


The First World War gave American women the right to vote. Waving aside militant struggles for voting rights, politicians said suffrage was granted to woman for her sacrifices and good work during the war. There is reason also to believe that this so-called gracious gift was presented to woman so that she might become a bulwark against revolutionary tendencies. The great revolutionary movement had started in Russia in 1917, crossed over to Germany, spread in England, and rumblings were heard in our own country. The reactionary leaders hoped that women, having neither political nor industrialexperience, could be counted upon to support the old way of living.
 
Great Expectations
Suffragists expected great changes from the woman’s vote. For years suffragists in their ardent struggle for women’s political rights had  claimed that woman’s suffrage by itself would bring a saner, better, and juster world. Man’s incompetence, they claimed, was responsible for all the social evils of the day. This corrupt world is a man’s world, they said, and woman will rebuild it on just, humane foundations.
Socialists even then made fun of these claims.
The troubles of this world, we Socialists have always assured the Workers, are not due to any conflict between the sexes – to a man’s world or a woman’s world. Poverty, disease, corruption, war, unemployment are due to economic causes; to the division of humanity into two classes: the boss class and the working class. Women, like men, belong to both classes, the possessing class and the dispossessed. Women of the rich class  are generally satisfied with this world which gives them wealth, leisure and security.
Women of the working class, the lower middle class and the farm group know the horrors of unemployment and disease. They are craving for a change in this world. But there is something they must learn: To change this world, one has to grasp the cause of evil, which is bossism, or capitalism. Women and men workers have to fight together for a new system of living. Both must help to organize a Labor Party to combat  exploitation by Big Business on the industrial and political fields.
Woman’s suffrage has been a great disappointment to these progressive elements. The twenty or more years of woman’s suffrage has proved that the suffragists’interpretation of the world’s evil was incorrect. Woman’s  influence in political life has too been hardly felt as a corrective – indeed, it has too often fulfilled the expectations of reactionary political leaders, instead.
In many instances, woman’s suffrage has turned into a farce. Soon after suffrage was established in Texas, Governor Ferguson’s corruption became so evil-smelling that even his own crew did not dare put up “Pa” Ferguson as a candidate for re-election. But they could nominate “Ma” Ferguson – and she got the job, to cover up for “Pa.” This procedure became popular. Look up the records of many women in Congress and you will find that they were nominated to replace their husbands, who were either dead or politically discredited.
This use of woman’s suffrage has become a boon for capitalist politicians – because it was much easier to use the same name, already well advertised.
 
Politically Backward
A few prominent women like Mrs. Astor in England or Claire Luce in our country, belong to the possessing classes and have proved arch-reactionary. In Europe, where the labor movement before the advent of Fascism was quite advanced, the Soialists had many is brilliant women representatives. However, here in the United States, women’s votes helped to defeat socialist candidates in Milwaukee; unquestionably prohibition was supported by women’s vote, and recently Catholic womaen assisted in Massachusetts in defeating the progressive demands of the Birth Control advocates.
Women have been more backward politically than men because until lately women’s work was confined for the most part to the home. Housework chains a woman to the most discouraging, soul-and-mind-killing, long-hour day!
Housework drudgery keeps her away from the great experiences of industrial life, keeps her mind centered on petty personal matters, hides from her the real causes of life’s problems.
Housework is a stigma of poverty or near poverty. The poorer the family, the bigger the task of the wife and mother, since better wages for the husband gives her a chance to send out the laundry, to buy labor-saving devices, to indulge occasionally in a restaurant meal. No wonder that Hitler, who tried his best to keep women backward, proclaimed that church, kitchen and children are the woman’s sphere! But under the economy of war, even Hitler could not keep women at home.
 
Great Changes
War forces women into industry. For many yeafs women had entered gainful occupations, but they had shunned industrial work. Now ten million women in the United States alone are working in industry. This means a revolution in women’s lives. Factory work taught man the divergency between his own interests and the interests of the bosses; it made a union man of him, for the union was his best protector against exploitation. From his local union he learned the importance of having his industry organized, and from there the next step was to earn that he was only a part of the working class fighting for its rights. Industrial work made men class-conscious.
Industrial work will awaken in woman the dame understanding of her class interests. At home she thought she was working for herself, for her children, for her husband. In her narrow view, she often blamed her husband for his lack of money. It may take time until women learn that even at home they are actually working for their husband’s boss, because by saving and skimping women enable men to work for less wages.
Work in the factory opens the woman’s eyes. She knows now that her boss makes big profits out of her labor. She learns the lessons of the class struggle and learns them in a shorter time than did her husband and other men workers. Woman had to go through this same industrial schooling by which men learned, in order to understand the present system of living. Suffrage alone was not enough to educate her.
The Second World War has drawn millions of women into industry and made them potential factors in the class struggle. After the war is over, women will again be told that their real place is in the home. True, many women will be glad to return to their home duties simply because during the war, they had to combine their industrial work with housework and child-care, and thus had a double burden to carry.
However, women who have spent many years in industry will be different persons from the women who had previously worked “only for the family.” The bigger aspects of the industrial world will be clearer to them.
Organized labor must do its utmost to get these women into unions while they are in industry. If the unions lose this opportunity, many industrially-trained and misled women may become strikebeakers in the future. Today, the working woman has an open mind. She may reach the right conclusions by herself, but to safeguard the future of the working class, this cannot be left to chance. The value of trade-unionism must be taught to her.
Capitalism created the working class, which is historically bound to overthrow capitalism in turn.
In the Second World War, capitalism has brought forth an army of women wage earners, who previously had been far away from the battlefield of labor. Now, women work side by side with men, women have joined the industrial army, women are due to become fighting members of the working class.
 




Your article on The Right to Be Beautiful, in which you discuss the use of cosmetics and beauty aids, awoke a few thoughts that I should like to share with your readers. I have lived for almost three-quarters of a century and in my youth we never used cosmetics. In fact, the use of them was considered indecent. And still we had beauty and romance. How do you explain the present situation? It seems to me that women’s entry into industry has a great deal to do with it.
While rich ladies use cosmetics to cover up their pale faces acquired during Society’s winter whirl of endless nights of drinking and dancing, women who work in factories and shops have pale and tired faces because of physical exhaustion due to overwork, bad air, hurried lunches and their whole life of rush and worry.
The working woman uses cosmetics, not only for her own satisfaction – to have a nice appearance or to attract possible romance – but she has to look well and attractive to keep her job. I think that if women would lead a healthy and normal life, their faces would look different. They would acquire the rosy cheeks that we had in our youth and the bright eyes and the red lips.
To me cosmetics are an expression of our unhealthy life under capitalism. It is not an important issue but it is just as well to understand that changes in women’s work affect even the most minute forms of their life. This doesn’t mean that I condemn cosmetics. I think that we shall have to use them for quite a while yet!
 




The problem as to whether a woman prefers to be a housewife or a worker is discussed at length in recent issue of the Sunday magazine section of the N.Y. Times. But the ladies discussing the question did not have in mind the lives of the twenty million women workers in factories and shops. They describe women of the middleclass. Their “housewife” has means to hire help; she has time to look after her husband’s financial problems. She certainly does not have six children. (This is actually stressed.) No doubt such a “housewife” can get a nap during the day and be in the best of moods to greet her husband in the evening.
But what of the housekeeper, and unfortunately the majority belong to this type, whose husband has no financial interests, whose husband receives only limited wages, who has five or six children, who has to rush in her housework frorn early morning to late at night? Such a housekeeper cannot take a beauty sleep. She often does not get even a good night’s sleep, for if children happen to be ill, the mother must get out of bed at any hour. Such a housekeeper is not always a picture of sweetness and kindness. In the evening she is often so tired she can hardly talk and her husband comes home from exhausting factory work in the same condition.
As to the “career woman.”  These ladies of the N.Y. Times did not talk about women standing on their feet nine or ten hours a day, working under “speed-up” conditions. Oh, no, their “career women” were sitting at a desk, receiving good salaries.
In the N.Y. Times discussion, the new type of woman worker who has to combine factory and housework was entirely forgotten. The average working woman, after eight hours of tiresome work, now has to go shopping. This is no easy task when one has to stand an hour or more at butcher shops and grocery stores. Then she prepares supper without any rest does the dishes and the laundry. Then she falls into bed more dead than aliveonly to start the same routine next day.
Is there really a choice between these two occupations, housework or career work? Why have twenty million women decided to go into factories and shops?
The reason often given is that women are disgusted with the drudgery of housework. But we mustn’t forget that most of them do not get rid of the housekeeping when they go into the factory. Why then do these millions of women leave home to go to work? The answer is simple. These women suffer from one of the greatest evils of our present capitalist system – namely, insecurity. They go to work to add to their husbands’ income, to save a few dollas and to provide better clothing and better care for their children.
Knowing well that factory work places a heavy burden on women’s health, we Socialists are nevertheless in favor of women’s entrance into industry. Factory work brings women into contact with the workers. It makes her feel the struggles of the working class. In the factory she learns how many women are exploited and that her own interests are closely connected with the fate of other workers.
She joins the trade unions, and there a new, life of workers’ aims and purposes are open to her. She may be dead tired, but instead of being a self-centered housekeeper who is thinking only of saving a few cents here and there and of the immediate welfare of her own family, the larger aspects of the workers' struggles are disclosed to her.
Industrial life for women is a schooling which can open the gates of a new life for her. Life for her class-life for the future of her children. It prepares them for the greater and more satisfying duties of the coming struggle for socialism.
 

ters: Note on Antoinette Konikow: Honoring Antoinette Konikow, Pioneer Trotskyist







Konikow Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Workers Vanguard, No. 1057
28 November 2014

Honoring Antoinette Konikow, Pioneer Trotskyist
BOSTON – On November 15, four days before the 145th anniversary of the birth of revolutionary Marxist Antoinette Konikow, supporters of the International Communist League gathered to celebrate her life and fighting spirit at her grave in West Roxbury, Massachusetts. With decades of experience in the international workers movement, Konikow helped found what would become the Communist Party (CP) in the U.S. Later, she was expelled from the CP for supporting Bolshevik leader Leon Trotsky’s fight against the degeneration of the Comintern that accompanied the rise in the Soviet Union of the parasitic bureaucracy headed by Stalin. As part of her role in building American Trotskyism, Konikow, a physician, championed women’s rights, notably by promoting birth control in a nation mired in reaction. The graveside tribute below, edited for publication, was followed by some additional comments from those assembled and the singing of the Internationale.
*   *   *
We are here today to honor the life of Antoinette Konikow during the anniversary month of both her birth and the Russian Revolution, which so inspired her and millions around the world. The International Communist League (Fourth Internationalist) sees Konikow as both a pioneer Trotskyist and a fighter for women’s rights.
Born in tsarist Russia, she joined Plekhanov’s Emancipation of Labor group as a teenage student in Switzerland. She later emigrated to the United States in 1893. For nearly 60 years, with Marxist compass in hand, Konikow stood for the correct program in the major fights of the socialist movement.
She joined the Socialist Labor Party in 1893, and was expelled in 1897 for her opposition to its bureaucratic practices. Already speaking five languages, she learned Yiddish to become a more effective organizer among immigrant Jewish workers. In 1901, she was a founding member of the Socialist Party of America. During World War I, she toured the U.S., inspired by German Marxist leader Karl Liebknecht’s courageous opposition to social patriotism.
She threw her support to the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution and became a founding member of the American Communist movement in 1919. Against the Stalinist degeneration of the Soviet Union, she was one of the first in the American CP to support Trotsky’s Left Opposition and recruited five other Boston party members to its views.
After James P. Cannon’s faction in the CP was expelled in 1928 for supporting the Left Opposition, Konikow was summoned to appear before the CP’s Political Committee. She wrote a defiant letter to CP secretary Jay Lovestone, stating:
“I did work for Trotsky’s ideals and tried to arouse sentiment for the Opposition in our party, and I consider I have the full right to do so according to the party’s stand on inner party democracy. But it is useless to expect your committee to accept this viewpoint, for your leadership would not last long under rules of real democracy in our party. I consider that the party has taken an outrageously wrong standing on the Trotsky situation in Soviet Russia. This stand is a result of the servile submission to the Stalin faction.”
Lovestone in his uniquely nasty manner said after reading Konikow’s letter to the November 2 meeting of the Committee:
“It is obvious from her letter that she is the worst kind of a Trotskyite, biologically as well as politically. The sooner we throw her out the better for the party.”
Konikow, a medical doctor and a pioneer of birth control, was unanimously expelled by the Political Committee. Upon her expulsion, she formed the Independent Communist League here in Boston in 1928. That organization later merged with the expelled Cannon faction to found the Communist League of America, which was later to become the Socialist Workers Party.
Konikow was always a stalwart fighter for women’s rights. In 1923, she published the handbook Voluntary Motherhood, the first birth control manual by an American physician, written to educate her primarily female immigrant patients. It sold more than 10,000 copies in its first three editions. She was repeatedly hounded by Boston authorities for her work on birth control, and in 1928 she was arrested for exhibiting contraceptives in public. On her own initiative, Konikow traveled to the Soviet Union in 1926 to introduce an inexpensive contraceptive jelly she had developed with John G. Wright, a chemist who was also her son-in-law and comrade and later one of Trotsky’s translators. In 1931, she published Physicians’ Manual of Birth Control to address the widespread ignorance in the medical profession itself.
In November 1938, there was a celebration of Konikow’s 50 years as a revolutionary Marxist. She was presented with a signed picture of Trotsky, who wrote:
“We are proud, my dear Antoinette, to have you in our ranks. You are a beautiful example of energy and devotion for our youth. I embrace you with the wish: Long Live Antoinette Konikow. Yours fraternally, Leon Trotsky, Oct. 28, 1938, Coyoacán.”
I will end with two quotes from her speech at that meeting; the words still jump off the page today.
“In 1888, fifty years ago, I joined the Social Democratic Party of Russia. Life was as dark and hopeless as it may seem to many today. I was delighted to hear the words of Plekhanov at the first congress of the Second International: ‘Only the working class will lead the Russian revolution!’ But the working class of Russia was spiritually even further away from us than the workers of the United States today. If anyone had told us at that time that 15 years later a strike of one and a half million workers would almost overthrow Czarism, and that 15 years after that the Russian soldier would turn his gun not only against Czarism but against the Russian bourgeoisie, we would not have believed it. We would have laughed. But it happened – and it will happen again. Only this time it will not take 30 years.”
To the youth in the room that day, she said:
“We place in your hands a banner unsoiled. Many times it was dragged into the mud. We lifted it up and lovingly cleansed it to give it to you. Under the red banner of Marx, Lenin, and Trotsky, you will conquer.”
On this day, at her grave, we honor the memory of Antoinette Konikow.
 




Following is the text of the speech delivered by Comrade Antoinette Konikow at the Center Hotel mass meeting last Friday in reply to the tribute paid her there on the occasion of her fiftieth anniversary in the revolutionary movement:
The comrades have received me with warmth and friendship. It gives me tremendous happiness. The kind words written by Comrade Trotsky on his picture presented to me remind me of the greatest honor – the honor that was given to comrades in Russia, the Order of Lenin pinned upon their breasts.
I feel as if Comrade Trotsky has pinned the Order of Trotsky on my breast! Not that I am a hero-worshipper – for I have helped to pull down too many heroes from their pedestals. But in the last ten years of darkness of despair, the words of Leon Trotsky have been like a bell for a ship in distress, leading it to safe harbor.
 
Joined in 1888
In 1888, fifty years ago, I joined the Social Democratic Party of Russia. Life was as dark and hopeless as it may seem to many today. I was delighted to hear the words of Plekhanov at the first congress of the Second International: “Only the working class will lead the Russian revolution!” But the working class of Russia was spiritually even further away from us than the workers of the United States today. If anyone had told us at that time that 15 years later a strike of one and a half million workers would almost overthrow Czarism, and that 15 years after that the Russian soldier would turn his gun not only against Czarism but against the Russian bourgeoisie, we would not have believed it. We would have laughed. But it happened—and it will happen again. Only this time it will not take 30 years.
 
At Many Cradlesides
I have had to sponsor so many new organizations that I have often jokingly told my comrades that I feel like a mother always rocking a new cradle – and that is all wrong for me, for I am known as an advocate of birth control.
But I did rock the cradle of the Russian Social Democracy and out of it came a great giant, the Russian Bolshevik Party. After being expelled in the United States from the Socialist Labor Party, I soon began to lock the cradle of the Debs party, later the Socialist Party. It seemed to contain a healthy baby, but the war and the Rusian revolution proved that there was a weak spot in its spine.
I then helped to rock another cradle, the cradle of the young, vigorous Communist Party. The glory of those days of the great Russian Revolution shall never be forgotten – the tremendous enthusiasm for Lenin and Trotsky – the ten days that shook the world! But again things went wrong. “Socialism in one country” became the slogan. This meant not only socialism in no other country, but no socialism in any country.
I began to rock another cradle and today the baby is ten years old. Who can deny that it is a sturdy, strong young fellow? The Socialist Workers Party is the only bright ray that today penetrates the horror of present-day nightmares.
I saw the beginning of the Second International and its fall. I saw the beginning of the Third International and its fall. Now together we launch the Fourth International which will accomplish the tasks beti-ayed by the Second and the Third.
 
A Magic Word
We live now in the atmosphere of impending war. My war memories remind me of many encounters. I was sent on tour by the German-language federation of the S.P. to speak in German at anti-war meetings. That was no easy task at the height of the war frenzy. Many times comrades would approach me, pale and trembling, begging that I speak on another subject. They pointed to German detectives and the sheriff sitting in the crowd. Often I felt like weakening – but there was one magic word that gave me strength to do my duty. I tell it to you comrades – it may again help you. The magic word was Liebknecht.
Before I conclude, let me say a few words to the youth. No sermons or admonitions, for you do not need them! I am proud of you. I went to tell you that I envy you, your youth and vigor. I would like to be 50 years younger to work with you, for your task in the coming years will be the most important in human history. You have great monsters to fight, Fascism, Stalinism. It was easier to work under the Russian Czar than under Stalin, easier under the German Kaiser than under Hitler.
 
An Unsoiled Banner
But you have better weapons than we had, more knowledge, the experience of 50 years of the leadership of the greatest living genius of the revolution, Leon Trotsky.
We place in your hands a banner unsoiled. Many times it was dz-agged into the mud. We lifted it up and lovingly cleansed it to give it to you. Under the red banner of Marx, Lenin, and Trotsky, you will conquer.
And when that great moment arrives, pause for a moment and think of us, who will not be with you at that glorious time, and say: “Comrades, sleep in peace. The work has been done.”

 




Ten years ago in Boston in the first week of November, six of us decided to organize “The Independent Communist League.” A month later we published the first and only number of the Bulletin of the Independent Communist League. While the Bulletin was already in the hands of the printer, a mimeographed copy of a statement made by Comrades Cannon, Shachtman and Abern reached us. We succeeded in placing a part of this document in our own Bulletin. The joy of receiving this statement of our New York comrades is difficult now to describe.
We had no connections with other cities; we did not know if any one else had taken up this fight against Stalinism in the Communist Party. We felt absolutely alone, isolated and suddenly we found prominent, well known comrades with us. It seemed almost ridiculous that six rank and file workers should dare to throw down the gauntlet to the mighty organization – the Communist party.
 
The First Comrades
The most energetic among us was comrade L. Schlossberg. His optimism and energy, no doubt, helped us go forward. Schlossberg is an old Bolshevik. He had participated in the 1905 revolution in Russia and was so enthusiastic about Bolshevism that he had decided to return to Soviet Russia and remain there for good. He went to Soviet Russia in 1926, spent a year there and returned disillusioned and heartsick. The rulling bureaucracy and the corrupt leaders made work there impossible. He was not readmitted into the party, which probably had been notified about his activities in Soviet Russia.
Comrade Chiplovitz and Weiner, prominent members of the needle trades Union, had noticed the wrong trend of the party long before. They left it in company with comrade Cooperstein, a prominent worker in the shoe industry. Comrade Shechet became our first new convert and proved to be an energetic, conscientious worker in the league.
I was the only one who was still connected with the party. For years I had been under suspcion because of my frank criticism of Zinoviev. When I left for Russia at the same time as Schlossberg (1926) I had no sanction from the party, but got there through the personal influence of important comrades. This made it harder for me later to be too outspoken about my experiences in Soviet Russia because of the fear of exposing these comrades to persecution.
 
Trip to Russia
I would like to sketch a few pictures from Soviet life which impressed me deeply at the time and threw a shadow of coming events. Letters of introduction and old pre-revolutionary ties threw many doors open to me. To one of the prominent comrades I posed leading questions like this: “With Zinoviev gone will we have more democracy in Soviet Russia?” (We knew very little about Stalin then.) The comrade went on tip-toe to the door, opened it, looked right and left, then returned and with averted eyes said, “perhaps.” The running to the door was repeated several times but the answers I received were utterly non-committal. This gave me the first idea of the fear of being spied upon prevalent even among prominent officials. I soon caught the infection myself and learned to look around and speak in a low voice.
“How much do you earn in a week?” I asked a girl in a candy factory, which I was visiting with many other comrades. “Eighteen Roubles.” “Per week, naturally,” I inquired. “No, per month,” she replied.
Soon I learned that girls walked miles to work or to meetings, as they couldn’t afford carfare. Had wages increased since? Not real wages, for prices had gone way up.
“What shall I say to the delegates inspecting the factory?” asked the girl interpreter of the manager, in my presence. The manager looked angrily at her; he knew I was only a visitor, “Why, you know what to say.”
Workers in the factory spoke about the party-managers with distrust. “Who are these men going through the factory?” one asked. “They say they are workers.” “Oh, they are bluffing us; look how they are dressed. Workers could not dress like that.”
Russian is my native language, so I could learn much more than others. While many accomplishments impressed me, while the sincerity and self sacrifice of workers with whom I came in contact was inspiring – the above and other incidents made me leave Soviet Russia perturbed and depressed.
 
Prepares for Break
The struggle between Stalin and Trotsky was not clear to me but I felt something was deeply wrong. Did I report this when I returned? No. I tried to defend these conditions by the reasoning that Russia was still in the transition state; and I knew too I would be expelled at once, if I were frank. So, I kept officially quiet and tried to find more facts and explanations to strengthen myself for the final break. I am sure hundreds of visitors to Russia acted the same way as I did. But I came at last to the right conclusion.
It took me two years ’til I felt I could submit no longer. The occasion was the demand to vote for the expulsion of comrade Trotsky. Loveslone addressed our Boston membership of 200 or more, for one-and-a-half hours, trying to prove that comrade Trotsky had forfeited the rights of membership in the party.
Several comrades had told me before the meeting they would never vote for Trotsky’s expulsion. But I saw some of them grabbing hat and coat to leave the hall; one even spoke up against Lovestone but later voted with the crowd. In my ten-minute rebuttal, I pointed out that we never had a chance to read Trotsky’s speeches or documents; that we could not come to correct conclusions without hearing the other side. About Comrade Trotsky“s speech to the crowd going to the Red Square, which Lovestone stressed to be a special act of betrayal, I was glad I made the remark: “The speech of Comrade Trotsky, the man who was the right hand of Lenin, may well be  considered by us as an S.O.S. to the comrades of the world warning of the great disaster Soviet Russia is facing.”
 
Expelled from C.P.
Soon I received a letter dictated by Lovestone ordering me to appear the next day in New York. I demanded that a local committee take up my case (later I found that the City Committee could not get a majority to expel me). I refused to appear before the  political committee. In a few days I had my expulsion notice.
I review the story of my growing into Trotskyism in detail to acquaint the comrades of today with our experiences ten years ago.
Our Bulletin was widely distributed and aroused consternation and savage anger. Our comrades were insulted and threatened with actual physical violence. Looking back to the years of our first steps, I realize that we were not well supplied with information, our forces were weak, but with all that I think there is no need to be ashamed of our little Bulletin which we worked out without documents or even adequate knowledge of our theories. We were going in the right direction. All six comrades are still with us. A lively ‘crowd’ of young men and women joined us, so we kept up headquarters, ran successful lectures and a small school.
The Stalinists, the “Twentieth Century Americans,” had much larger meetings than we; so had the Democrats and Republicans.
We were not afraid to start our work when there were only six isolated from everybody (as we thought)! We still swim against the current, but so did Lenin. Such is the pioneer work of all revolutionary forces.
 




Mrs. Smith, my neighbor who always lived in the country, moved to town when her husband got work in a nearby factory. She likes to chat with me when we meet on the stairs, and expresses her delight with the modern improvements in her new home.
“What a relief to have a gas stove,” she told me. “I remember how I used to slave carrying up coal and sifting ashes.” Then she spoke about the sewing machine bought on the installment plan and how simply and quickly dresses for Mollie and Louise could be made. If only Charlie keeps his job, she plans to get a vacuum cleaner and her eyes shone at the joyous prospect, as she told me about it.
“Yes, this housekeeping machinery is certainly a help,” I remarked. “Help!” Mrs. Smith said, “why, it is a blessing. Caring for my five kids kept me constantly on my feet and my back always ached. Now I find time to rest and may even go to one of those meetings you always talk about.”
 
But Machinery Seems a Curse, Too
A few days later, Mrs. Smith stopped again for a neighborly chat. Her face was not as radiant as the previous time; “Charlie told me last night that they have a new machine in his factory. It is a new fangled one that can do the work of five men, or rather any man can now do in one hour what used to take five hours.”
I looked at her troubled face. “Why that ought to be fine for your husband. He will not have to work long hours. He will be home much earlier or will earn so much more.”
Mrs. Smith did not appreciate my joke. “Why are you kidding me? You know what it means and I’m worried to death. Charlie explained it to me. Unless they expand the business, and that appears unlikely, four out of five men will lose their jobs and Charlie may be one of them.”
I invited Mrs. Smith into my apartment and we continued our conversation. “We spoke only a few days ago of the blessings of machines you have at home. You, yourself, pointed out that they save you time and labor. Why should the new machine in the factory not do likewise for your husband?”
Mrs. Smith answered quickly, “The machines in my home are my own.” “Just so,” I agreed, “the machines in your home are yours and they are a blessing, but the machines in the shop belong to the boss and instead of a blessing they may mean your husband’s unemployment. But while they seem a curse to the worker, they bring more profit to the boss. To him they are a blessing.”
 
Socialism Will Make Machines a Blessing to Everybody
In other words, the machine – a product of human ingenuity and progress – is a blessing to the one who owns it. If the machinery in the shop belonged to the workers, they would get more leisure and rest whenever a new, improved machine is introduced. That is exactly what we Socialists try to explain to the workers.
“A big machine in the factory cannot belong to one worker as your small sewing machine belongs to you. But it can belong to all the workers, or to a workers’ state. Then every modern improvement in machinery instead of striking terror in the heart of a worker would be welcomed because it would ease their labor just as your little machines do at home."
Mrs. Smith was quite amazed. The comparison of machines in the factory and at home had evidently never occurred to her. Then she sadly shook her head. “It sounds right, but machinery belongs to the bosses and they would never permit workers to use it that way.”
“Well,” was my answer, “the workers in Russia succeeded in getting all the factories and mines and transportation in their hands. True it did not work out as it should have because workers of other countries did not follow their example. So in Russia the workers were unable to stop a bureaucracy from grabbing power away from them. But the revolution in Russia proved it can be done and the experience of the workers there will teach the workers of the whole world how to avoid the mistakes made in Russia.”
The machines have taught the workers a great deal. Because of large machines thousands of workers gather in one factory, they learn to organize into trade unions to protect their rights against the greedy capitalist. But while trade unionism is the first step to help the worker, it cannot solve the unemployed problem and many other problems, such as crises and war. Only ownership of the machines by the Workers’ State will assure for the worker security of work and leisure. To achieve that task is the work of the Socialist Workers Party.
 




Mother’s Day comes this Sunday, May 12. What a mockery! The brain storm of those miracle men of this ailing system, the advertising specialists, who conceived it as business tonic and a rare opportunity to unload on a limitless public (everyone has a mother) tawdry and unsaleable merchandise that might otherwise remain unsold. Thus a fine and genuine emotion is degraded and distorted by contact with the world of quick sales and huge profits. Mother love is now given its market value by these worthy sentimentalists, the manufacturers and shopkeepers, whose crabbed souls respond to only one overpowering emotion – greed for profit.
Today mother is feted with candy and flowers and gifts. Today, by order of the bosses, everyone remembers mother. Tomorrow and tomorrow, for 364 tomorrows mother continues to struggle with problems created by those very bosses and their system – poverty, unemployment, hunger, want, disease, and the scourge which often deprives her of her motherhood – war.
What does motherhood mean to the wife of a worker or middle class man today? Mother may be the wage earner, partially or totally. Motherhood means extra work and constant worry not only for the immediate present but also for the future. Mothers recall their own unhappy childhood, their overworked, embittered parents dulled and aged by lives of toil and drudgery with whom no real companionship was possible. They remember their dreams – of school, of training for useful work, of simple luxuries, of contact with an unknown world of art and music – most of which were never realized. And because they so love their children, born and unborn, women today recoil from motherhood rather than see repeated by those dear to them a miserable childhood and thwarted preparation for adult life.
Many women today are on strike against children, as their expression of protest against the conditions in which they must face motherhood and raise families. The first inquiry of every newly-married woman is how to avoid unwanted motherhood. Has human nature changed? Have women become hard and loveless and selfish? How absurd! The urge to recreate one’s own, to watch the development of a human being, almost part of yourself, from a little animal that sleeps and eats to a growing, thinking adult whose progress you follow with pride and concern – that instinctive desire for progeny cannot be repressed – no! not even by the capitalist system that today deprives so many parents of their right to raise families. The dream of most young married couples is to achieve that condition of modest financial security which will make it possible for them to have a child and perhaps a whole family.
Women today are not granted (legally) the right to regulate the size and spacing of their family. Clinics and physicians in many states are not permitted to inform women about birth control. A business dealing in bootleg information, dispensing inadequate, expensive and often harmful drugs and appliances has been created because of this hypocritical and barbaric law. Women every day endanger their health, suffer pain and needless torture, rather than bear children whom they can offer nothing but love.
Today with war on the agenda, celebration of Mother’s Day adds insult to hypocrisy.
“Mother,” the bosses say, “we appreciate you – you bear the young men we need for the army. You suffer and toil, sacrifice and plan, to produce fine healthy boys. We can use plenty of them in battle with the sons of mothers of other countries – to protect our trade and profits that is – democracy. The thought of those mothers whose sons are killed shouldn’t disturb you. They are enemies and haven’t the same feelings as you have. What’s that you say? Your son may be killed and the sons of other mothers who are not enemies? Yes, but then you will have the satisfaction of knowing he died a hero – and you will be rewarded with a gold medal and given an honor seat at public functions. Besides, he probably would not have had a job, and have been a bum or a crook, so perhaps it’s just as well.”
Mothers! The sugar-coated gifts hide the bitter pill of the boss system. Under capitalism there can be no improvement of conditions for women, mothers of families. Only in a Socialist society will mothers achieve that security which will permit them to raise children without fear for their future. But no one will give you that as a gift. You will have to struggle and fight for Socialism, you together with the workers, men and women, black and white, old and young in this country and in others – for their cause is yours and only through the victory of the workers will mothers solve their problems. Only when all mankind raises itself from slavery and exploitation and enjoys a free and full life will women choose mother happily, confidently and proudly. Rearing and preparing the young for a life in a socialist society, for useful labor, for boundless achievements in science, industry and art – that will indeed make of motherhood an interesting, important and honored profession.
Boston, Mass.
 







In our March 16 issue we published a letter from a worker
whose sister-in-law, a housewife, wanted to know: “What will
socialism do for us housewives?” Part of the answer to that
important question is contained in the following letter written by
comrade Antoinette Konikow, physician, mother and – above
all – a revolutionist for over fifty years. We are glad to
note that comrade Konikow promises other letters on this question.
And let’s have letters from our reader-housewives – we
want to know what you think about comrade Konikow’s letter.
– Editor.



*
Editor:
Are housewives paid for their work? I heard an amusing story on
that problem. A woman collecting statistics visited a worker’s
family. No one was at home but a little boy. The woman inquired about
father’s wages, brother’s and sister’s. At last she
asked about his mother’s earnings. “Oh,” said the
little fellow very proudly, “My mother does not work.”
“She does not work?” asked the woman. “But
doesn’t she cook and wash and iron and mend and clean? Is she
not on her feet the whole day long always doing something? Don’t
you call that work ?”
The little boy was a bit perplexed; then he said, “Yes, that
is true, but, you see that kind of work does not pay.”
The little boy was right. Work done by the housewife does not pay.
In fact her work is not recognized as work at all, nor even
respected. It is the old story; the less you are paid for your work,
the more it is held in contempt and if you are not paid at all –
well, all the drudgery you do is hardly recognized even by your own
family.
This raises the question: why does a housewife get only board,
room and clothing for her long hours of work? “She works for
her children,” is often the answer. Holy motherhood means
continued sacrifice. But it seems strange that the glory of
motherhood’s sacrifice is only known to wives of workers or
wives of the lower middle class. Mothers in well-to-do families don’t
mind losing the halo of holiness – by hiring help to do all the
hard work of motherhood. And hard work it is! The readers of the
Ladies Home Journal voted overwhelmingly that women having
small children work harder than their husbands in the factory.
 
The Wife Works for Her Husband’s Boss!
Is the wife of a worker really exploited by her children and her
husband? My answer is “no.” When the worker sells his
“hands” to the boss, he sells at the same time the
“hands” of his wife to the same boss, because only the
unpaid labor of his wife makes it possible for him to live with his
family on the wages paid to him. The wife thinks she slaves day and
night for her husband and children – in reality she works for
the same boss who exploits her husband. The housewife has a right,
then, to ask the question: what of my work under socialism? What will
I get out of it?
To give a correct answer, one must first give an adequate
explanation of what socialism really means. I hope to cover this
problem another time more in detail. Socialism means the management
of business and factories by the workers themselves, because the
factories then will not belong to the bosses. Part of the income will
go to the Workers’ State to cover expenses of education, health
and management, but each worker will get a larger income and at the
same time will work shorter hours. A larger income for the
worker will give him a chance to relieve the work of his wife.
Laundry can be paid for, part of the meals can be eaten in
cooperative lunch rooms; sewing can be done away with; and even some
of the house cleaning can be paid for. A better income will naturally
relieve women of many of the tasks which she undertakes now because
she has no money to pay for them.
 
The October Revolution Showed the Way
Let us see what was done for mothers in Soviet Russia before the
Stalin bureaucracy stepped in. I was there in 1926 and was deeply
impressed by the advantages which workers and their wives had
secured. To lessen mother’s work in Soviet Russia, nurseries
were created for babies and smaller children. Almost every large
factory had such nurseries under the management of reliable nurses.
The husband in the factory could buy a good dinner for a small sum
in dining rooms connected with the factories or with his trade. His
wife and children were allowed to have their dinners in the same
dining room. Women workers expecting motherhood received two months
vacation before and after delivery with full pay; also a layette for
the baby and free milk for the baby or nursing mother. Working women
nursing the baby could stop work every four hours to nurse the baby
in the nursery. The workers had free medical care, free hospitals and
a month’s vacation with pay. In case of illness the worker
received his full wages for a certain time and then half of the wages
indefinitely.
All these rights which the workers achieved in Soviet Russia
through the revolution were afterwards whittled away or reserved only
for the Stalinist bureaucracy and its yes-men. The factory meals
became so bad and expensive that workers stopped patronizing factory
dining rooms. The free medical care turned into poor service by
overworked physicians who were afraid to testify to the illness of
workers because they were blamed and persecuted by authorities for
granting sick benefit rights too easily.
The paid time for expectant mothers before and after delivery was
reduced to one month. Women who had free time, instead of enjoying
it, had to work in factories because their husbands’ wages were
inadequate, or had to spend their time standing in line to buy food
or clothing.
Thus the Stalinist bureaucrats took away from the workers the
benefits which had begun to lighten the lot of the housewife. When
the Russian workers overthrow the Stalinist bureaucracy, they will
revive and expand these benefits. Along the same line we will go in
this country.
 
How We Would Begin in the United States
After attaining workers’ power the first task to relieve
women’s life would be the creation of nurseries, kindergartens
and playgrounds in a sufficient number – here in the United
States their number is deplorably small. The next would be the
organization of cooperative lunch rooms to relieve mothers of their
kitchen drudgery. Even then mothers would still have plenty of work
left: taking care of smaller meals, keeping the house in order,
taking care of clothing, entertaining or supervising the children out
of school and nurseries, nursing children with minor illnesses. Yes,
even under socialism the mother will have her 6–8 hour day of
work.
But then the husband, getting a better income, would be able to
give her an “allowance,” as men of the middle class call
the money they give their wives. I think housewives would prefer to
call it “pay for their work.” In fact, I should like to
discuss in another letter the possibility that under socialism
motherhood should be considered a profession and be paid for by the
state just like nurses and teachers today.



 


Antoinette Konikow,
Boston, Mass.



 




Machinery in industry or the industrial era caused considerable change in the life of women. All agree that the home of today is not what it used to be. The home is “breaking up,” people say, and of course we socialists are blamed for it. The passing of the present home with its drudgery, worries and uncertainty of income would not grieve me. For such a home I would shed no tears; but neither would I or any socialist accept responsibility for undermining it. Incredible as it may appear, the very people who accuse us, the bosses and their agents, they are the real culprits. They did the job very effectively with their gigantic privately-owned machinery and factories.
Many young women today consider work in the factory or office just a transitory, temporary step for they are certain it will cease with marriage. That is why it is often difficult to organize women workers into the unions. But after marriage (and contrary to the movies they rarely marry the boss or boss’s son) they often discover that it may be better to work a little longer to compensate for the small wages of the husband. Then illness occurs or the husband loses his job, and the wife’s work becomes a necessity. In many industries like textile goods, the whole family must work to cover expenses; even statistics present us with a record of “family wages” instead of individual ones.
 
Women Changed by Industry
Yet all this had a compensating aspect. The drudgery and monotony of domestic life kept a woman isolated, ignorant of world realities. She was concerned mainly with her own narrow, family interests. Her work outside the home awakened her to a new outlook. It was not the kiss of Prince Charming which stirred her slumber, it was the whistle of the factory and the rumbling of machinery. As she works and mingles with others under modern industrial conditions her very character is altered. At home she was bashful, self-conscious, lacked confidence in her own ability – the so-called “clinging vine.” She soon acquires a backbone, and begins to assert herself. She learns to think and act independently and likes it.
How did this affect the home? Desperately women try to combine work with married life. The wife now has on her slender shoulders a double yoke; work in the office, factory, or profession and the care of he house and often children. When a woman comes home from work, she cleans house, prepares supper and cares for the children. The young husband often wonders why the cheerful, peppy girl he married is now always tired and depressed.
In Recent Social Trends, the report of the President’s Research Committee, 1932, it was revealed that in 1930 there were three million married women engaged in gainful occupation, and that from 1900 to 1930 “the total number of men employed doubled while the number of married women  engaged in work quadrupled.” One-third of all women employed in gainful occupations were married. These statistics are ten years old but the trend has not changed.
Lately a movement has started to prevent married women from working, hoping thus to alleviate unemployment. That is what happened to women in Germany. First Hitler ordered all married women to stay at home and attend the three “k’s”: kinder, kuche, kirch, which means children, kitchen, and church. Then as men are needed in the army, he ordered them back into industry again!
Industrialism has created new conditions in woman’s life. Is this change alltogether detrimental to women? By no means! True, women work harder, their health often suffers, their nerves go to pieces-but in the schooling of this new life they have gained in experience,  self-reliance, knowledge and if they are workers they learn to defend their rights and become class conscious.
 
The Promised Land for Women
It is said that when Moses led the Israelites to the promised Land, he took forty years wandering through the deserts because he wanted them to forget the slavery in Egypt so that they would come to the Promised Land with a generation which had never known slavery, I think we women should consider our tramping through the jungles of capitalism in the same way. Despite its hardships, it has a progressive, valuable aspect for women. Involved in the problems of labor, women begin to understand more clearly than can ever be learned from books the crying need of changing this capitalist world of insecurity, suffering and struggle into a new world of socialism. Then the dream of real home building may be realized.
Women envisage a home not of monotonous work and worry but a place where their services as wife and mother will assume the status of labor in the cooperative society and be valued as all other services and paid for and regulated.
Will there be private homes under socialism? An interesting problem which will be solved best by trial and experience under the new system. Some may prefer a form of cooperative home life and others will cherish their privacy even if it may mean a little more work. Experience we have at present seems to prove that children thrive best in private homes, not institutions however perfect, and need the personal interest and love of their parents.
No one can predict details or complete plans of our future homes. That will be an interesting phase of our planning and education after the socialist revolution. Only one thing we can state with assurance – however homes will be planned and home life arranged, the basis will not be the the exploitation of women.
 




The achievements of the birth control movement in this country are scarcely secure. The movement in the past has been successful in almost all slates. The first clinic was opened in 1923 in New York, Today there are reported to be 529 clinics in the United States. But birth control has been declared illegal in two states – Massachusetts and Connecticut – and can be undermined elsewhere as well.
A brief history of the legal status of birth control in this country may be helpful. The Comstock law of 1873 which prohibited the trade and circulation of obscene literature and articles of immoral use specifically includes birth control with abortion and obscene literature and articles. This is a federal law still in operation, 24 states passed similar laws. Eight states – New York, Ohio, Colorado, Indiana, Iowa, Minnesota, Nevada and Wyoming added provisions which exempt from prosecution by this law physicians using, applying or prescribing an instrument or article for the cure or prevention of disease. However, in other states the need for birth control information was so apparent everywhere and public opinion so much in its favor that the laws against it have not been enforced. In several instances where arrests were made of lecturers on birth control (myself, for example) or authors of books dealing; with sex problems the cases were quashed and some even won by the defendant.
 
Dangers Confronting Birth Control Advocates
But this was at the discretion of the courts which at that period chose thus to interpret the state or federal laws. At any time, however, the law may be enforced as it is today in Massachusetts and Connecticut, without any provision allowing physicians to prescribe birth control methods even for the protection of health (except in the above mentioned eight states). In 24 states where there is no law applicable to birth control, among which are Illinois, Michigan, Rhode Island and New Hampshire, the Federal Comstock bill can be utilized.
Many attempts to exclude birth control from the anti-obscenity law were made. In 1924 two senators were found progressive enough to introduce such a bill but it met with defeat. In 1934 a bill exempting physicians, hospitals and licensed clinics from the provisions of the Comstock law was heard by both Senate and House and actually passed by the Senate in the closing days of the session, only to be hurriedly reconsidered and killed.
Massachusetts and Connecticut may well signify the beginning of a reactionary wave which may attempt to destroy progress made in this field all over the country.
 
Catholic Opposition and Its Internal Difficulties
One of the strongest opponents of birth control is the Catholic Church, which wields considerable influence in Massachuaets where 41% of the population is catholic. In Holyoke, Mass., a lecture by Margaret Sanger was arranged to be held in the First Congregational Church. Catholic influence prevailed upon the church committee to withdraw permission to hold the meeting. Upon transference to the Holyoke Turnverein similar pressure was exerted and the hall broke its contract. The meeting was held, nevertheless, because the CIO Textile Workers offered their headquarters to the Birth Control Committee. It is very gratifying to note that a workers’ organization displayed independence of action and an interest in birth control.
The strong trend in favor of birth control is evidenced by the fact that even the Catholic Church had to accept a compromise. While it vigorously opposes the scientific method accepted by physicians, it approves a form of birth control described in Dr. Latz’s book Rhythm. The physiological theory upon which this system is based has been proven false by qualified research work. It is obvious, however, that the Catholic church has been forced to abandon its austere opposition to all forms of birth control. Catholic women are demanding the right to birth control information.
The Ladies’ Home Journal, in a poll in 1938 on birth control, reported 51% of Catholic women voting for it. 83% of them, explained that they favor it because of limited family income. If 51% dared to vote in opposition to the dictates of their church, there must be many more in agreement who dare not express themselves.
Working class parties have never officially taken a stand on the question of birth control. The main reason is, no doubt, that the leadership of the birth control movement has been entirely in the hands of middle class elements, many of whom are still followers of the almost extinct theory of Malthus.
Malthus, a prominent economist of the 18th century in England, claimed that poverty was due to the fact that the increase in population was more rapid than the production of foodstuffs. He preached abstinence to the poverty-stricken workers ot England (capitalism had just begun to develop) as a means of improving their conditions. His followers, the Neo-Malthusians (New Malthusians) substituted birth control for abstinence. Like Mathus, however, they consider overpopulation the source of all evil in the world – poverty, war, etc. Seemingly their theories received much support because the practice of birth control spread rapidly and the birth rate has declined in all industrially advanced countries. This, however. does not denote an acceptance of Neo-Malthusian theories but is the result of pressure of economic forces in woman’s life.
Industrialism or capitalism put women in the factories, offices ans professions. Women had to combine work with child-bearing. Birth control was woman’s protest against suffering under capitalism. Working men and women seek birth control information not for fear of future world overpopulation, but to prevent it in their own apartments, to keep hunger from their own doors.
It is important to isolate birth control from its stepfather Malthusianism. Many revolutionists identify this escape theory of the middle class with the support of birth control by the masses. Lenin expressed himself strongly against birth control but in actuality argued against the Neo-Malthusian theory.
In Soviet Russia (1926) my interest in their birth control work usually inspired the remark, “Oh! you are a Malthusian.” I had long discussions with leading people, among them Clara Zetkin, on that subject. To them birth control meant Mallhusianism.
What is the main significance of birth control for the workers and their families? It provides for planned parenthood and spacing of their family, which permits the working woman to combine work and the joy of motherhood without exhausting her health or the well-being of her child. It makes possible a slightly better standard of living for the average family. The working woman has more leisure to develop politically and participate In labor organizations. The worker, not overburdened with family responsibilities and worries, can participate more fully in his union or party.
Birth control is by no means a panacea for the evils of capitalism, but does offer some respite to workers during the period of bondage under capitalism. Workers, and particularly politically developed workers, should therefore protect against the onslaught of reactionaries, whatever progress has been made toward permitting the spread of birth control information. Unions with health centers should provide for birth control clinics administered by efficient physicians. Birth control often serves as a means of introducing into working women’s organizations the basic ideas of class struggle, I have recruited numbers of women to the cause of socialism by approaching them first with lectures on this problem.
No doubt under socialism there will be an increase of population, for the fear of insecurity will have disappeared. However, women will not agree to be merely child-bearing machines. The family will be limited for reasons of health or to provide more time for the attainment of education and culture. Under socialism, great strides will be made in the scientific research on this subject and the education and instruction of all on planned parenthood. There need be no fear that population will decrease for if, even under conditions today, parents still want children even though it means extra privation and suffering, how much more will that desire be manifested when society will have everything to offer children – health, education and the opportunity to develop into happy, useful people. What parent would ask for more?
 




Physically she was small, slender, a neglected hip disease in childhood left her with a limp. On her arrival to address large gatherings, committees meeting her for the first time would become crestfallen: How could such a frail being make an impression on the speaker’s platform! But once she faced the crowd, she seemed to grow in stature; her resonant powerful voice, her flaming oratory roused audiences to wild enthusiasm. Our Red Rosa, the German workers called her with proud tenderness.
Rosa Luxemburg was a magnificent speaker and combined this with a rare ability of presenting the ideas of socialism in a simple and graphic language. She was not only a student but a theoretician of Marxism,  the author of many pamphlets and books, among them The Accumulation of Capital, in which she expanded and modified Marx’s exposition of this subject  in volume II of Das Kapital. (The controversy over her  interpretation still continues and I leave it to theoreticians to evaluate its merits.) But Rosa was no cabinet theoretician. Her writings as her speeches were intimately bound up with action.
She possessed the rarest of gifts – the ability to understand and even sense in advance the vital periods,  problems, and strategy of the workers’ movement. It was precisely this that brought her into sharp conflict throughout her life with the self-satisfied and degenerating leadership of old German Social Democracy.
Rosa Luxemburg was born in Czarist Poland, and began to participate in illegal revolutionary circles from a very early age. At 18 she was forced to flee Poland in order to escape arrest. I met her at Zurich where she studied economics and philosophy. She was so mature, serious and self-assured that my friends and myself considered her our senior, but in reality she was several years younger than we were.
Returning to Poland she worked to counteract the reactionary nationalist movement which had grown strong, by organizing the workers on a principled Marxist basis. Lenin criticized her opposing the demand for self-determination, in particular for Poland. Her influence in organizing a powerful and strongly centralized party in Poland was enormous. On more than one occasion she sided with Lenin against the Mensheviks within the Russian movement.
 
Her Struggle Against Reformism
Through a fictitious marriage she became a German citizen and was thus admitted to the arena of the large German party. From then on we find her dealing blow after blow to the reformist tendency which was gaining sway over the German Social Democracy and the Second International. For example, when the French Socialists became jubilant because Millerand had received a high ministerial post, Rosa at once condemned this entry into a bourgeois government. The gist of her criticism was: Socialists can accept executive state positions only if the government itself is in their hands, otherwise they invariably serve as the servants of the bourgeoisie and betray the workers.
In her fight against revisionism she attacked Bernstein, a very prominent and influential party leader in Germany, who argued that Marx had become “outmoded” and that it was possible to evolve into socialism without any revolution by simply relying on progress, the parliament, and the feelings of justice and morality. Revisionism expressed the direct pressure of the middle class upon the workers' movement; pressure which repeats itself periodically, as we can vouch for from our own recent experience. In Germany, capitalism was on the up-grade at the time. The party had several million votes, a vast treasury, many newspapers, scores of parliamentary seats, etc. Party functionaries were well paid, and trade union leaders dominated the party. A feeling of satisfaction combined with a fear of losing their gains began to possess the Social Democratic tops. They argued against revolutionary action because everything seemed to be progressing smoothly. Why rush, why “gamble,” when a gradual growth would bring about socialism? In her fight against this Philistine outlook, Rosa had against her almost the entire German leadership.
 
1905 Becomes the Dividing Line
When the 1905 revolution broke out in Russia, Rosa with great joy followed the tremendous mass movement in her own backward homeland. She grasped at once the  importance of the new weapons applied in her Russia, especially the role of the general strike. The German leadership inclined to dismiss the general strike as “general nonsense.” But Rosa saw in it revolutionary mass action surging onward without fear of the possibilities of defeats – an expression of the tremendous vitality latent in the masses. During this period she became more and more estranged from the old leadership, and from Karl Kautsky himself who had for a while shared her enthusiasm for the 1905 events in Russia.
The World War of 1914 brought with it the crucial test for all revolutionists. The German party and the Second International revealed the full extent of their degeneration. The leaders betrayed the working class. Kautsky, the theoretical leader of the Second International bid his farewell to Marxism, declaring that internationalism could operate only in peace time and had to be suspended for thle duration of war. Rosa Luxemburg did not waver in her stand. Together with Lenin she had sponsored the resolution against war adapted at the Stuttgart World Congress, the last one before the war. This resolution in veiled phraseology (to elude the German censors) had actually threatened a civil war against the bourgeoisie in every country if war were declared.
At the outbreak of the war Rosa Luxemburg applied the line of this resolution. Addressing the workers in Germany she said: “If you are ordered to shoot down your French brothers refuse to shoot!” She was arrested and imprisoned for the duration of the war. Her fate became henceforth indissolubly linked with that of Liebknecht, her comrade-in-arms, who had proclaimed: “Our main enemy is at home!" and who soon shared Rosa’s fate – imprisonment.
Rosa Luxemburg, caged like an eagle, spent her days in a tiny cell from which she could barely glimpse a blue patch of the sky. Her letters from prison reveal an aspect of her character previously known only to her friends. The tenderness of this indomitable fighter is evidenced in these letters. She could not observe without revulsion even the suffering of animals – the overloaded oxen, the tiny, unprotected bird. In her letters she puts down her deep sympathy for all suffering, her craving for peace and beauty, her auger at injustice. She did not, However, let her hands hang. Her magnetic personality and noble nature enabled her to make friends in prison who helped to smuggle out regularly her articles for The International, the publication of the Spartakus group which she and Liehknecht had formed.
 
The Famous “Junius” Pamphlet
Her best known work of the period is the Junius Pamphlet, circulated throughout Germany. She did not sign her name because that would have disclosed her work in prison. Even Lenin was unaware of the identity of the author of this remarkable pamphlet, which he greeted with joy as a sign of a new and powerful revolutionary wing developing in Germany. He criticized the pamphlet for its mistakes, but appreciated its power and true revolutionary spirit.
“Junius’” reasons for opposing imperialist wars have become classic. They should be studied today, for they apply to World War II just as they did twenty years ago. Rosa explained that the victory of either side – whether Germany or the Allies – would necessarily lead to another world slaughter. Only the masses could tear humanity out of war. Nothing can save the world except Socialism.
She exposed the hypocrisy of the capitalist class, the fraud of patriotism. The ruling class will always make an alliance with the enemy in order to suppress its own working class. The French aristocrats welcomed the English and German armies against the French Jacobins. The German army released the army of Napoleon III so that the Paris Commune could be crushed. The Russian White Guards urged England, France and Germany to help them against the Russia of the Bolsheviks.
She pointed out that, far from weakening the working class, the revolution would strengthen and encourage the masses to defend their country, which becomes their real fatherland only after the revolution. The combined forces of all the monarchies could not subdue the great French Revolution.  Nor could Soviet Russia under Lenin and Trotsky be overthrown by all the imperialists.
And when the social patriots sneered that the party could do nothing during war time, she replied: Our task is to issue clear political slogans comprehensible to the workers; a determined consistently revolutionary course of action followed by the party will arouse assurance, self-confidence, and resolution in the masses; a weak, vacillating course not only undermines the power of the working class but demoralizes and confuses the masses. She cited a passage from a book by General Bernhardi (he was the guiding genius of the Germany army at that time) disclosing his fear that under certain conditions the army might become a menace to the ruling class.
The Junius pamphlet states that national war cannot be waged under imperialism. Lenin realized that Junius had the world war in mind, but considered it necessary to correct this statement by explaining that we would support national wars of the colonial peoples for self-determination; such wars are progressive and a blow to imperialism.
Junius called for a German republic to put an end to the war. Lenin pointed out that a parliament constituted of representatives of the bourgeoisie and  the middle class could never stop war. Only the masses – through the Soviets – can assure peace.
 
Rosa and the Russian Revolution
In prison Rosa received the great news of the Russian Revolution. She burned with indignation over the Brest-Litovsk peace forced by Germany upon the Bolsheviks. She accused the pro-war “socialists” of their responsibility, their degrading submission to the
Junkers. The Russian Revolution deeply inspired Rosa. Enemies of the Russian Revolution have tried to construe her criticism of the Russian Bolsheviks as an opposition to the Russian revolution. This is false. It was as one of them that she criticized some of their tactics.
The most vicious lie is that spread the Stalinists, who have tried to depict her as an enemy of Communism.
The doors of her prison were thrown open by the German workers. It was November 9, 1918 – the beginning of the German revolution. Although her long prison term had weakened and exhausted her, Rosa threw herself into the work. She edited the Rote Fahne (Red Banner). Together with Liebknecht she organized the German Communist Party. The Manifesto of the Party, in complete agreement with the program advocated by Lenin and Trotsky, was written by her.
The degenerated leadership of the Social Democracy took charge of the government in order to crush the revolution. Luxemburg and Liebknecht were hounded. Leaflets demanding their assassination were circulated. Large rewards were offered for their capture. The Spartakus group which had become the German Communist Party had a large following but was not yet strong enough to take power. The situation greatly resembled the July 1917 days in Russia. The advanced workers were pressing forward to battle, while the leadership realized that it was premature. The bourgeoisie and the Social Democratic leaders did everything in their power to provoke the masses in Berlin to an uprising so as to drown the revolution in blood. Liebknecht and Luxemburg did not stand aside from the masses. On January 15, 1919 they were arrested and immediately assassinated.
These two great revolutionists, two of the most sincere, devoted and fearless leaders of the proletariat were murdered by the bourgeoisie and its “socialist” lackeys. Luxemburg and Liebknecht have become the symbols for courage, militancy and unswervering opposition to imperialist war. The monuments erected  in Germany to commemorate these two comrades have been destroyed by Hitler.
But  Luxemburg and Liebknecht have more permanent memorials than monuments of stone or iron. Their names are inscribed in flaming red letters in the hearts of the international working class.
 

ters: Note on Antoinette Konikow








Konikow Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Note on Antoinette Konikow
I find Dr. Antoinette Konikow to be a very interesting woman.
Dr. Antoinette Konikow was a major figure in the earliest years of the 20th century in the fight for educating women and physicians who take care of women regarding reproductive function and control of same. She was a woman physician in an era when being such was still quite unusual. She was in many respects a similar prominent early fighter for women’s rights to ... and a contemporary of ... Margaret Sanger.
She also was a founding member of the Workers / Communist party of the USA, and one of the first half dozen founders of the American Trotskyist movement when its leaders were first expelled from the CP late in 1928. She in fact distinguished herself in her public writing as a Trotskyist critic of the increasingly Stalinized American CP a month or so BEFORE James P. Cannon (founder of American Trotskyism) first did! She was a prominent and dedicated and active Trotskyist until her death in 1946.
We present here four of the five revisions / editions of her ground-breaking pamphlet Voluntary Motherhood, intended to educate physicians regarding providing women with birth control measures. These are rare today, held by very few special collections libraries, and few if any hold more than a single edition. To my knowledge no scans of this pamphlet were available anywhere on line before. It may seem at first glance obsessive, collecting as many as I could (4 out of the 5 printed) different editions of the “same” pamphlet. But if you compare them carefully you’ll see each revision is quite significant, with changes in the organization, the text, and the illustrations.
Also presented here is her roughly 260 page 1931 book Physicians Manual of Birth Control. This has been scanned in the past, but all such scans that I have been able to locate were hidden behind a pay wall or a wall of “restricted to members” of this that or the other elite academic or other club. So I made a high quality scan of my personal copy of the book, which we of Marxists.org offer free to all.
I also have provided plain text and scans of an article she wrote that appeared in the January 1931 Birth Control Review journal, which reveals dramatically the legal and social state of physicians offering birth control advice and measures at that time.
Additionaly, we present here two or three political and birth control-related articles by her that appeared in US Trotskyist newspapers (Socialist Appeal and The Militant).
I have also included a scan (made by someone other than myself) of Bulletin No. 1 of the International Communist League, December 1928, a very early publication of one of the very first Trotskyist opposition groups in the U.S., in which Konikow breaks with the Stalinized CPUSA and publishes a criticism of it in line with that of Trotsky’s left opposition.

Regarding the pamphlet Voluntary Motherhood:
Neither Konikow’s public name nor her original name is mentioned anywhere in the first (1923) or third (1928) editions of her pamphlet. [I’ve yet to see a 2nd 1926 edition, and NONE are listed in WorldCat.] This reflected the SEVERE legal repression at the time of those ... even physicians ... who would publicly discuss and advocate such things as birth control and education regarding such. The absence of her name is DOUBLY significant in that Konikow was a life long and very public and prominent communist. Thus one NOT shy about standing up for her beliefs, no matter how unpopular or sanctioned against by society. AND she had the relative privilege of being a physician. Despite BOTH of those factors, the repression of those who dared to advocate and teach birth control back then in the US was SO great that EVEN Antoinette had to act with the discretion that is sometimes the better part of valor and refrain from putting her name on the first three editions of her book. It’s only in the fourth edition, printed in 1933, that we find her name on the pamphlet. A decade after the historic original pamphlet things apparently had changed enough so that she finally first dared put her name on the published work.
Note: The 1923 and 1928 1st and 3rd editions of Voluntary Motherhood bear no copyright notice. Thus they are in the public domain without need of further research. The 1933 and 1938 4th and 5th editions of Voluntary Motherhood bear a copyright notice. But there is no indication the copyright was renewed in the Stanford University copyright renewal database. Thus it’s resonable to assume those two pamphlets are in the public domain as well, barring any documented objection to this assumption.

Dr. Antoinette Konikow died in 1946. 4 years before I was born.
I regard it as an honor and privilege to be able to make a small contribution to helping preserve to the world of medicine, the world of those who continue to struggle for the rights of women, and the world of the working class movement / movements for social justice the record of her life’s work.
Martin H. Goodman MD
Director, Riazanov Library digital archive projects
Board of Directors, Holt Labor Library of San Francisco


Credits:
The two editions of  Voluntary Motherhood ... 1928 and 1933 ... that I now own and personally scanned were very kind personal gifts from a prominent collector and scholar of the periodicals of the US socialist and communist left, Mr. Tim Davenport, from his personal collection. He operates the Early American Marxism web site, one of the older and more respects sites providing the public with such material, and is among many other things a prominent expert in matters of the history of the Socialist Party of the US in the late 19th and early 20th century.
The scan of the rare 1923 first edition of Voluntary Motherhood was very kindly and generously made for me (us) by the University of Southern Illinois special collections library, who are the only institution listed in WorldCat to hold that rare first edition.
The scan of the 1938 5th and final edition of Voluntary Motherhood was kindly and generously made for me (us) by the University of Richmond, Richmond Virginia’s special collections library. Only two or three insitutions were listed in WorldCat as holding copies of this edition of Voluntary Motherhood.
Technical notes: The scans I made of the 1928 and 1933 editions were done employing 600 dpi single bit BW scanning mode, though the cover of the 1933 edition we also scanned in 300 dpi color to capture the use of green ink on the cover. The scan made for me of the rare landmark 1923 1st edition of this pamphlet by U of Southern Illinois was done using 300 dpi 24 bit color mode throughout. At my request, the University of Richmond of Richmond, Virginia scanned for me their holding of the 1938 5th edition at 600 dpi 24 bit color. It is presented here in BW.
 

