

MALACHY McKENNA was correct to point out to your readers (June) the fact that Northern Ireland is a police state in Britain’s backyard.
However he should also have informed them that there are two British supported police states in Ireland. All of the draconic provisions of the Northern Special Powers Act can be found in the Southern Offences Against the State Acts. That is why Irish revolutionary socialists raise the demand: Tories out – North and South.



 


Gery Lawless,
Duncan Terrace,
London, N.I.



 



EAMONN McCANN, militant Irish socialist and Socialist Worker reporter, was cleared by Derry magistrates last week of a charge of unlawful assembly arising from the police riot on October 5.
Loud cheers greeted the news and McCann was carried shoulder high from the court to a mass meeting on the dockside.
McCann told the crowd that the court decision was not victory in a war for the civil rights movement, but only a victory in a skirmish.
The tactics of the O’Neill faction in Northern Ireland’s Tory government are clear. They had meant to bring only militants before the courts.
But Craig, the police minister, who wants more extreme policies, charged 40 others, including Leader of the Opposition Eddie McAteer and two other MPs, Gerry Fitt and Austin Currie.
To imprison such respectable figures would mean committing the government to a policy of mass repression. This would lead to a break with Westminster and Rhodesia-style UDI – which Craig favours.
O’Neill imperialism’s representative in Ulster, was unwilling to follow in Ian Smith’s footsteps. Fighting back against Craig’s ultra-right threat, he is using the courts to get himself off the hook.
The second set of charges, which are minor ones, have been heard first in Derry. McCann has been acquitted, and so will many of the other defendants, including the MPs.
Then, when the dust settles and the press turns its attention from Ulster, McCann and other hard-line militants will be back in court on charges under the South Africa-style Special Powers Act.
 
Solidarity
DUBLIN:– 250 Young Socialists and Left-wing students marched on the British embassy last week to declare their solidarity with the militants on trial in Derry. Their path was blocked by 200 riot police.
Kitty O’Kane of Derry YS told the marchers that the police action was an example of the Dublin government’s support for the Ulster police state.
‘The southern establishment are just as opposed to workers on the streets demanding their rights as are the Northern Tories,’ she declared.
 
Long march
BELFAST:– The People’s Democracy, a non-sectarian civil rights movement, is organising a ‘long march’ from Belfast to Derry (73 miles) from December 19 to 22. British socialists are invited to take part. Full details from Mike Farrell, 8 Strandview Street, Belfast 9 Tel. Belfast 669685.
 



UNITED ACTION between police and supporters of the clerical nazi Ian Paisley stopped a civil rights march in Northern Ireland on Saturday.
The march was part of the growing movement for voting and housing rights for the catholic minority in the Ulster police state.
5,000 civil rights marchers were met by a solid wall of 1,000 Paisleyites at the junction of Thompson Street and Market Street in the town centre.
 
Weapons
The Paisleyites openly carried weapons. I saw lead pipes, police batons, pickaxe handles and table legs with nails stuck through them.
They were supported by 300 riot police.
It was victory for the thugs. They stopped the march, brazenly defied the law and, aided by the police made a triumphant tour of the city.
The stage was set for the victory of reaction on Friday, when 150 police entered Armagh at 7.30 in the evening.
After a night spent patrolling the nationalist (anti-Paisley) areas of the city, they took up positions in Market Square and held it until 5 a.m. on Saturday, when they changed places with the vanguard of the Paisleyites, who arrived in four buses.
With the key position in their hands, the thugs were able to cut off approach roads from Belfast to the city centre.
At 8 o’clock, the riot police returned from breakfast and placed a ring of steel around the town.
All vehicles except those of the Paisleyites were stopped and searched.
Entering the city from the north and giving my name as John Reed, I was allowed through three police road blocks.
Entering from the south and using the Irish form of my name, I was searched for weapons. Police ransacked the boot of my car, the glove compartments and under the seats.
It was an open display of police-Paisleyite collusions. As one civil rights worker said to me: ‘With police like this, do we need Paisleyites?’
 
Solidarity
ON MONDAY, the riot police moved back into Armagh to declare their solidarity with Paisleyites as they menaced a smaller demonstration by civil rights marchers.
100 civil rights supporters staged a sit-down in the council chamber and disrupted the monthly meeting. There were cries of ‘Fascist’ when the council leader praised the police for preserving law and order on Saturday.
Militants wanted to march on the city centre, but nationalist leaders urged the demonstrators to disperse. Police made no effort to prevent chanting Paisleyites from occupying the roads and threatening civil rights supporters.
 
On trial
AS WE GO to press, charges against 46 supporters of the Civil Rights campaign were being held in Derry. The accused include our correspondent Eamonn McCann and the charges arise from the march in Derry on October 5. Socialist Worker declares its solidarity with those on trial.
 



DERRY’S WALLS were stormed on Sunday by 13,000 of its citizens who held a meeting in the Diamond area in the city centre in defiance of a government ban.
At first the armed police riot squad tried to seal off all approaches to the city centre by blocking the archways of the old city walls with armoured cars, tenders, Jeeps and portable wire barriers, but it was no use.
Despite attempts by middle-class elements in the Citizens Action Committee to keep the marchers outside the banned city centre area, vast throngs of people surged through the ancient city gates at various points to hold a mass meeting.
The right-wing in the Civil Rights movement are flying a kite to sound opinion for a move to call off all demonstrations for one month to give Wilson a chance to put ‘pressure’ on Prime Minister O’Neill.
This is logical for these people, whose perspective is lobbying bourgeois parliaments, not mass struggle. They are being supported to the hilt by the tiny Communist Party of Northern Ireland.
Socialists must oppose this, and demand that the struggle be kept on the streets.
On Monday, police charges against Eamonn McCann and 45 others, including three MP’s, were adjourned until December 4. The charges range from incitement to riot to unlawful assembly and breach of the Special Powers Act on the Civil Rights march on October 5.
In McCann’s case the possibility of justice being done is slight. After he had been charged, and before the case was heard, Ulster Police Minister ‘Adolf’ Craig denounced McCann as being the chairman of the Irish Workers Group who Craig claimed were behind the revolt of October 5.
 



THE ARTICLE by your Spanish correspondent (14 September) shows the danger of using a Spanish correspondent to comment on Basque affairs.
The article, although containing some useful information, is vitiated by the presence of snide remarks aimed against the conception of Basque nationhood. With regard to the language, is your correspondent aware that the Irish Proclamation of Independence in 1916 was written in English? This did not stop the Easter Rising being the first blow in the destruction of the British prison-house of nations.
The inability of Basque guerrillas to speak the Basque language will hinder them just as little as ignorance of Irish hindered the Irish Citizen Army.
Your correspondent finds the idea of an independent Basqueland joining the Common Market simply fantastic; we consider equally fantastic the idea of the perpetuation of the Spanish prison-house of nations.
Revolutionary socialists do not make their support for national liberation movements conditional on their having the right programme, but just to set the record straight the militant section of ETA (the people responsible for the guerrilla activity, not, be it noted, "terrorism”) are also left-wingers and have declared that they stand for the socialist revolution.



 


Chris Gray, Gery Lawless,
London N8



 






Police savagery in Northern Ireland does not make the South, by comparison, a haven of democracy. GERY LAWLESS, editor of Irish Militant, describes moves by the Southern ruling class to strip workers and unions of their rights



ON OCTOBER 16 voters in the southern part of Ireland will go to the polls to vote in a referendum.
They are being asked by the government party, Fianna Fail, to agree to abolish election by proportional representation and replace it with the English ‘first past the post’ system.
Fianna Fail has been in power for 31 out of the last 36 years. Their last attempt to abolish PR was rejected by the people in 1959.
Why should they now seek another referendum? The answer is simple.
Fianna Fail, in the interests of the Irish bosses, is introducing a set of vicious anti-trade union laws. They are well aware that when such laws come into force they will produce a swing to the Left among workers.
They want to abolish PR to offset this challenge.
The Irish ruling class, with its weak economy tied openly and brutally to Britain, knows that if Britain enters the Common Market, then Ireland must follow. It needs to build up its industry to survive the ruthless competition from Europe.
 
Push up wages
A massive propaganda drive was launched to win foreign investment. It worked for a while and unemployment fell in some areas and in certain skilled trades.
But under such conditions the workers, after years of depression, found themselves in a seller’s market for labour and were able to push up their wages, often substantially.
Faced with this new-found confidence, Prime Minister Sean Lemass launched himself into a series of india-rubber contortions in an attempt to discipline the workers.
He used force but not sufficiently. He granted concessions but not enough of them. Workers could neither be coerced nor induced into acting in the so-called ‘National Interest’.
From 1961–1965 there was a gradual increase in the number of man-hours lost through industrial action. By 1964/65 Ireland headed the International Labour Organisation’s table for man-hours lost per thousand workers. Alongside this trend there was a gradual weakening of management domination.
This could not go on. The workers had to be disciplined.
Up to October 1965, despite differences in the Cabinet, Lemass’ strategy was to mark time and wait until Wilson had created the atmosphere and conditions for a showdown with labour in Britain. In other words, he wanted Wilson to do the dirty work first.
While biding his time he granted concessions, in some cases substantial concessions, to the working class, through the official union leaderships, such as the 12½ per cent all-round wage increase in 1964.
He knew that as long as the official union bureaucracies could win concessions for the workers they would be able to contain the situation, at least as far as national wage agreements were concerned.
Lemass and his successor Jack Lynch were well aware, that an outright show-down with labour would further discourage foreign investors, and that, as can be seen from the experience of other working classes, workers, if beaten down on the industrial front, tend to turn towards politics – hence the swing to Labour in recent years.
Fianna Fail want to abolish PR and hammer the Labour Party before forcing the show-down with the workers.
In April 1967 came confirmation, in the form of the minutes of the Working Party of the Irish Congress of Trade Unions in its meeting with the Department of Labour, of Fianna Fail’s success in getting agreement with the union bosses.
Basically the plan called for the formation of union ‘groups’ in given industries. The proposed ‘groups’, with a government-granted monopoly of negotiating rights, would concentrate effective power in the hands of a tightly-knit bureaucratic apparatus.
‘Central’ – presumably government-control of balloting, and state pensions for union officials made redundant, would tie this apparatus even more firmly to the state machine. The suggested banning of ‘unofficial’ pickets and the creation of conditions which would virtually rule out the formation of new unions would nullify any attempt to by-pass the official leadership and leave rank and file militants to the mercy of the states
 
Smash the system
When these laws are put into full force the struggle for higher wages and better conditions will become a struggle against the state, with a consequent politicisation of the working class.
This will drive workers to vote Labour. Hence the need for Premier Lynch, egged on by strong-man – and future Premier (when Lynch gets the knife in the back) – Charlie Haughey, to smash the present system of election by proportional representation and replace it with the ‘English’ system.
At the last election Fianna Fail had 71 seats, the other right wing party Fine Gael 47 and Labour 22. There were four others.
Political scientists at Trinity College, Dublin estimate that if PR is abolished Fianna Fail, without necessarily gaining an extra vote, would get 97 seats, Fine Gael 37 and Labour would be reduced to seven.
In the face of this threat, the Irish Left has formed a united front, the like of which has not been seen for many years. Social democrats, Trotskyists, orthodox Communist Party members and even the leadership of the Irish Congress of Trade Unions, have joined the campaign to defend PR.
But there are microscopic elements who have learned nothing trom the German events of the 1930s. ‘What the hell does it matter which way we vote?’ they say, ‘it’s immaterial what method is used to elect the executive of the bourgeoisie.’
This is precisely what the Irish bosses want: step aside, let Fianna Fail wrap Ireland up in the way most advantageous to the City of London. This is neither marxism nor common sense.
 
Utter rout
If PR is retained, Fianna Fail will be forced to introduce its anti-trade union laws in a situation which could lead to its utter rout. This would create a major parliamentary crisis, putting Southern Irish politics once more back on to the streets.
Whatever its other weaknesses, the Irish working class has a very good record in situations like this.
*
A special issue of Irish Militant on the PR ballot swindle was printed in London on September 20 and posted the following day to distributors in 14 centres in Ireland. Editor Gery Lawless said this week that to date only four packages had reached their destination.
 



EAMONN McCANN was correct to state (June 5) that I, not he, contributed that part of the amalgamated article which called upon socialists in the southern part of Ireland to demand that the Green Tory government arm Derry.
To remove possible confusion, could you explain where the heading on the letter came from?
Comrade McCann stated that it was ‘not a demand I would raise’. Fair enough. Where then did you get the heading ‘Derry – the wrong demand’?
I don’t subscribe to the notion that the sacredness of democracy is best guaranteed when the bourgeoisie is armed to the teeth and the workers unarmed.



 


Sean Reed
London N1



*

THE EDITOR COMMENTS: The headline lacked an essential question mark.
 



CAPTAIN Terence O’Neill’s decision to call a snap election in Northern Ireland while his Tory Unionist Party is in open disarray must be seen as ar act of political desperation in a situation which has become, for Northern big business, both intolerable and dangerous.
The diehard Unionist MPs, by meeting openly in Portadown, have thrown down the gauntlet to O’Neill.
O’Neill knows that at least seven more Unionist MPs are waiting in the wings to join the diehards.
It is common knowledge that a majority of the rank and file members of the local Unionist constituency associations are in support of William Craig – style fundamental unionism.
By holding an election O’Neill has ensured (with some exceptions) that the sitting members will be readopted as the official candidates.
It is clear that where the official candidate is an O’Neillite he will be opposed by an independent diehard, while the official diehards will be opposed by independent O’Neillites.
With this prospect, time and money are all important and O’Neill who has the money (via the official party funds and the backing or big business, both British and Irish) holds a snap election and denies his opponents time to organise money and support.
 
Save bacon
Another advantage O’Neill hopes to gain by a snap election is to save the bacon of the Green Tory Nationalists whose support has been corroded over the last few months.
Green tories like Eddie McAteer. will raise the cry of ‘opposition unity’ in a desperate attempt to hold on to their comfortable parliamentary jobs.
Where possible socialists must smash this spurious unity by refusing to support any candidate who is not wholeheartedly committed to the full programme of the civil rights movement, including the demand for civil rights in the south.
Wherever possible, socialists must oppose candidates of both the two-tone Tory parties and must resist any pressure for a civil rights truce during the election campaign.
Such a truce would be disastrous at any time but would be treacherous now when O’Neill enters the hustings with his proposed amendment to the Public Order Act which would make it illegal sit down, sit in, or stand up for civil rights.
 



THE RESIGNATION of Brian Faulkner and Billy Morgan from the Tory cabinet in Northern Ireland is part of the Faulkner conspiracy to oust Prime Minister Terence O’Neill.
The power struggle, which is now out in the open, dates back to 1963 when O’Neill pipped Faulkner at the post for the leadership of the Unionist Party.
On Monday January 6, following the civil rights march from Belfast, while the barricades were up in Derry, Faulkner in fact won a majority in the parliamentary Unionist Party. O’Neill was saved by two factors:
First, the anti-O’Neillites, although they could agree on Faulkner as Prime Minister and on the policy to be pursued – putting the boot in on the civil rights movement – could not agree on the members of the new cabinet.
Second and more important, Harold Wilson vetoed the move and made it clear that any attempt to ditch O’Neill or to use mass repression before the basic demands of the civil rights movement had been granted would lead to British intervention.
 
No Need
Faulkner, by far the most capable of the Unionist leaders, knows that the British government no longer has any need to boost the Northern Ireland regime which it sees as an embarrassment to its attempts to reintegrate the economy of Southern Ireland with Britain as part of the plans for entering the Common Market.
The Unionist Party knows that if the civil rights campaign is not brought to heel soon there is every danger that it will rapidly go beyond the boundaries laid down for it by the present middle-class leadership and transform itself into a movement capable of threatening the very existence of Ulster unionism.
So Faulkner resigned,stat- ing that his difference with O’Neill is on the question of one man, one vote and the need for strong government.
He hopes that with this line, Westminster will allow him to replace O’Neill.
 
Unite Party
Then, as a known strong man who holds the confidence of the extreme right of the Unionist Party, he could hope to unite the party, grant one man, one vote and ruthlessly crack down on a divided civil rights movement.
The irresponsible ‘moderate’ leaders of the civil rights movement will use O’Neill’s troubles as yet another excuse to call a truce with Toryism.
Inis danger must be countered by a programme to keep the civil rights movement on the streets.
The class content of the civil rights demands must be made clear and the movement must acquire its own means of publicity to end the need of relying on the Tory press, whether Green or Orange.
 



THE CIVIL RIGHTS Campaign in Northern Ireland which sparked off the present crisis inside the ruling Unionist Party here took the stage again last Sunday.
More than 100 delegates from many parts of the province gathered in Belfast or the annual meeting of one of the three main organisations in the movement, the Civil Rights Association.
One proposal made was that when the new Public Order Act is passed, Civil Rights meetings should be held at all major centres throughout the province, with a mass demonstration in Belfast, possibly with supporters marching in from outlying districts.
 
Challenge
A committee of 14 was elected with three new members, Michael Farrell, and Kevin Boyle of Peoples Democracy, the militant student group and Vincent McDowell, a leading Left-wing member of the Labour Party. Michael Farrell is the Peoples Democracy candidate for Bannside, where he is challenging Prime Minister O’Neill.
A series of resolutions were passed which called for a study in depth by the executive of a campaign of mass civil disobedience. Another resolution called for the demand of ‘one man, one job’ and ‘one family, one house’ to be given equal value to the demands of ‘one man, one vote’.
 
IN DERRY, an ad-hoc group has been formed called ‘Save the Civil Rights’ campaign’ and is collecting signatures on a petition calling for the resignation of John Hume and Ivan Cooper from the Derry citizens Action Committee.
Cooper, chairman and Hume, vice chairman of the committee are contesting seats as independents in the election.
 
Split vote
Hume has split the vote for Eamonn McCann who is standing as a Labour candidate against the leader of the Green Tories, Eddie McAteer. Hume and Cooper both say they are not using the movement for their own ends. Both opposed the march from Belfast to Derry, both supported the truce with O’Neill.
 



BELFAST:– Peoples Democracy, the militant civil rights movement, is putting forward 11 candidates in the Northern Ireland crisis election on February 24.
Among constituencies which they will contest is Bannside, where Michael Farrell will oppose both Prime Minister O’Neill and the Rev Ian Paisley.
And socialist Eamonn McCann is standing as a Northern Ireland Labour Party candidate in the Foyle constituency in Derry.
The policies on which the PD candidates will fight the election are:–

One man, one vote
 
The repeal of the Special Powers and Public Order Acts
 
The disbandment of the armed B-Special police
 
A points system for housing and a crash programme of housebuilding, linked to the demand that the Housing Trust debt to the Central Bank be cancelled
 
The direct intervention by the state in industry
 
Workers’ control in the factories
 
The break-up of large estates to enable small farms to form co-operatives.
 

Highlight
‘The forthcoming general election, like all elections in N. Ireland, is essentially undemocratic,’ says PD in a statement. ‘This is the main point which we want to highlight and change.’
The statement stressed that PD remains a mass movement and that individuals within it, if elected, were committed to the struggle for civil rights both inside and outside parliament.
The election has been presented by the right-wing press here as a struggle between ‘moderates’ and extremist Tory and Unionist forces.
The people who have supported PD in their civil rights campaign are combining to ignore the original alternative to a torn and discredited Tory Unionist Party and the ‘half-a-loaf’ Green Nationalist Tories, who are the other side of the two-tone sectarian coin.
British socialists and others who want to help should contact Alan Morrison 01-969 0915 or PD in Belfast 0232 660861.
Money, election workers, cars and loudhailers are needed. Money to: PD, c/o Belfast Bank, Bradbury Place, Belfast 9.
Last updated: 26 October 2020




IT’S BEGINNING to dawn on Fleet Street that 22 years-old Bernadette Devlin is no student nine-day wonder to be feted and rendered harmless.
Even after a gruelling election campaign followed by a weekend in the Bogside area of Derry, where she advised the people to form a Citizens’ Army to protect themselves from the Royal Ulster Constabulary, she has given as good as she got in interview after interview.
Terence O’Neill’s reputation, so far largely unsullied in the Tory press has got a hammering from which he will not recover in a hurry.
 
Main enemy
Despite the attempts by press and interviewers to get Bernadette to praise O’Neill, she has refused to budge from her statement that mainstream Unionism, headed at the moment by O’Neill, is the main enemy of the civil rights movement.
To shocked reporters she declared:
‘The only difference between O’Neill and the Paisleyites is that the unfortunate Paisleyites don’t have hyphenated names. The Unionist rebels want to walk over us with hob-nailed boots, O’Neill would use carpet slippers.’
Bernadette joined the civil rights campaign last August when she took part in a march from Coalisland to Dungannon, where she was kicked by stewards because she shouted slogans other than the official ones.
In Derry on October 5 she supported Eamonn McCann’s call that the march should defy the ban placed on it by Police Minister William Craig.
The resulting RUC brutality confirmed to Bernadette that she must take a full part in the campaign.
In the following week she took part in the founding of People’s Democracy, the mainly student body which was to play a major part in the movement from then on.
When the middle of the road leaders of both the Derry Citizen’s Action Committee and the Civil Rights Association tried to use the sacking of Craig as a signal to call off the campaign, Bernadette was one of those who struggled to break the truce.
On the famous “long march” from Belfast to Derry in January the action which effectively smashed the truce, Bernadette underwent another transformation. The young ‘do-gooding’ student saw the need to fight against the right-wing in the movement as part of the fight against Toryism in Ireland, North and South.
In the General Election which followed the second split in the Tory Party she was picked to fight Major James Chichester-Clark for the South Derry seat. She won the highest vote of the eight PD candidates.
The poll and the non-sectarian manner in which she put across the PD message set the pace for Mid-Ulster. The seat was set to become the cockpit for a great faction fight as Green Tory carpetbaggers like Austin Currie turned first left then right in an attempt to project himself as the all-purpose unity candidate.
The grass-roots anti-Unionists demanded and got a say in the selection of the candidate to fight the Orange Tory. A unity convention was agreed to.
Even before the convention it was clear that Bernadette was the choice of the ‘white negroes’ and the only non-Unionist candidate who stood a hope of getting any Protestant votes.
The Tories tried to destroy her with a communist scare. The fact that Northern Ireland’s tiny CP was backing one of the nationalist Tories was neither here nor there.
The diversions failed. Bernadette stormed to victory with Protestant as well as Catholic votes and hammered another nail in the coffin of the Tory police state.
 



THE SOUTHERN PART of John Bull’s other island will go to the polls on June 18 to vote in a general election. The 16th Free State Dail was dissolved on May 21 and the new assembly will meet on July 2.
With nominations due to close on June 3, the three main parties finished the majority of the constituency conventions last weekend.
Both Tory parties, the ruling Fianna Fail and the Fine Gael, will each have about 130 candidates while Labour will increase its total by about 50 per cent to field 100.
 
More seats
The election will be fought under the proportional representation system. Despite some minor attempts at gerrymandering, alterations to constituency boundaries following shifts in population will mean more seats in working-class areas. This time 144 Deputies will be elected in 42 constituencies against 38 last time.
In the 1965 elections FF won 72 seats, FG 47, Labour 22, and there were three ‘independents’. Since then there has been one defection from Labour to FF and an unusually large number of by-elections, which under proportional representation tend to go to the government party. This, plus the high death rate in the ranks of Labour’s vintage Deputies has shifted the balance of parliamentary power.
The strength of the parties at dissolution was: FF 74, FG 46, Labour 18, ‘independents’ 2, with three by-elections pending.
The increase in the number of Labour candidates reflects the swing to the left which has marked Ireland, North and South, in the last five years.
Irish Labour is way to the left of what passes for a Labour Party in Britain but, despite a vague commitment to Connolly’s ideal of a Workers’ Republic, the party remains basically a reformist organisation. Party leader Brendan Corish reminds one of a younger, better looking, version of pre-64 Harold Wilson.
Corish’s problem for the last six months has been to contain the more militant socialist elements who make up a large part of the new influx of members.
The most likely outcome of the election will be a stalemate, with FF remaining the major party and Labour standing a good chance of becoming the main opposition instead of FG.
Despite this, FF has to go to the country now. The government must get the election out of the way to allow the introduction of its anti-union laws.
The key to these laws is the jailing of ‘unofficial strikers’. Each time this happened in the past the state has been forced to back down.
This time, with the economy certain to be affected by the British squeeze this winter, their field for manoeuvre is reduced and the pressure for a showdown greater.
It seems clear that FF, if returned to power, would time this showdown for the summer holiday period when, they hope, it will be difficult to organise solidarity actions. In the past it was such solidarity which forced the government to retreat.
The blame for the fact that FF was able to recover from a landslide defeat in the referendum on PR last October must be laid on the leaders of both wings of the Labour movement. An extra-parliamentary campaign then would have brought down the government, but, like the old lady, Irish labour said no.
 



DERRY:– 30 homeless families organised by Derry Labour Party moved in and occupied 30 houses last weekend, that had been built for the British navy in the high-class residential area of Clooney Park.
The Labour Party called a meeting of squatters on the estate and a tenants’ association has been formed that will take responsibility for protecting the squatters.
On Monday I visited the squatters at Clooney Park and saw children playing on swings and seesaws possibly for the first time in their lives.
This is the largest and most successful squatters’ occupation in Ireland since the war, but its success still leaves the civil rights movement in a very weak position compared with just a few weeks ago.
Squatting on its own is only reformism by illegal means. Three weeks ago the whole question of power, at least in Derry, was on the agenda.
 
Question
Today the high point is the occupation of 30 houses. The Left in Ireland must question the policies and methods that have allowed this transformation to take place.
Blaming middle-of-the-road MPs like John Hume is no substitute for a clear programme and a serious attempt to implement it.
The mistakes, political and organisational, that passed unnoticed when the movement was on the upsurge, are now coming home to roost. The Left must take advantage of the present lull to do sane serious thinking about what is to be done.
 



BERNADETTE DEVLIN, 22 years old People’s Democracy leader, is almost certain to win a seat at Westminster when the 68,912 Mid-Ulster electors go to the polls on April 17.
When nominations closed in Armagh at the weekend there were only two candidates, Mrs Ann Forrest, widow of the former Tory Unionist MP, and Bernadette, who is standing an the same militant programme, including workers’ control of industry, that won her 6,000 votes in the mid-Derry election in February.
 



AS FORECAST in Socialist Worker last week, Ulster Unionists have put uniforms on Paisleyites and called up the hated B-specials.
Using as an excuse last Sunday’s explosion at Castlereagh’s electricity station – believed to be the work of provocateurs – the government has authorised the mobilisation of over 1,000 B-specials.
The marches and sitdowns of the last two weeks have made it clear that the Ulster Constabulary alone would be unable to enforce the proposed Public Order Bill.
Premier O’Neill had a clear choice: to grant civil rights or start to plan mass repression. He has opted for repression. By doing so he forces the civil rights movement to make a choice – accept repression or organise to resist.
 
Paisleyites start Derry violence
VIOLENCE FLARED briefly in Derry last Sunday at the end of the latest march in the city of protest.
It happened when Paisleyites waved Union Jacks in the faces of the 7,000 strong civil rights marchers. About 200 civil rights supporters broke past stewards and set about the loyalists in the Diamond, the city’s main square.
The Paisleyites, with the conditioned arrogance of 50 years’ rule behind them, used the British war memorial as their strong point as they set about the civil rights supporters with flagpoles and clubs, but they were swept back by waves of marchers.
After the short 12-minute battle, the marchers entered Guildhall Square to hear speeches from John Hume, Ivan Cooper, Eammon McCann, Michael Farrell, Bernadette Devlin and others.
The march was called by the moderate Derry Civil Rights Committee in an attempt to regain the initiative from the Derry Labour Party, which last week held a mass sit-down. The numbers both demonstrations were roughly similar.
 



FIFTY-THREE YEARS ago this Easter, on April 24 1916, a Proclamation was read in Dublin declaring Ireland a Republic.
The Republic maintained itself in arms for five days. With a massive use of armed force and the bombardment of Dublin, the ‘third city of the British Empire’, the uprising was defeated.
As the British troops moved in, Dublin’s middle class served them with tea and cake, then joined with the shawlies from the slums to hurl spit and sneers at the defeated rebels.
The end of the insurrection was the beginning of a wholesale execution of the leaders by the British Liberal government.
 
The gravedigger survives
The surrender took place on Saturday April 28. By Wednesday May 3 firing squads under the command of General Sir John Maxwell were at work. Pearse, Clarke and MacDonagh went to their doom that day.
The executions continued until by May 10 all but three of the captured insurgent commandants had been done to death.
The remaining three were Eamonn De Valera, afterwards to be the chief gravedigger of the Irish revolution, Sean McDermott, a cripple, left-republican, professional revolutionary and one of the signatories to the proclamation, and the representative of the revolutionary working class in the uprising – James Connolly.
Why was Connolly involved? The short answer is that he was attempting to implement in Ireland the resolutions of the Second International passed by its pre-war congresses at Stuttgart, Copenhagen and Basle which called for the mobilisation of the working class in each belligerent country against imperialist war.
The Irish section of the Second International did not rally to the ‘defence of its national regime’ as was implied in a recent article by Jim Higgins (Socialist Worker, January 18 1969).
By contrast, in the next few days bourgeois Ireland rallied to the Empire. The Irish Times called upon imperialism to ‘use the surgeon’s knife’.
The bourgeois viewpoint was more clearly expressed by the leading daily paper, the Irish Independent. In a leading article entitled The Clemency Plea it said:
‘When, however, we come to some of the ringleaders, instigators and fomenters not yet dealt with, we must make an exception.’
 
‘Sign of weakness’
‘If these men are treated with too great leniency, they will take it as an indication of weakness on the part of the government and the consequences may not be satisfactory.
‘They may be more truculent than ever and it is therefore necessary that society should be protected against their activity ... It would hardly be fair to treat these leniently because the cry for clemency has been raised, while those, no more guilty than they, have been severely punished
‘Weakness to such men at this stage may be fatal ... Let the worst of the ringleaders be singled out and dealt with as they deserve.’
Two days later this is precisely what happened to ‘the worst of the ringleaders’: the wounded Connolly, strapped to a chair, was shot with MacDermott.
The insurrection over, all shades of politics came forward to pronounce their verdicts.
The verdict of the British ruling class was given by Augustine Birrell, the Chief Secretary for Ireland. He felt confident enough to state in Westminster that the revolt did not express the wishes of the Irish people, who would never regard it as a landmark in their history.
The organ of clericalism, The Irish Catholic, wrote of
‘This extraordinary combination of rogues and fools. To find anything like a parallel for what has occurred, it is necessary to have recourse to the bloodstained annals of the Paris Commune.’
And the paper declared that:
‘What was attempted was an act of brigandage, pure and simple, and there is no reason to lament that its perpetrators have met the fate which from the very dawn of history has been universally reserved for traitors.’
 
Labour joins the chorus
The Pope sent a message expressing his regret. John Redmond, the leader of the Nationalist Party, was satisfied that the revolt was ‘artificial’ and so to be dismissed.
The British labour movement could not miss out on the imperialist chorus. Labour leader Arthur Henderson sat in the cabinet which ordered the death of Connolly, while the Newcastle-on-Tyne Conference of the Independent Labour Party condemned militarism, and included among the ‘militarists’ Connolly and ‘the Irish Citizens Army.’ Polluted with the twin prisons of pacifism and Great British chauvinism, the labour movement of this country was unable to rally any support to the great Dublin struggle and ended up supporting the execution of the General Secretary of the largest trade union in Ireland.
Dublin lay in ruins. 1,351 people were killed or wounded – officially – the jails overflowing, 15 leaders in quicklime.
In the city centre 179 buildings totalling 61,000 square yards had been irrevocably ruined.
But, as Pearse had predicted, the revolt had redeemed Dublin from many shames: the Dublin which James Joyce had so accurately described in Ulysses was dead, and what the poet W.B. Yeats was to call a Terrible Beauty was born.
Part of that terrible beauty was the tradition which told 30,000 factory workers to refuse to pass a picket for 4½ weeks last month until 1,300 maintenance men won a pay award of £3 10s a week.
Even some of the revolutionary Left took the position that the insurrection was a putsch.
Trotsky, while defending the Rising, thought that the basis for a national revolution in Ireland had disappeared.
Radek, in the columns of the Berliner Tagwacht [1] attacked the movement in a manner reminiscent of the attacks one reads in some sections of the Left-wing press on Che Guevara and the guerrilla movement in Latin America.
Lenin made a different estimation. He wrote:
‘The term “putsch”, in the scientific sense of the word, may be employed only when the attempt at insurrection has revealed nothing but a circle of conspirators, or stupid maniacs, and when it has aroused no sympathy among the masses.
‘The century-old Irish national movement, having passed through various stages and combinations of class interests, expressed itself, inter alia, in a mass Irish National Congress in America which passed a resolution calling for Irish independence – it expressed itself in street fighting conducted by a section of the urban petty bourgeoisie and a section of the workers after a long period of agitation, demonstrations, suppression of papers, etc.
 
Verdict of the masses
‘Whoever calls such an uprising a “putsch” is either a hardened reactionary or a doctrinaire, who is hopelessly incapable of picturing to himself a social revolution as a living phenomenon.’
The verdict of the Irish masses was to vindicate Lenin. In the general election of 1918, Sinn Fein,the Republican party, won 73 seats out of 105.
Out of 84 seats contested, the Green Tories who had opposed 1916 won only six; the counter-revolutionary Unionists won 26. Elsewhere the opponents of the struggle and supporters of the imperialist war went down before a hurricane of popular indignation.
The death of Connolly and his failure to construct even the embryo of a revolutionary party, allowed the ruling class to dominate the national upsurge which followed.
The betrayal of the fight for freedom in the compromise of 1922 flows logically from the success of the bourgeoisie in gaining control of the movement, likewise all the subsequent betrayals.
The Irish working class is the only true inheritor of 1916. It must complete the struggle.
*

S.R.
Connolly



I heard about Connolly when I was a kid.
My mother told me all about Jim:
As she told it, he sat at the right hand of God,
And Larkin at his left.
At school they didn’t tell me about him;
I wasn’t interested then.
I was on strike last month, four weeks and a half.
All the boys talked about Connolly.
This time I was interested,
’Cos he was right, you see.
We learned it on that strike:
The great only appear great because we are on our knees.
But we know it now, Kev and Eddie, Sean, Austin and Kate.
So what’s goin’ to happen to the great?



*
Footnote by ETOL
1. The paper that published Radek’s article was actually called the Berner Tagewacht.
 



TENS OF THOUSANDS of Ulstermen and women voted to return the civil rights campaign to the streets. This is one clear message from Northern Ireland’s snap coupon election.
A massive attempt to swing the ‘white negroes’ of John Bull’s other island behind the half-a-loaf policy of Tory Premier O’Neill failed. Catholic working people refused to follow the lead of the Catholic upper class.
 
Swing
Not only has O’Neill-style Tory Unionism failed to win the Catholic vote, but the beginning of the end for the Green Tory Nationalists is in sight – with the start of a swing to the Left – the real Left.
Eight People’s Democracy candidates polled over 20,000 votes between them while four other candidates known to support the PD Manifesto totalled a further 13,000 votes.
The swing to the Left is confirmed by results from the last two constituencies. In South Down PDs Fergus Wood polled 4,610, less than 250 short of victory.
In neighbouring South Armagh, Newry PD member Paddy O’Hanlon, standing as an Independent, won the seat from Green Tory, Eddie Richardson.
It was a major breakthrough for the Irish Left, the more so when one understands the handicaps.
A snap election left only 10 days to raise cash before the close of nominations.
PD is not a political party and most of its members had never taken part in an election before. The bulk of PD’s support comes from the youth who have no vote.
The election was based on the old register. More than 20,000 young people over 21 had no vote.
Many electors had never voted in Stormont elections before. PD candidates were unable to enter some areas to put their case to the people.
A vicious slander campaign – especially in Derry – reached an all-time low even for an Irish election.
There was tacit unity between the Orange and Green Tories to ‘smash the Reds’. The agreement was highlighted in South Fermanagh where the Orange Order was used to rally support for Nationalist John Carran, who has a deal with the Unionists to keep the civil rights campaign out of his area.
Tribune published a PD appeal for funds on page two last week. On the back page their Irish correspondent, Andrew Boyd, claimed falsely that PD had ample funds.
Boyd in the same article, written after nomination closed with no Unionist candidate in Foyle, accused Eamonn McCann of splitting the anti-Unionist vote and leaving ‘enough room for a Unionist to canter through’.
Not to be outdone, the ex-stalinist political correspondent of the pinky Irish Times, alleged that the Left wanted O’Neill out to put the ultra-right in power.
 
Militant
The Unionist Party Manifesto culled a paragraph from the Republican Proclamation of 1916 and a leading Unionist claimed that James Connolly would have supported O’Neill.
Against these odds, despite some serious political and organisational mistakes, People’s Democracy won tens of thousands to a programme of militant struggle on the streets, for full civil and social rights new. It is a record to be proud of.
 



THE NORTH of Ireland’s biggest and most dramatic day of protest went off last Sunday without any major violence.
It was a day of triumph for People’s Democracy and other militants in the civil rights campaign who carried through the demonstrations in six major centres despite threats from the Paisleyites and obstruction from the right wing of the civil rights movement.
The protests had been called by PD and the Derry Labour Party against the new Public Order Bill.
 
Blocked traffic
In Derry, more than 5000 answered the Labour Party’s call and blocked traffic for two hours in a massive demonstration in the heart of the city.
Eammon McCann, who presided, said:
‘We have been told that there are now two types of unionists. One section want to walk over us with hobnail boots and the other section, led by O’Neill, want to walk over us in carpet slippers.’
‘The people of Derry,’ he added, ‘are not going to allow anyone to walk over them ever again.’
Following the sit-down, there was a march by young men to the Royal Ulster Constabulary Barracks where windows were smashed. The RUC remained discreetly out of sight and there were no arrests.
 
Burnt Bill
In Armagh, 1,500 people attended a meeting in the market square where a copy of the Public Order Bill was burnt.
About 1,000 marchers in Enniskillen had their march prematurely ended by the RUC at Erne Bridge. The demonstration which was organised by PD, was addressed by Paddy Devlin, MP, Paddy Kennedy, MP, Michael Farrell and Peter Cosgrove of PD.
The last of the demonstrations at Toomebridge, Co. Antrim, passed off without incident.
 
Blundered
In spite of a major speech by O’Neill on Tuesday night, defending the Public Order Bill, it is clear that the Ulster Unionists have blundered badly. The Bill outlaws sit-downs or sit-ins.
Last weekend’s events have made it clear that the RUC do not have enough men to enforce the law once a campaign against it is organised.
The only way open to O’Neill if he is not to see the law flouted every weekend, is to call up the B-specials which means putting uniforms on Paisleyites. Such a move will be understood by the people for what it is – a declaration of civil war.
 



SIX RIGHT-WING leaders of the Irish Civil Rights movement have resigned in an attempt to split the campaign and forestall a swing in favour of more militant policies.
MPs John Hume and Ivan Cooper have quit as chairman and vice-chairman of the Derry Citizen’s Action Committee. Both will remain on the committee.
The other four, headed by Irish Communist Party leader Betty Sinclair, have resigned from the executive of the, Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association, alleging that it had been taken over by the People’s Democracy.
 
‘Nonsense’
This claim was described as ‘absolute nonsense’ by Michael Farrell. He said the PD members, himself and Kevin Boyle, were democratically elected at CRA’s annual meeting last month.
The real reason for the resignations is that the rank and file of the movement, sick and tired of the excuses of Sinclair and company for not organising any action since last summer to push their demands, have swung behind the militant PD policies.
Last week, PD announced plans for a march to parliament on March 29 to protest against the Public Order Bill. Last Saturday’s CRA meeting agreed to jointly sponsor the demonstration in spite of Sinclair and her supporters.
Rather than accept the decision, they resigned, hoping to split and wreck the movement.
If there is no compromise with these elements, the way is now clear to commit CRA to a programme of street struggle in alliance with PD.
The resignations on the same day of Hume and Cooper can be seen as acts of self-defence. Both men have lost popularity in Derry since their election to parliament last month.
The Derry Labour Party decided to organise a mass defiance of the Public Order Bill when it goes through Stormont. Both Hume and Cooper were opposed to the Citizen’s Action Committee joining but they feared that an open refusal on their part would mean a loss of support for their middle of the road committee.
By stepping down they hope to ride the wave until – as they think – the present militancy has passed.
 



PEOPLE’S DEMOCRACY, the militant organisation that shook the Northern Ireland Tories in the recent elections, is to stage a march from Belfast to Dublin this Easter in support of demands for civil rights in both parts of Ireland.
The march is expected to last five days. Plans were discussed last week at Queen’s University Belfast.
A PD statement issued later said: ‘We are opposed to Southern politicians using the Northern situation to direct attention from the failings of their own state.’
The statement stressed that objections to undemocratic laws in the south – such as anti-strike legislation, the banning of divorce, the prevention of the open sale of contraceptives and the privileged position of the Roman Catholic Church – does not only come from the Tory Unionists in the North.
 
Ban sit-downs
On Sunday, PD confirmed that if the O’Neill government re-introduced the Public Order Amendment Bill, a protest march would be organised.
The Bill will make sitdowns and the occupation of public buildings, including universities,criminal offences, On Wednesday members of PD occupied the vacant top floor of a new block of offices for several hours. They were protesting against the building of prestige office blocks instead of houses.
British socialists who would like to join the Easter march should contact: Alan Morrison, 01-969 0915 or PD in Belfast, 0232 660861.
 
Emigrants support
BIRMINGHAM:– At a meeting called by the Ad-hoc civil rights movement on Monday, Irish emigrants decided unanimously to take part in the Easter march from Belfast to Dublin. They will campaign to win further emigrant support in the city.
 

