

THE entire dispute over trusteeships at the San Francisco
Conference is definitely only another part of the game of power
politics. The recent maneuverings among the Big Five, about whether
to use “independence” or “self-determination” as an objective
for the dependent colonial peoples, to be stated in the preamble to
the trusteeship section of the global charter, is only so much
surface covering to deflect attention from the intense rivalries for
markets, territories, bases, and profits among the Five.
What is the controversy concerning whether or not “independence”
for colonial peoples shall be written into the new trusteeship
chapter of the UNCIO’s (United Nations Conference on International
Organization) charter? The matter of eventual independence for
now-dependent peoples has been characterized by the failure of the
United States and English delegations to back it up thus far at
sessions of the United Nations Conference Committee on
Trusteeships.
 
“Self-Government” Myth
The independence issue has been sidetracked by substituting the
idea of “self-government in forms appropriate to the varying
circumstances of each territory.” What was originally merely a
draft of a “working paper,” drawn up by Commander Stassen and
others of the American delegation, and accepted by the Committee only
as a basis for discussion, has now been high-handedly adopted as the
future policy, through American pressure.
It becomes brutally clear that this poorly camouflaged scheme
is an outright bid for control of colonies, on the part of the
Allies. Dr. Wellington Koo of China protested feebly at this action
and originally urged at one of the meetings, that, in line with the
progressive ideas on political advancement set forth in China’s own
proposals as to trusteeships, the word “independence” be added”
to, or substituted for, “self-government.” A.A. Rostchen,
representing Russia, defended Koo’s position. Lord Cranborne,
British Dominions Secretary, argued against use of the word
“independence,” saying that a lot of dependent peoples didn’t
aspire to independence, even if they could achieve it. Stassen gave
this display of concern for the colonies the crowning, final touch
when lie cynically explained that his view is not independence, but
inter-dependence among nations, and that “all nations must learn to
live together” – a very pretty sentiment indeed, and meaning
absolutely nothing, except that, what the U.S. says, goes.
As if it mattered which word to use, when the motives of all are
alike. Now it appears that the Chinese delegation has been forced to
agree, for they have withdrawn their proposal to insert the word
“independence” for “self-determination.” And the Russians who
originally sided with them now too accept the Anglo-American plan on
instructions from Moscow.
We most emphatically do not think the trusteeship system will
offer “real opportunity for progress to dependent peoples.” The
professed peace and post-war sentiments of the San Francisco
Delegations cannot be realized in the arena of imperialist power
politics.
Nobody seems to think that the colonial peoples themselves have
anything to say about the achievement of their national independence.
Instead, the Security Council is going to see that these objectives
are to be carried out so they should not interfere with the retention
and development, on the part of the great powers, of strategic areas
and bases.
 
Imperialist Record
Let us examine the fine records of these “friends” of the
colonials and their inter-imperialist rivalries. The British, for
example, have promised the Indian people independence many times,
have made speeches about it in Parliament, have sent special
committees to India, and busied themselves with other ineffectual
measures, but at the same time, have continued to imprison the
leaders of the colonial peoples of India and elsewhere fighting for
independence.
Britain, and to a still greater degree France, have been
weakened by the war. Keeping and exploiting the colonies is a life
and death concern to them. They oppose anyone else moving in on their
territory, and are frightened, for there are others who eye their
rich colonies in Africa, the Near East, and Asia enviously,
especially the U.S.
The U.S. has been using the trusteeship formula from the beginning
as a means of broadening the degree of its economic penetration of
the world. That means penetrating the colonial empires of Great
Britain, France, Holland, Portugal and Belgium.
Russia, too, is added to the many friends of the colonials. Why
should Russia be so concerned about colonial self-determination and
national independence? It has not even offered the people of Poland,
Bulgaria, Romania, and the Baltic countries the right to determine
their own forms of government and to free them from the control of
the Stalinist bureaucracy, but instead continues to repress
ruthlessly all socialist or radical expression.
The problem of the colonies is a crucial one for the Allies, for
the war has developed strong movements for national independence and
freedom.
After all, why should the Allies emancipate these colonies that
have been deprived freedom for so long by their masters? None of the
powers can really be interested in the freedom of the colonies, for
the colonies are an intrinsic part of the capitalist structure of
exploitation and imperialism. From the colonies are derived cheap
labor and cheap raw materials.
The struggle of the exploited peoples in the colonies is only
part of the greater struggle of all humanity to achieve freedom and
equality. The peoples in the colonies will develop the powerful
forces existing in their own countries and realize that their
interests are identical With the workers of all countries. But, in
turn, the workers of other countries must recognize this affinity of
need and interest. No alliances among any of the powers can serve as
a substitute.
 



There’s nothing like a war for trotting out figures like billions, or even trillions! The following figures on war expenditures, based on the report of research experts of the American University at Washington, D.C., tell us a grim tale of the gigantic war costs that have accumulated thus far, used solely for destruction and killing.
Direct expenditures for the war have totalled so far more than $1,030,000,000,000, which still does not include figures for “the. destruction and damage of public and private property,” nor the expenditures of China. Of the total, Allied war figures were $558,090,000,000, and Axis war figures, $442,900,000,000. Listed by countries, we have:



WAR COSTS




Allies:


 


Axis:




U.S.


$280,600,000,000


Germany


$258,900,000,000




Russia


  170,000,000,000


Italy


    94,000,000,000




Gt. Britain


    64,200,000,000


Japan


    44,000,000,000




France


    13,000,000,000


 



Added to this picture of human futility we have the total of the European War, which, according to tentative War Department estimates, were about 60,000,000 – the, greatest recorded toll of any war in history. Of this number, about 14,000,000 were killed, or died from other causes, compared with about 8,538,000 killed or died from other causes in the First World War. We are becoming, more skilled in methods of death and destruction.
The War Department’s breakdown is as follows:



WAR CASUALTIES




Killed in battle and dead from other causes


  


14,000,000




Permanently Incapacitated


  5,500,000




Wounded, returned to duty


30,300,000




Captured


10,200,000



It is noteworthy that these figures do not include civilian casualties from bombings, nor the number of civilian deaths due to starvation, malnutrition or war disease.
THESE WAR CASUALTIES EQUAL THE TOTAL POPULATIONS OF BELGIUM, BULGARIA, CZECHOSLOVAKIA, DENMARK, FINLAND, THE NETHERLANDS, GREECE, NORWAY, SWITZERLAND AND SWEDEN PUT TOGETHER!
These figures are extremely interesting and tell a story that is tragic in its implications. They tell us that billions have been and are still being spent on production for destruction and killing, with quite irreparable loss and waste of human lives. The figures also compel us. to explain a riddle: With such tremendous productive capacity, why could we not have a society planned on the basis of an equal distribution of the good things of life to the peoples of the entire world?
 
United States and Germany
War costs for the United States are seen to be above all others. The U.S. has reached an unparalleled peak of employment and production in wartime. Why, then, do layoffs, cutbacks, reductions in wages, unemployment, depressions and poverty become such terrible realities in peacetime?
Because our economy is capitalist,  meaning chaotic and anarchic, based on competition, monopoly, producing not for public need but for private profit.
Capitalism, which was progressive in its beginnings in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, because it overthrew the feudal method of production, has now become ah anachronism, with its depressions and wars standing in the way of progress and the intelligent, socialist planning of society.
The latter would have as its goal economic security for all, so that with this minimum requirement, “human” beings will have the potentialities for the full growth of their “humanity.”
We also see from the figures for Germany that net war costs neatly approximated those of the U.S., indicating that she was the greatest European industrial power, having the means for tremendous output of goods. This was demonstrated in this war when she almost won a world empire for German imperialism. But above all it showed what slave labor means to a capitalist economy; Germany was able to have this tremendous production by enslaving German and European labor.
But Germany is to be reduced to a vassal country and her industries smashed. The workers are to suffer alongside of the fanatical Nazis – still more evidence of the futility of capitalism. For the German workers, together with the American workers, and the workers in all other countries, could produce enough for a society that would supply “plenty for all” – food, clothing, houses, schools, even radios, automobiles and refrigerators.
It is no myth that there is plenty for all. Here are the facts: More food can be raised today than we could, possibly eat” – through widespread use of tractors, combines, fertilizers, improved seeds, irrigation, insect control; etc. Here is what the Yearbook of Agriculture, published by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, has to say:
“Two billion acres (about five per cent of the earth’s land area, and 42 per cent of the present area under cultivation) would, under scientific agricultural methods, provide an optimum food supply for the population of the entire globe.”
Yet people starve in the midst of plenty and food is dumped overboard in peacetime when people cannot buy for they may not have the jobs or the money.
In industry, progress has been even more outstanding. Mass production increased the productivity of labor by fifty per cent in manufacturing industries for the fourteen-year period of 1923–37 alone, and everyone knows the miraculous feats of war production today.
We have the natural resources, the machinery, the labor. Modern science has made comfort and culture and leisure possible for all. Who will deny the great potentialities for good inherent in our advanced economy?
The owners of production have at their disposal all these wonderful opportunities, but have they used them to end poverty, maintain security and a high standard of living and keep the peace? No, for they have flagrantly and willfully mismanaged.
This is the record of average weekly wages for factory workers under capitalism in this age of mass production:

1927 – “Prosperity” wage, $23.38. (The National Industrial Conference Board reported in 1926 that $36.88 was essential for a decent living for a family of five in New York City.)
 
1931 – Depression wage, $20.31. (Not everyone worked all year around.)
 
1938 – New Deal “Recovery” wage, $22.70. (Relief, WPA and an alphabetical era flourished.)
 
1942 – Wartime wage, $40.37. (Of course, working long hours increases the weekly wage, but wartime wages only seem high when we overlook wartime taxes and prices. Wartime wages buy less and less every day.)

Where, then, does all the wealth go to? The Federal Trade Commission’s Report on National Wealth and Income showed that one per cent of the population owned at least fifty-nine per cent of the wealth; that twelve per cent (middle classes) owned thirty-one per cent of the wealth and that eighty-seven per cent (workers, farmers, small shopkeepers) owned a bare ten per cent.
 
Who Owns America?
In 1929, the big boom year of capitalism, 513 men each received over a $1,000,000 income; their combined income was equal to that of over a million ordinary workers. In the New Deal year of 1936, forty-two per cent of all families received less than $900 a year income. President Roosevelt was being overly conservative when he said that ONLY one-third of the nation is “ill fed, ill clothed, and ill housed.” The war has not changed this alignment of force either, for corporation profits have increased enormously.
That the rich get richer and the poor get poorer is always true under capitalism.
The war has a neat way of obscuring the failures of capitalism, for under peacetime capitalism it is inevitable to have crises and mass unemployment. The purchasing power of the people cannot increase fast enough to provide a market for the growing volume of production. When the capitalists realize there is no profit in selling their goods, there are layoffs and slashing of wage’s. Food is left to rot in the granaries and storage houses, and hungry people starve in the midst of plenty.
 
A Contradiction ...
The capitalist system won’t work, for the very root of capitalism is all wrong. It is based on a contradiction, namely, that the man who owns the tools of production (the capitalist) does not work them, and the man who works them (the worker) does not own them.
Before the coming of capitalism the owner of the tools and the worker of the tools were the same man, but with the industrial revolution, the product no longer belonged to the producer – the worker at the machine – but belonged to the capitalist owner of the machine, who sold it for the best price the market would pay, and gave to,the workers the smallest wage they would work for.
There is a way out of this chaos. The working people themselves should own and operate the industries cooperatively, through owning and operating the government.
This would end production for profit and the waste of competing corporations.
There would be planned production for the first time, increasing the output of wealth so that there would be plenty for all.
The big incomes would be eliminated and the income of a country would be more evenly distributed, to raise the living standards of the peoples.
Here in the United States, we have today more workers, more profits, more efficiency, more productivity, and more machinery than ever before, due to wartime expansion. We have more of all the means necessary to a high standing of living, shorter hours and certainly full employment for every able-bodied person. But the workers throughout the entire country are now experiencing the first fruits of the end of the war in Europe – cutbacks, layoffs and unemployment.
Thus far the government and its agencies, which were so capable of planning production and full employment for war needs have met this situation with words and nothing more. A solution to this threatening situation can be provided by labor, organized in an independent struggle around a realistic program for full employment at a living wage.
 
Labor’s Goal
To carry out this program, the] workers need a political party of their own, based on the millions of organized trade union members, free and independent of the capitalist parties and politicians. Such a party will fight for a real program of reconversion and full employment, and will aim at the establishment of a workers’ government. Only the Workers Party has presented a fighting program for the achievement of these aims.
The kind of planned economy we envisage would, for the first time, make possible an end to wars between nations. Because the planned economy would include all countries. The aim of the working class would be to end capitalism and all forms of exploitation everywhere; and everywhere introduce workers’ governments and planned economy. Its aim would be to create a socialist world.
 

  The defeat of Germany and Italy, and the certainty of defeat for Japan, does not mean the defeat of fascism. For the conditions that bring fascism into existence remain. Fascism feeds on economic chaos, and since capitalism cannot guarantee economic security, peace or freedom, the danger of fascism is constant. All sections of America have united in an uproar of indignation over the crimes of foreign fascism. “How can such things be in a civilized world?” It is misleading and decidedly dangerous to think that fascism is a national characteristic of Germany or Italy; that it came to Germany because the people were nationalistic, militaristic and pronto regimentation; that it came to Italy because the country was backward. Such theories are false and disarm the people of other countries, especially the working classes, in their struggle against reactionary fascism. They do not explain, for instance, why in almost every important country of the world, fascist movements were and are in existence. FASCISM IS NOT A NEW SOCIAL SYSTEM, BUT A FORM OFPOLITICAL RULE UNDER CAPITALISM. AS SUCH IT IS CAPABLE OF COMING TOPOWER IN ANY COUNTRY. There are evil threats, which are taken for granted, to American workers in such native, anti-labor, anti-democratic and anti-Semitic pro-fascist movements as the newly-formed Nationalist Party, headed by ex-Senator Robert Rice Reynolds, and of the America Firsters, led by Gerald L.K. Smith. Both are financed by, and serve the interests of big business; both are flourishing today, and trying to consolidate and coordinate all reactionary and pro-fascist forces in this country.  Joe McWilliams’ Activities Sensational disclosures in the Cleveland “Press”reveal that Reynolds is employing as a key-man, none other than Joe McWilliams, the silvery-voiced Yorkville Fuehrer, to solicit wealthy Cleveland industrialists for contributions to the Nationalist Party. It is pretty generally avowed that McWilliams is an out and out fascist and admirer of Adolph Hitler and all his policies; a friend of the leader of the German-American Bund, Fritz Kuhn; and of Silver-Shirt leader, William Dudley Pelley. McWilliams gained notoriety chiefly through his vicious anti-Semite speeches at street corner rallies in Yorkville in the early days of the war. He is the author of such a profound remark as: “ADOLPH HITLER IS THEGREATEST LEADER IN THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD.” Reynolds, leader of the Nationalist Party, former chairman of the Senate Military Affairs Committee, husband of Evalyn Walsh MacLean, owner of the Hope diamond and a huge fortune, had the political and social prestige to give his party a deceptive aura of respectability. The big-time Nationalistic press, the New York Daily News andWashington Times-Herald have come out for a Nationalistic Party, while the Chicago Tribune has specifically praised the Nationalistic Party of Reynolds. Reynolds is himself the owner of a newspaper, the National Record, the official organ of his Party, and the proud possessor of a private, potential storm-troop outfit, the Vindicators. Here is what A.F. Weber of the Triplex Screw Company of Cleveland tells of an interview with Nationalistic Party representative, Malone, “public relations director” for the American Nationalistic Committee, Reynolds’ Number One organizer and trouble shooter, active in the last four months in New Jersey, New York, Massachusetts, Illinois and Ohio. “Malone asked me for a donation to the party. He said the Nationalists expected to get into office and would help industry. He said they would do away with all business regulations, lower taxes, and make the unions incorporate, like they do in some of the Southern states. He talked a lot about Communists, and how they were taking over the country through the New Deal. He said the Nationalists would put an end to the Communists and foreigners in this country. He explained the way the Nationalist Party would get into office by uniting the anti-New Deal Democrats of the South, with the right kind of Northern Republicans. He showed me a map to see how the votes in the different states would be united under the Nationalists.” Other industrialists or firms visited by Malone or McWilliams include: James F. Lincoln, president of Lincoln Electric Co., who has a record of violently reactionary actions against labor; Robert A. Weaver, president of Ferro Enamel Corp.; Republic Steel Corp., Standard Oil Company, Federal Reserve Bank, Mutual Finance Co., American Shipbuilding Co., etc.  Gerald L.K. Smith The Nationalists are in communication with Gerald L.K. Smith, head of the America Firsters, who has as one of his financial backers Harry Bennett, former head of the Ford Co. service squad, now reputed to be running the Ford empire. Smith visited the San Francisco Conference to relaunch the America First movement from there and to transfer his Detroit headquarters there. He plans to coalesce the various fascist, crackpot elements on the Coast – the pension“oldsters, ” the fundamentalists, the vegetarians, the“monetary reform” groups, the “good government”people, the “ham and eggs” movement. Fascism in Italy and Germany was subsidized by the magnates of the heavy industries, the iron, steel and mining industries, and by the financiers – the Krupps and the Thyssens. Krupp told his employees once: “We want only loyal workers who are grateful from the bottom of their hearts for the bread which we let them earn.” Thyssen said: “Democracy with us represents – nothing.” And yet it is the workers of Germany who today must suffer, and the Thyssens and Krupps will go scot-free. Fascism came to power in Germany as the instrument of the capitalist class to prevent the workers from seizing power. The fascist movement is usually composed of declassed elements: middle classes which have been destroyed by big business, unemployed militarists, i.e., professional soldiers, unemployed workers whose morale has been destroyed by years of idleness, youth who have no hopes for the future under capitalism. These were the forces which the degenerate leaders of the Nazi Party won to their program. This program promised everything to everybody but really adhered to one aim: strengthening the power of the capitalist rulers of Germany, guaranteeing their profits and waging war to extend their interests on a world scale. Fascism can be fought only by militant working class action. Labor must organize the fight against fascism, it must organize a strong Labor Party with a genuine labor program, for the people to guard against the inroads of the fascists. Labor must organize its own Defense Guards to be ready for the fascist violence, organize an independent Labor Party, based on the unions, to bring about the victory of its program.   
  It is about time the people of this country sat up and took notice of the pernicious and reactionary native fascist groups in their own country, instead of allowing all their attention to be directed to foreign brands of fascism. Fascism is not a local phenomenon, but has an international character; it feeds on economic chaos, and since capitalism cannot guarantee economic security, freedom, or peace, the danger of fascism is universal. It is no wonder the people of the United States visualize their country as a land of the free and the brave. Capitalist propaganda tries with all its might and main, through the school, press, radio, movies, church, and other propaganda means to permeate all with its hypocritical and misleading philosophy that the United States has always been in the right, and a champion of the downtrodden and oppressed, that the peoples of this country are free and equal. –Yes, free to be killed in war and to be jobless, and starve and live in slums, in eras of unemployment and depressions. And equal ... but who does believe that? Surely not those whose crime is that they’ve been born with a black skin. Fascism is latent in all capitalist economies. When the owners of the industries can no longer earn profits because of the restrictions and contradictions inherent in capitalism, which creates economic crises and depressions, and which cannot develop any further without planning, they see a way out in fascism. Because under a totalitarian rule, they have a tight grip on wages, hours and working conditions.  Hypocrisy of Fascism Fascism in all countries has always been financed by big business, although it skillfully disguises itself at first by pretending to be anti-capitalist, even revolutionary. That is how it attempts to gain adherents. It promises everything to everybody. Hitler and Mussolini before gaining power, talked of the workers’right to strike, of workers’ participation in management, of the sacredness of trade unions, and the necessity for realizing the basic aims of socialism. Fascist propaganda often sounded more left than that of its mild socialist opponents. But the workers are the first to be deprived of their rights. They became regimented under the fascist regimes and lost all of their hard-won gains. Their trade unions were mercilessly smashed. It is a lie that the German workers supported Hitler; he received only 43% of the vote in the Reichstag elections on March 5, 1933, in spite of all the terror methods used to gain support. His vote came from the middle class and reactionary groups. The workers, who hated fascism and wanted to fight against [it], were betrayed by their leadership, who sought to fight Hitler by “legal means.” The further accomplishments of German or Italian fascism do not need re-telling. That the United States is not immune to fascist ideology is attested by the bizarre assortment of native fascist parties in this country, headed by such rabble-rousers as Father Coughlin, Huey Long, Gerald L.K. Smith, W. Lee O’Daniel, Gene Talmadge, etc. We, Labor Action, previously reported on the activities of the most recent sect – the Nationalist movement. At present, Sen. Reynolds’ Nationalists and Smith’s American Firsters, capitalizing on prejudice and discontent, are embroiled in a fury of recruiting activity, and attempting to unite all of the dissident crack-pot groups on the West Coast into ah organization which they hope will become a dominant force in American politics. The Nationalists are preparing to make a bid for Congressional seat sin the elections of 1946. With a program of racial hatred, exploitation of labor strife, and glorification of dictatorship, they expect to gather enough strength by 1948 to influence the presidential election.  Fascism on the March Recent exposures have revealed the activities in Cleveland and elsewhere, of Joe McWilliams (alleged “seditionist” and friend of Fritz Kuhn, former leader of the German-American, Nazi Bund), and of J. Victor Malone, Mr. Reynolds’ representative, both of whom are soliciting industrial contributions for the Nationalists. Evidence has also been accumulated by Eugene Segal of the World Telegram, showing a scheme of operation and organization indicating similarity to the methods by which Hitler’s Nazis rose to power. The Nationalists have started a campaign of infiltrating the ranks of groups which may have a real or fancied grievance against the federal administration and its policies. They have taken over a Midwest farmers’ organization –the National Farmers Guild, which is composed of a large percentage of former followers of the Reverend Coughlin. Their henchmen are moving into key spots in labor unions. Some of them are establishing cells in Detroit auto factories, and in CIO and AFL unions as well as the United Mine Workers Union,  Foremost among the groups active on the labor front are the United Sons of America, a revival of the old Ku Klux Klan, with headquarters in Detroit, whose members are, getting into stewards’jobs in union shops. The organization is moving against Negroes and the unions. With a large number of Negroes working in war plants, Detroit will become a danger spot as the Nationalist movement develops. The United Sons distributed anti-Negro propaganda before the Negro race riot in June 1943. They have formed two veteran’s organization, which are holding out bait to attract returning servicemen. They have started a youth movement which they claim is represented in seven Midwestern states, and which is called the Christian Youth for America. They have won the affiliation of certain church groups and have the backing of an old, established theological seminary, which preaches a hate creed in the school’s official publication. Through allied organizations, the party is bidding for the support of small business. It is making common cause with some American foreign language groups from countries which have been occupied by Russian forces. Several monetary organizations are associated with Smith and other Nationalists. Even men under indictment on charges of sedition, were contacted by Reynolds’ representatives. The Nationalists are anti-Negro, anti-Semitic, anti-Catholic, anti-foreigner, as the situations demand, but apparently they will accept any convenient alliance.  (Part II – Next Week)   


THERE is formidable evidence, which keeps mounting, in the
examples of Italy, Belgium, France, Greece, Yugoslavia, Albania and
other countries, that the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation
Administration (UNRRA) is strictly an instrument for carrying out big
power policies – mainly those oi Great Britain and the United
States.
UNRRA has failed to function as a supply organization in the
liberated areas of Europe, despite its promises of food, clothing,
medicines, reintegration of displaced persons, industrial and
agricultural rehabilitation and welfare services – this in the face
of the most intense and urgent human need.
The war has dragged on for more than five years and conditions
among Europe’s starving masses grow continually worse, for the
effect of the Allied invasion has been to reduce rather than improve
the standard of living. About forty million people have been
displaced from their homes; hospitals and public services are
completely broken down; there are no drugs; transport facilities are
reserved for military use only.
It would be interesting, in the light of its failure, to go back
to some of the original aims and purposes of the UNRRA.
First of all, it is highly ironic that the UNRRA was set up at its
founding, conference in November, 1943; as an “international
agency, established by forty-four United and Associated Nations to
help organize the resources of the United Nations so that all
liberated nations may have the same opportunity to relieve the
suffering of their people and start rebuilding their peace.”
“Supplies and services are to be dispensed on the basis of the
relative needs of the population in the area, and without
discrimination because of race, creed or political belief; these
resources should at no time be used as a political weapon.”
Its record belies its principles.
 
Some Examples of UNRRA Policy
1. Although the UNRRA was set up as an international agency, the
real powers behind it are the combined boards (Combined Food Board,
Raw Materials Board, Combined Production and Resources Board and
Combined Shipping Administration Board), exclusively Anglo-American
institutions, which have the last word concerning the allocation of
any commodity which the UNRRA might wish to include in its list for
relief.
The power of the British-American combination was understandable,
their policies equally so. During the war they have established a
virtual monopoly of supplies and shipping. They are richest in
foreign exchange and have frozen the funds of many other countries.
Together they have power that will be nearly irresistible in the
peace negotiations. They propose to keep that power intact until the
showdown, the period in which the. major post-war political and
economic decisions are made.
As it developed in practice, therefore, the pooling and allocating
of world resources meant denying the people of the small nations that
little relief they asked for. Small wonder that, in these
circumstances, most European countries were reluctant to apply to
UNRRA for help. It did not take them long to find out that if
anything was to be gained it was best achieved by bringing to bear
upon the combined boards what little political pressure they could
exercise.
France and Belgium remembered that their colonies could be brought
into the unpleasant game of power politics as a valuable asset. The
Norwegians found it necessary to remind their British allies that
Norwegian seamen, at the risk of their lives, brought food, fuel and
other comfort to Britain while their own countrymen at home were
deprived of the barest necessities of life.
 
Military Enter the Picture
2. When the military authorities were charged by former President
Roosevelt with the main responsibility for relief, they merely took
away from UNRRA the main part of its job.
3. The UNRRA has been steadily increasing its generously paid
staff. By now its personnel in Washington, London, Cairo and other
capitals of the world includes several thousands of employees, most
of whom are busily engaged in kicking their heels.
At the same time, millions of Europeans are going without the
necessities of life. They are starving and dying. An American member
of the council of the UNRRA stated that “every tenth man or
woman you pass on the streets of Rome would soon be a corpse, and the
same is true for Greece, parts of France, Belgium and Holland.
Thousands of people in the liberated areas have become convinced
that once again, as after World War I, food is being used as a means
to political ends. During his visit to Italy last year, Prime
Minister Churchill, was pressed for an increase in the Italian bread
ration. That was at the time when the Italian votes in America had to
be taken into consideration. Soon after the American election, the
rations were again reduced.
4. UNRRA will receive contributions of foreign exchange from
member countries, but it can spend these funds only with the prior
approval of the donor country.
5. UNRRA may aid in relocating displaced persons, but must first
negotiate for the consent of the country where they are and the
country to which they want to go.
6. There has remained a consistent blind spot on the question of
relief for India, because of British pressure, from the time of the
terrible famine in India when reports were coming in daily of the
death of many thousands of people from starvation and plague.
Newspapermen were reporting instances of black market hoarding by
Indian princes in collaboration with the British administration.
 
Food as Political Weapon
7. The distribution of food in Greece was stopped because of the
EAM’s armed resistance to former Premier George Papandreou’s
regime and in order to bring pressure on the revolutionaries.
8. The trend of American foreign policy represents a similar
attempt to win control of parts of Europe by hypocritical expression
of sympathy for national independence and by relief handouts. In
Italy, where the U.S. has been most brutal in its attempts to stifle
any expression of the masses for national independence, and in
Belgium, where American troops were used against striking workers,
American foreign intervention is as direct as is the British.
9. The role of Russia, in refusing to let UNRRA enter Yugoslavia
or Poland, except on its own terms, should be understood. If food is
to be a club over the starving people of Poland, Stalin wants the
club to be in his hands, which explains why UNRRA was forbidden to
enter Poland until the Allied powers came to terms with Stalin on
Poland, giving in to his plans to reduce it to a Russian colony.
 



Despite the popular belief that fascism is a collective madness
peculiar to certain evil nations abroad, it should be recognized by
every anti-fascist that the seeds of fascism are inherent in every
capitalist country. Although there are differences in form, the
content of American fascism is the same as that of Europe, in that
fascism in reality serves big-business interests, although
masquerading as anti-capitalist. That this has been amply borne out
is evident when we consider some of the native and ill-assorted,
anti-labor and anti-democratic movements which have flourished here,
variously headed by such saviors of democracy as:
 
Some “Rabblerousers”

W. Lee O’Daniel, former president of the Hillbilly
Flour Company and the Fort Worth Chamber of Commerce, recently
elected senator of Texas and now head of the Christian American
Association which has succeeded in adding several anti-labor laws to
various state constitutions.
 
Father Coughlin, whose crusade against Wall St. was
in part subsidized by certain Wall St. silver speculators.
 
Gene Talmadge, who led the Atlanta “Grass
Roots” conferences, a gathering of Southern farmers and smalltown
folks, financed by such rustics are Pierre duPont, Ogden Mills, and
several executives of General Motors, National Steel, etc.
 
Huey Long, who had intimate connections With
Standard Oil of Louisiana and was on the way to spreading the
crackpot “share-the-wealth” gospel.
 
Gerald L.K. Smith, head of the America Firsters, who
can boast as one of his financial backers Harry Bennett, former head
of the Ford Co. service squad, now a vice-president and reputed to
be running the Ford empire.
 

Reynolds’ Party
The most recent fascist threat to American labor and the people as
a whole is the formation of the Nationalist Party, by the
rabble-rousing ex-Senator Robert Rice Reynolds (famed for his
isolationist policies), who broke with Gerald L.K. Smith’s America
First Party. His ostensible aim is the creation of a mass party of
Jim Crowers, anti-Semitic, anti-foreign-born people, and anti-labor
elements, which abound in the country, with the goal of establishing
a totalitarian fascist state in America.
Designed as a catch-all to combine numbers of the fascist “lunatic
fringe” with the money and prestige of big business, the
Nationalist Party is busily organizing secret cells in New York City.
Operating thus far on a small and underground scale, about fifty
secret cells or “units” have been set up in the five boroughs,
especially in Queens and Brooklyn, where membership in a unit is
limited to ten persons.
It has been reported, however, that an expansion of Nationalist
Party organizational activity appears likely, for Reynolds who has
been vacationing at his Florida estate, is due back at his Washington
headquarters shortly, and “big things” are predicted upon his
return. At least five important pro-fascist outfits in New York City
have joined the motley crew.
The Nationalist Party is the result of the fusion of
two other Reynolds’ fronts, the American Nationalist Committee, and
the Nationalist Confederation.
Reynolds also boasts a private, potential storm-troop outfit,
the Vindicators, and a newspaper, the National Record.
He has indicated that the Nationalist Party will come out in the open
with public meetings, distribution of literature, etc., on July 4 of
this year. By then he hopes to have at least one unit in every
Congressional District in the country. With the end of the war in
sight, the Nationalists believe that now is the time to build a party
which can exploit the resentments produced by casualty lists and the
wounds of thousands of demobilized soldiers.
 
A Big Business Weapon
That fascism is synonymous with all that is reactionary,
retrogressive and corrupt in society is quite clear and leads to but
one conclusion: fascism can be fought only by militant, working-class
action. If the workers depend upon the reformist labor leaders, they
will suffer defeat, because the reformists represent the interests
not of the workers, but of so-called “liberal” capitalism, and
when it comes to a showdown, “liberal” capitalism simply drops
the adjective. It protests, but is powerless since it does not know
how to fight fascism.
We have as yet no strong labor party to counterpose a genuine
labor program for the people against the inroads of the fascists, but
we do have the lessons of the past decade to guide us. We have
learned that big business, in order to survive, maintains the fascist
gangs merely as anti-labor militia at first, whose job is simply to
terrorize and demoralize the workers’ organizations. They help
break strikes, beat up and murder the workers’ leaders, wreck union
offices and left wing newspaper plants. As capitalist crisis
intensifies, big business finds that this is not enough and launches
its fascist troops toward the conquest of state power.
Thus labor must organize the fight against fascism. It must
organize its own Defense Guards to be ready fop the fascist violence.
It must organize an independent Labor Party based on the unions, to
bring about the victory of a genuine working class program.
 

  Reports culled from all over the country tell a grim tale of shutdowns in shipyards, aircraft plants, instrument plants and munitions industries. As we go to press, cutbacks and layoffs are getting into full swing, hours are being cut, workers are being down-graded, entire plants ore being closed. The great planners in government and business – planners for war and destruction – simply have “no plans” for these workers and plants in peacetime. Here are reports of current layoffs in some of the most important industrial centers of the country, and the figures are growing everyday, but fast!  Detroit Militant CIO auto union locals have begun setting up unemployment committees and making preparations for a monster Labor Day parade and demonstration against layoffs, which this week threw more than 350, 000 Detroit workers out into the streets. Demands are being raised by the more advanced auto unionists for full compensation for time lost in layoffs, a thirty per cent general wage increase, a thirty-hour week, and operation of idle plants by the government under trade union control. Monday, August 30, will go down in history as “Black Monday” for the “heroes of production” in this key center of American industry. Hundreds of thousands were dumped out of the plants like so much scrap. Regional WMC Director Edward L. Cushman admitted that no more than 33, 000, less than 10% of those fired will be re-employed at the end of 60 days.  Chicago Over 7, 000 unemployed CIO workers demonstrated in the Coliseum auditorium and the streets of Chicago’s Loop on August 20, demanding jobs, severance pay and adequate unemployment insurance. Lay-offs here are expected to exceed 500, 000 within a few months. Marching in the parade were contingents of workers from Dodge, Buick, Studebaker, Bendix and other war plants, which had closed their doors, turning close to 100, 000 workers into the streets with only a few hours’ notice in many cases. They marched, shouting “WEWANT JOBS, ” and held aloft hundreds of banners and militant slogans and demands such as, “THERE WILL BE NO PEACE WITHOUTJOBS, ” “WORK OR FIGHT, ” “IT HAPPENED INENGLAND, IT CAN HAPPEN HERE, ” “THE LITTLE STEEL FORMULABE DAMNED, ” “NEGRO AND WHITE UNITE FOR JOBS!”  Philadelphia “Brother, don’t you know there’s a ‘peace’ on?” is the grim jest circulating among the approximately 70, 000 war workers in Philadelphia who have been fired since V-J Day. The total is still rising and government reports reveal it may soon reach 100, 000. Hardest hit are the shipyard workers at Cramp and Sun. The fast-mounting sentiment for decisive action among the union ranks was shown in the membership meeting of which called on the CIO to initiate a national labor holiday to force Congress to act immediately. A proposal to retain laid-off members in the local and establish a“Jobs Now” Committee to lead the fight for the unemployed was adopted. As its first assignment, the committee was instructed to prepare for a mass CIO unemployment parade and a sit-in at offices of the local War Manpower Commission. Other resolutions were adopted calling for the formation of a local Labor Party and raising the demand for the 30-hour week at 48-hours pay.  Other Areas Plant shutdowns affected 175, 000 in North Jersey thus far;52, 000 are due to lose their jobs in the Twin Cities; 10, 000 are being laid off daily in the Massachusetts area; 50% unemployment is seen for General Motors at Flint; 200, 000 fired in Los Angeles;two-thirds of Toledo’s working force are on “holiday, ”with 45, 000-75, 000 jobless; scores of thousands of shipyard and aircraft workers in Seattle face a precarious future; Kaiser disregards seniority in heavy Portland layoffs; 5, 000 jobs in Buffalo for 50, 000 jobless. The list can be extended but the stories are painfully alike. In New York, CIO United Electrical Workers, Local425, representing some 7, 000 members, staged a mid-town demonstration march in protest against widespread layoffs at the Ford Instrument Corporation plants. * Top union officials seem paralyzed in the face of these wholesale layoffs. They merely issue statements and send wires and letters of protest, but give no thought to mobilizing the workers in demonstrations and mass actions. Pressure of widespread unemployment, however, is bringing about a resurgence of militancy among the union workers of the country and is crystallizing sentiment in some locals for independent labor political action. Workers are refusing to abide by the complacent advice to collect unemployment insurance at $18 a week for 20 weeks, or to take jobs at lowered salaries. In the meantime they are reassured by War Production Chief A.J. Krug in his report last week on the first three weeks of reconversion that: “the rate of reconversion is much better than we had expected!” His appraisal was based on a survey of 5, 000manufacturers in sixty-two industries which are now “swinging back to peacetime production.” This is all very jolly for the optimistic corporation owners; the government merely guaranteed them millions in profits for “tiding over” purposes in the reconversion, but the workers have to do their “tiding over” at the old prices, on twenty miserable dollars a week. Why doesn’t the government give the workers a living wage during this period? The answer is simple: the government is run in the interests of big business and not in the interests of the majority of workers. Nor are the workers being promised post-reconversion jobs by their bosses. Here again the answer is simple: no guaranteed profits, no guaranteed jobs. Now, as before the war, the boss’s greed for profits motivates his actions. Now, as always, the rich get richer, and the poor get poorer.  Full Employment True, there are proposals before Congress, which has benevolently decided to curtail its vacation period, to (1) increase unemployment benefits to $25 a week for 26 weeks to tide over persons made jobless by reconversion and (2) for a Full Employment Bill, which would instruct the President to prepare an annual estimate of potential employment, and propose, if he thinks necessary, measures – not specified – for providing jobs through government aid if“private enterprise” is not expected to offer sufficient employment. The bill stipulates that government funds shall be used for such purposes only as a “last resort.” Thus while most of the witnesses before the Senate Banking and Currency Committee on the Wagner-Murray Bill agreed that full employment was “desirable, ” there were also those who would like an army of unemployed big enough to knock down wages and weaken the labor movement. CIO President Murray’s threat that “if private enterprise fails to give workers jobs at good wages, turning out things we all need, the people will recognize the failure of private capitalism and vigorously call for government operation, ” fools no one. The repercussions in this country of the British Labor Party victory, the economic crisis precipitated by the end of the war and the growing clamor of the American workers have convinced an important section capitalists and their political agents that they must now make a gesture of offering labor “something” –that something is the Full Employment Bill.  Failure of Capitalism It is the belief of Labor Action and the Workers Party that the workers cannot rely on the capitalist system, the capitalist government or a piece of legislation projected by capitalist politicians to solve the evils of the private profit system. Unlike Murray who warns “that the people will recognize the failure of private capitalism if the bill is not passed, ” we recognize now the failure of capitalism which has already proved itself unable ogive the people either economic security or peace. Therefore, labor must project its own demands for full employment, and should be ready to enter the political arena with a class party of its own and to fight for its own program. (See Workers Party program for organized labor.)   


The Rev. Gerald B. Winrod, otherwise known as the “Jayhawk Nazi,” is attempting to launch again his particular brand of fascist ideology. The Kansas demagogue, a Bible-thumping evangelist of the old school with modern trimmings, is now operating under the cloak of a “spiritual revival.” He was recently courageously picketed by seventy-five militant Akron anti-fascists who organized a “United Committee to Expose Winrod Fascism.” These seem to be strategic times for the general dissemination of the propaganda of the various native American fascist groups.
Winrod’s contributions to American fascist crackpot-ism are fairly typical, following the anti-labor, anti-Negro, anti-Jewish and pro-Nazi pattern also practiced by most of America’s leading fascists in league with Winrod and along with some of whom he is under indictment for treason.
 
Who Is Winrod?
A summary of salient points in his career will reveal the real threat and danger that is inherent in his fascist teachings. In Wichita, Kan., Winrod early plunged into a career as a tent evangelist and rabble-rouser. Along with William Jennings Bryan, he zealously campaigned against evolutionist teaching in the schools, threatening his opponents with lightning bolts and other manifestations of God’s wrath. When interest in the monkey battles ebbed, he turned to Catholic baiting, which was popular in Kansas during the Klan ascendancy. He once described the Roman Catholic Church as the “harlot woman of the Bible.”
Winrod, who was the inspiration for Sinclair Lewis’ Buzz Windrop, next unearthed his “international Jewish conspiracy”shortly after Hitler came to power. His magazine, The Defender, became loudly anti-Semitic and announced that Jewish conspirators were plotting to overthrow the government. Later he was to reveal that President Roosevelt’s name was Rosenfelt and that the New Deal therefore represented not only a political but a “biological” problem. He was also to charge that the kidnapping of the Lindbergh baby was part of a Jewish-Communist plot.
Not content with these profound revelations, he decided to seek new vistas; he began by worshipping at the shrine of German fascism. In January 1935, after a visit to Germany, made at the invitation of Dr. Otto H.S. Vollbehr, a propagandist for the Reich, he informed a meeting of his followers that his experiences abroad had further convinced him that Jews were responsible for all the ills of the world.
 
Learned from Hitler
On his return from Germany, Winrod seriously embarked on his fascist activities, and acquired senatorial ambitions; “I am absolutely sure of going to the United States Senate. When there, I will make it my sounding board.” Three years later, in 1938, he almost made good his boast by polling 53, 000 votes but was beaten by a last-minute campaign against him.
Spending money at an estimated rate of $5, 000 a week, probably more than the combined sum of his three opponents, he peddled platitudes by means of a radio chain, a sound truck, platform addresses, a magazine, two newspapers and tons of campaign literature. Big business and Nazi financial interests were generous in their support of the would-be American “Fuehrer.”
A noteworthy aspect of the 1938 campaign was Winrod’s lamb-like disavowal of racial or religious bigotry. He represented himself as a pious, peace-loving Christian and democrat who had been greatly maligned.
Actually he has spread more genuine fascist propaganda than any other American pro-Nazi. The Defender has been an American version of the Sturmer; in addition, he has published two other magazines, now defunct, and hundreds of pamphlets, and has delivered thousands of speeches, all embodying the Goebbels doctrine.
Winrod’s activities have been closely integrated with those of other members of America’s fascist network. The list of those he has published and praised in the Defender reads like a “Who’s Who” of American fascism: Father Coughlin, Gerald L.K. Smith, Colonel Sanctuary, ex-Congressman Jacob Thorkelson, R.E. Edmundson, Lawrence Dennis. He has been praised inturn by most of them. Smith placed him on his list of outstanding Americans and Edmundson once named him on a fascist roll of honor. Winrod has also made extensive use of World Service, a German propaganda agency. He was connected, too, with the German-American Bund, the American Nationalist Confederation, which called itself the Fascist Party of America, with Pelley of the Silver Shirt movement and with a reviving Klan.
 
Winrod’s Backers
His chief backing comes from a group of thirty to forty influential fundamentalist preachers who accept his leadership, invite him to address their congregations and who write for The Defender. The Rev. Harry H. Hodge, a close friend of Congressman Martin Dies, is also a Winrod associate. In the summer of 1937, Hodge was instrumental in having Dies call off an investigation of Winrod.
Winrod’s fundamentalist followers provide him with an excellent political base. Winrod again ran for senator in the fall of1942 and polled around 75, 000 votes. That he is a crack-pot pure and simple does not alter the fact that his insistent propaganda has won thousands of supporters and that the subsidies of big business are a constant rejuvenating agent.
It is true that the lies and deceptions spawned by the “Jayhawk Nazi” have little to differentiate them from those of his fascist cohorts in this country. All attempt to raise obsolete problems and to bring the relations between the individual and society back to what they were two centuries ago.
But it is also true that Winrod is particularly dangerous, because he is surrounded by an aura of religious respectability. Italian and German fascism too presented themselves as a religion, which would rather arouse faith than address itself to the intelligence or to reason. Once the faithful believe, nothing is easier than to play with truth and logic, under a veil of mysticism.“Fascism is so, because the Leader says so!” Fascism rests on a fundamental scorn of the masses of people.
 
Is the U.S. Immune?
It would be a mistake to think our country has a “tradition”or “heritage” rendering fascism impossible. There are the same potentialities for a fascist movement in this country as there are in all capitalist countries, wherein fascism always serves the interests of big business.
The more we are led to think of fascism as something monstrous and unheard of, as one more “ism, ” peculiar to foreign nations – the harder it will be to check the growth of American fascism. By spot-lighting the secondary characteristics of European fascism, such as Jew-baiting and book-burning, without exposing its class roots, the false impression is built up that such manifestations are something unparalleled in the history of“civilized” nations. This makes it easier to divert the energy of the American working class and supporters into a crusade against overseas fascism, while our own ruling class is left in power, biding its time to introduce fascism over here when the situation demands it.
 

  The great white hope of, native American fascism, Charles Augustus Lindbergh, has reappeared in the political limelight. This concurs with the resurgence of the. Nationalist and America First fascist groups in the United States. Post-war periods are always times of unrest and dissatisfaction. The capitalists are no longer willing to organize the economy for vast production in peace-time, so that there will be jobs for all – as they did for a destructive war. Cut-backs, lay-offs and unemployment are now the order of the day. Reactionary groups will try to pit returning veterans against the workers, whose“crime” is that they valiantly fought to maintain the gains of labor despite war-time restrictions, such as the wage freeze and the no-strike pledge while the capitalists were amassing huge profits. This is a cross-section of the transitional period of reconversion, where discontent and prejudice are sharpened. Taking his cue for such a period of stress, Lindbergh, like all good fascists, is now laying down a new Nationalist line – that of “interventionism” – a far cry from his pre-war“isolationism.” On July 26, 1945, Lindbergh was quoted by the Chicago Tribune as having said at a luncheon with Colonel Robert McCormick and other Tribune executives (McCormick has specifically praised the Nationalist Party of Sen. Reynolds in his paper): “... never has truth been so low. The ideals of justice and tolerance virtually have vanished from a continent, freedom of speech and action is suppressed over a large portion of the world, especially the so-called liberated nations, many of whom have simply changed the Nazi form of dictatorship for the Communist form.” Lindbergh has never cared for the truth, nor does he in this instance. He utilizes the old red-baiting formula to pass over the militancy of the Resistance Movement in Europe now fighting for national independence. The British elections also recently reaffirmed the fact that the left will be the dominating power in Europe.  Lindbergh’s “New Line” Lindbergh now wants to save civilization and Europe from itself: “To make ourselves independent of Europe’s welfare is impossible. The civilization which is falling to pieces in Europe is our civilization. We are hound to. our civilization as a man is bound to his family. We cannot retire now and leave Europe to the destructive forces which it (the war) has let loose. Honor, self-respect, and our own national interests prevent doing that.” This is a curious transposition, for on May 19, 1940, he said in a speech at Washington: “We are in danger of war today not because European people have attempted to interfere with the internal affairs of America hut because American people have attempted to interfere with the internal affairs of Europe.” “Isolationism” is a mild term to describe Lindbergh’s thinking before the war, when he loosely followed the Fascist pattern in his anti-Semitic, anti-foreign-born, and pro-Nazi speeches, along with the America First Committee (permeated by Father Coughlin and his followers), and its satellites among the isolationist Senators. In a speech at Des Moines on September 11, 1941, Lindbergh cast aside all veils of pretense and in the pattern set by Hitler, sought to make the Jews a public national, issue in the United States.“Hero” Lindbergh attacked the Jews as being one of the“three most important groups who have been agitating for and pressing this country towards war” – the other two groups being the British and the Roosevelt Administration. He benevolently offered this advice: “The Jews should suppress their natural opinion.” “The Jewish groups in this country should be opposed to war for they will be the first to feel its consequences.”The implication was that the Jews would be blamed for the war if it came, and would be persecuted because of it when opposition arose. If this was not a threat, it was the next thing to it.  Lindbergh, a Fascist Demagogue Next to blaming the Jews for a war, the most effective anti-Jewish talk is to accuse them of having more than their share of wealth and influence. “Their greatest danger to this country lies in their large ownership and influence in our motion pictures, our press, our radio, our government.” Senator Nye, his brother-in-arms at the time, in this fascist crusade to terrorize and blackmail millions of foreign-born Americans into supporting the Isolationists, also said:“I wish that those who would be its victims would sense the possibilities.” Goebbels could not have done better. By invoking the powerful force of unreason and religious hatred, Lindbergh invited all the separate hate-groups in this country to combine in a common hatred of the Jews. This is the precise language of the Nazis. One of the earliest of the Nazi slogans, was, that the Jews owned and controlled press, radio and government. The Nazis used the “stab in the back” slogan. The Jews, they said, had stabbed Germany in the back and lost the war for the Germans. Lindbergh’s variation was that “the Jews are getting us into the war.” But the pattern was the same. There is no conflict between Lindbergh’s “isolationism”of America First days, and his “interventionism” of the present. Lindbergh, then and now, conclusively proves by his utterances, actions and connections, that he is pro-fascist and reactionary, and that in this, he is supported by big business interests. Keeping America out of the war, anti-Semitism, and a theory of racial superiority were convenient components of his‘‘isolationist” period. Today, “interventionism”serves his purposes best. Lindbergh wishes to foment a war against the upsurge of the masses all over Europe. He fears the specter of socialism and revolution. He is no doubt aware of labor unrest in this country as well, and dreads the rise of a conscious, independent political organization of the working classes in this country. He wants all who fear labor’s strength to join with him.  Danger of Underestimation It is important to understand what is happening. Lindbergh’s recent remarks in Chicago lay down a new line for the Nationalists and pro-fascists in America, and they again present Lindbergh as a candidate for active political leadership. Lindbergh, the super-hereof the 20’s, is the most scintillating person in the native American fascist movement. He is indeed most likely to succeed. To combat the growth and influence of the freedom-hating and reactionary fascists, all anti-fascists must combine in a common anti-fascist united front. In Los Angeles, such a united front protest meeting was held at the same time Smith spoke at an American First rally. It was widely attended. Such protest meetings are necessary and effective, but not basic enough. The root of fascism is the economic chaos of capitalist economy, which feeds on wars, depressions, poverty, unemployment, hunger, bad housing, race hatreds. We anti-fascists must therefore go further, and organize consciously, our own independent political labor organization so that the great power of labor will be organized and invincible.   
  While Reynolds and his representatives talk of achieving power by approved political means, others are now preparing for violence. An ex-convict Nationalist from Chicago, Homer Maertz, is going into Midwest communities organizing local hoodlums into a terrorist force. He also has frequent conferences in Detroit with leaders of the old Ku Klux Klan and the United Sons of America. He was a delegate to the first national convention of the America First Party, in Detroit Aug. 29, 1944, where he offered a resolution calling for the sterilization or deportation of all Jews in the United States. It is noteworthy that in Germany armed gangs were trained by the industrialists to fight the organized workers, to weaken and subdue them. One such gang in Munich took the name National Socialist Party and from 1920 on hailed as its chief, Adolf Hitler. Reynolds denies any connection with lawless elements, but Maertz is working closely with Smith, rabble-rouser par excellence, and photostatic evidence plainly reveals Smith’s collaboration with Reynolds. Reynolds was well enough regarded in Germany to get an article under his byline in Hitler’s personal newspaper, Voelkischer Beobachter, which appeared in February 1939, six months before Hitler started the war. In part it said: “I am happy to state without the least hesitation that I am absolutely against the U.S. waging war for the purpose of protecting Jews anywhere in the world.” “Hitler and Mussolini have a date with destiny;it is foolish to oppose them, so why not play hall with them?”  Working with Smith Sharing Reynolds leadership is the already mentioned Gerald L.K. Smith, founder of the America First Party, and idol of various“mothers’ groups, ” although Reynolds, contact man for the movement in government circles and society, denies he is collaborating with Smith, But Mr. Smith’s Washington headquarters are in Mr-Reynolds’ office in the Colorado Bldg. Around Reynolds and Smith moves a ring of satellites, such as Carl Mote of Indianapolis, part owner of’ two small public utilities of the National Farmers Guild; Mrs. Lyn Clark Van Hyning of Chicago, head of We, the Mothers, and Mobilize for America, Inc.;Rev. Harvey Springer, a Denver rabble-rouser, who is called the Cowboy Preacher; and the Rev. Gerald Winrod, popularly known as the Jayhawk Nazi of Wichita, Kansas, who is under indictment for sedition. In 1935 Winrod toured Germany, had interviews with Hitler and other top German leaders, and began a full-scale pro-Nazi campaign on his return to this country. The Nationalist groups tried unsuccessfully three times before to become a united political force, once under George E. Deatherage, who is under indictment for sedition; a second time in Father Coughlin’s heyday, and again with retired Army Gen. George Mosely as leader. Each time, the effort failed because the individual groups would not surrender their own rackets.  They Are Better Prepared The Reynolds organization doesn’t intend to make any mistakes this time. It has a Nationalists Confederation, in which all groups can unite while retaining their autonomy. It also has a Nationalists Party for political action. A third division is the Nationalists Committee, an educational body to which industrialists are told they can make tax-exempt contributions. The evidence clearly points to the growth of a fascist threat in the U.S. Reynolds and his cohorts are not fooling; they are in dead earnest. They are banding together all the worst elements of the country and are spawning the frauds, lies, and misconceptions which serve fascism. The particular form of fascist “mystique” which prevailed in Germany and Italy, the cult of the Fatherland, and the cult of the Leader, are not likely to develop here. Up to now, pro-fascist leaders have taken care to present themselves as “just plain folks.” And the great varieties of nationalities over here, our geographical isolation, our relative prosperity, and higher living standards have made it so far impossible to arouse extreme nationalist feeling. The venom of American nationalism has been directed against regionalism rather than nationalism, i.e., on tension between city (New York especially) and the provinces. Though there are differences in form, the content of American fascism is the same as that of Europe – big business interests masquerading, as anti-capitalism. It is not enough to be shocked or to protest feebly and righteously. We must combat these gangs. The Workers Party picketed the recent Nationalist meetings in Los Angeles where Smith spoke. It showed what has to be done on a mass scale.  Prepare Labor’s Struggle Labor should learn the lessons of the past decade. Its organizations are among the first to be uprooted under fascism. Wages were reduced in Germany, hours lengthened, and conditions considerably worsened immediately after Hitler came to power. We must fight fascism with the consciousness that always, everywhere, it is financed by, and serves the interests of big business, that it is condoned by the government, and that labor is always the victim. We must have a constructive and strong counter program. We need to form a labor party based on the trade unions, with its own Workers Defense Guards to be the vanguard in opposing the treachery and violence of the fascists. The deepening economic crisis may be expected to make it easier for the fascists to unite. The same economic crisis that spurs big business to launch a fascist coup will also put the masses of people into a state of unrest, ready to follow whatever political path seems to promise an escape from their misery. We are already experiencing the first fruits of the end of the war in Europe, in cutbacks, layoffs, and unemployment. The workers must shake free of their present do-nothing leadership and prepare the struggle against reaction at home. Fascism cannot be fought by compromise or concession, but only by militant working-class action.   


Demobilized and back home after the war, war veterans are notoriously prey to deep discontent: many of them cannot adapt themselves to civilian life. Even when they get back to the old stream of things they are often weary, restless, disappointed. There are those, too, who carry back from the war a physical need for violence, a need they can no longer satisfy in the prosaic existence of peacetime.
Our twelve million war veterans will constitute one of the strongest political forces in this country. Nobody is more aware of the tremendous power they represent than the Nationalists of former Senator Robert R. Reynolds and Gerald L.K. Smith. They are making a strong bid to get hold of some of that power.
Smith has organized two veterans’ organizations, the Nationalist Veterans of World War II and the Committee of Veterans of World War II. Smith’s line for these groups is cleverly designed to appeal to the veteran’s outrage at unemployment. You “have been virtually deserted by our people,” he tells them. You “belong to the Lost Battalion.”
The big bait which Smith tosses out to veterans is a proposal to get them at least $1,000 for a year or more of service.
The type of membership sought by native fascists is indicated by the fact that George Vose, head of Smith’s veterans’ outfits, is trying to recruit among the United Sons of America, an offshoot of the Ku Klux Klan.
With the war over, everybody who is anybody in the fascist world of America is trying to get into the act. Joe McWilliams, better known as Joe McNazi, is distributing a “Veterans Reconstruction Plan” in which he calls for gifts amounting to $7,800 for war veterans.
Veterans’ organizations are booming. Anti-Semitic Edward James Smythe, temporarily enjoying freedom from the sedition trials, is coming out in the open with his Protestant War Veterans – no Catholics, Negroes or Jews wanted. In Detroit and in the South, the Ku Klux Klan is contacting ex-servicemen. The American Order of Patriots in Texas wants Gentiles only. Father Coughlin has run up the list of his San Sebastian Brigade to 400,000.
The native fascists hope to organize the veterans into hoodlum gangs for use against the labor movement. One of Smith’s associates, Homer Maertz, is already recruiting bands of terrorists, according to Eugene Segal of Scripps-Howard. This unsavory character attended the first national convention of the America First Party in Detroit, August 29, 1944, where he presented a resolution calling for the sterilization of all Jews in the United States. He has definite connections with the Ku Klux Klan and United Sons of America as well.
 
Pattern of Nazism, Fascism
What better way of aping the pattern set down by Hitler and Mussolini? In Italy the first groups founded by Mussolini in 1915 were soldiers, Fasci, and the Fasci of 1919 were formed under the sign of “the spirit of the trenches.” “Only unknown men can save the German people,” Hitler declared, “but these unknown must come from the front ... they must come from the ranks of those who did their duty during the war.” And Rudolph Hess asserted: “The Third Reich was founded on an idea, that came from the trenches.”
Germany after the First World War offers the best example of how a “war psychology” continued to permeate certain sections of the population, namely, the unemployed veterans and opportunistic officers. This subsequently led to the suppression of the post-war revolutionary uprisings and later to the formation of Hitler’s storm troopers.
There were groups in Germany, the big industrial magnates and military cliques, which wanted to exploit these sentiments by giving the fascist gangs financial backing and using them against the militant workers. Thus the beginnings of the National Socialist Party of Germany, founded by a troop of armed soldiers, which later, as the S.A. (Sturmabteiling) became the basic party core.
Hitler’s true political line was always directed against the Jews, against “Jewish democracy,” “Jewish Marxism,” “Jewish world domination” and “international finance.” American fascists are able pupils and run true to form with their tirades against Jews and Negroes.
 
Veterans and Joblessness
According to a CIO pamphlet on Substandard Wages: “Millions of returning soldiers will find that work in private industry actually yields them less income than the Army did. A soldier with wife and two children now gets $128 in cash a month for them under the Soldiers’ Allotment Act – plus of course, his own board and keep.” We also read that veterans in large numbers are collecting unemployment insurance of $20 under the famous GI Bill of Rights. They could get jobs, says a representative of the War Manpower Commission, but they “have a fantastic notion of what jobs are paying.”
More than anything the soldier seeks for some meaning to his existence, some justification; he seeks to understand why wars are fought and how illusions are built up concerning the outcome: why the fruits of wars are more wars, why rivalries and conflicts flourish afterward even among the so-called victors.
A solution for him can be socialism, wherein equality will really reign for the first time and wars among mankind will be wiped out, wherein workers will have their own government, cooperatively run their own economy.
In the United States, the most advanced of all countries productively, such a society is possible. It is the only way out of the chaos of future wars and future insecurity. It will truly mean the beginnings of a better world. It will provide a solution to all the antagonisms inherent in capitalist society: worker versus boss, black versus white, Jew versus Gentile and worker versus veteran. This is the only answer to the threat of fascism.
 



The Nationalists, who are organizing to revive and unite the native American fascist movement, held a meeting on September 5 at the Hotel Empire in New York City, typical of hundreds which are occurring throughout the country at an accelerated pace since the war ended.
It was the first attempt in New York to organize prewar America Firsters, Bundists, isolationists, anti-Semites, Negro-haters, reactionary elements of the pension-planners, money cranks, fundamentalists and labor-baiters, under the banner of former Senator Robert R. Reynolds’ American Nationalist Party, with the goal of establishing a totalitarian fascist state in America.
 
Cell Organization
Plans were laid for use of the ten-person “cell” technique devised by Reynolds in his Chicago and Detroit organizations to guard against the enrollment of “unsympathetic” individuals into the party. Those at the meeting, mostly women, were instructed each to organize a “cell” of ten “trusted friends,” then to instruct each of the cell members to go forth and organize his or her own little group.
The purpose of the meeting was to lay down the Nationalist propaganda line for the post-war period now that wartime handicaps to fascist utterances have been removed.
Present at the meeting were at least three people now under indictment for sedition. The roster of speakers read like part of “Who’s Who” list of American fascism. There was Colonel Eugene Sanctuary, Jew-baiter, still under indictment, who had definite connections with the American National-Socialist League in New York and with other pro-Nazi outfits.
There was Elmer Elmhurst, Bundist, also awaiting trial and also held in high esteem by the Nazi hierarchy of America.
There were minor characters like John G. Scott, editor of Money, a newspaper dedicated to “a Christian America”; Hudson de Priest, hate writer and seditionist; Charles Smith, Queens Nationalist and party chairman, and Stephen Sylvester, Kings County leader.
Chairman of the meeting was Joseph Nelligen, New York State chairman of the Nationalist Party, whose mail address was given as care of the Daily News, 700 Pacific Street, Brooklyn. He pleaded for money to set up a state headquarters in New York City and supported his plea with a letter from Reynolds saying that “The party had been forced to mark time until the war was over, but now was the the time to push full speed ahead, organizing for the 1946 congressional election.”
The party platform, on which it aims to elect representatives to Congress in 1946, is designed as a catch-all to combine the mongrel fascist groups. Its catchlines include: “America for Americans,” “Deport the Jews and Negroes,” “End Immigration into the U.S.,” “Dissolve the present economic system and adopt that of the Congress of Monetaty Organization” (a crackpot outfit which recently met in Detroit) and “Bring Home the Boys.”
This is all too reminiscent of the old fascist technique: promise pie in the sky, denounce the labor movement, slander the Jews, bait the Negroes, exploit the resentment of millions made jobless by war cutbacks and capitalize politically on the emotions of the gold-star families.
The stories to be released as “authentic” news intend to show that the Jewish international bankers and movie moguls set up scientific private espionage agencies to spy on nationally prominent isolationists to frustrate efforts to “keep us out of the war.” This propaganda offensive is merely part of the strategy prepared by the Nationalists as the first step in their revival.
The literature distributed at the meeting specifically quotes the Daily News (their big-time press) as approving their aims in the following editorial words: “For our part, the boys can’t come home and form a Nationalist Party too soon.” This was cited as proof of a “nationalistic trend.”
The announcement that Upton Close, the Hearst writer and former radio commentator, was organizing a third nationalist party (Reynold’s “Nationalists” and Gerald L.K. Smith’s America Firsters are the other two) caused some consternation until it was explained that it was Close’s intention to unite his gang with the others.
 
Hitleresque Methods
The pious words of these fascists should fool no one. Hitler too promised everything to everybody, denounced the Jews and accused them of leading Germany into the First World War. Hitler was laughed at but condoned.
The aim of these fascists is to “divide and conquer.” It would be decidedly dangerous to dismiss them as mere crackpots. It was said about Hitler that he would not last, but look at the chaos he left behind him!
Organized labor and all anti-fascists must build a broad united front of action and militantly oppose the Nationalists and their satellites, must oppose the vicious lies and hatreds to which the fascists are dedicated. The Nationalists are attempting to unite all of the dissident fascist sects into one party and are bidding for congressional seats. The working class must organize its own independent Labor Party to combat their propaganda effectively and launch a program of its own with demands embodying the real needs of the people.
 



“... this taste for war, this adulation of power, this belief in German supremacy and in peace only if it is a German peace – these are not the private characteristics of a small group of corrupt or demented men. These are the common postulates of Germanism, so common that few Germans have even dreamt of examining them.” [1]
In the light of a previous article concerning the distortions and vulgarizations inherent in the official theory of a “unique, brutal and aggressive German national character,” we should like here to continue our discussion of the meaning of national character and challenge the prevailing myth of Germany’s so-called “collective guilt.” We believe there are no racial or national groups which exist as entities and which determine the characteristics of the group members. It is true that certain behavior traits may be more frequently found among individuals of one nationality than those of another, but the overlapping is great. We believe further that the world is divided into nations, each with a typical cultural and historical background; that national characteristics among nations therefore differ as individuals interact with their respective environments; that, similarly, there are differences within each nation; that there are mores common to the whole of a nation and there are those common only to subgroups.
It would be interesting at this point to turn to Marx’s theory of human nature implicit in his social philosophy in order to see what light it thrown on the entire problem. Marx not only propounded a social theory but strove to be effective in the practical world as well; he sought to influence widely variegated groups. Marx was aware that the socialist idea must be tested by its implied judgment of human nature. He once remarked that he who would pass on the social scene must “first become acquainted with human nature in general, and then with human nature as modified historically in every age.” He believed in the dual aspect of human nature, in “generic” man and in “historical” man, the former embodying universal traits of human beings, the latter embodying the plastic constituents which change with the environment and hence with human activities. [2]
The concept of generic man as one and invariant enabled him to justify his social theory in terms of a set of traits belonging to a homogenous mass. Generic man is not English or Chinese, bourgeois or slave, black or white, ancient or modern man, but the qualities they have in common. But the concept of historical man as plural and changeable made it possible to explain the variety of traits in different ages and places. It provided the foundation for the contention that some old traits could be abolished and new traits developed in accordance with the requirements of progress. Man has always lived and acted, not in nature and society in general, but in specific, natural environments and in given societies. To the multifariousness of that environment he has reacted by improvising convenient habits, traits and customs.
Marx did not develop any blanket ideas on national traits, nor did he regard them as permanent and unchanging. National character must reflect the particular experiences and adjustments of a social group as it functioned within a particular physical and historical environment, the nation. Marx conceived of the modern nation as the complex product and function of environmental, economic, historical and other influences. The physical character of the environment, the degree and fashion of its development; the general features of the prevalent method of production, together with the special local divergencies and peculiarities; the number, functions and interrelationships of the important classes and especially the character of the ruling or dominant class; the institutional political experiences of the past; and the distinctive culture and traditions – all these factors affected the character and development of the nation.
 
Marx Not Anti-National
Marx accepted national peculiarities and differences as substantial factors in history. He was equally impatient with conservative critics who regarded all radicals as anti-national and with those radicals who dismissed the importance of nationality. The Communist Manifesto answered the common taunt that the socialists proposed to abolish nationality as unworthy of serious consideration and that the charge was of a piece with the notion that socialism would abolish all personal property, put an end to liberty and culture and destroy the family. Far from wishing to uproot these values and institutions, Marx and Engels proposed to give them in life what they now were only in theory. What Marx foresaw was not the complete disappearance of all national distinctions, but specifically the abolition of sharp economic and social differences, economic isolation, wars and exploitation of one nation by another.
Nor did Marx’s prediction of economic uniformity and interdependence involve the obliteration of all frontiers; economic uniformity would not necessarily bring in its wake political, cultural and legal uniformity. The same economic base might show infinite variations and gradations due to innumerable circumstances, natural conditions, group relations and outside historical differences. Thus Marx never established an automatic and even correlation between economic and non-economic factors. He felt that within the same type of economic structure, there are important differences from one country to another, and that there is room for variety in the world even if its economic systems should approach uniformity.
* * *
Out of this conglomerate picture we can say with some assurance that national character is not illusion, as some would have it, but reality. It can be considered a composite reflection of those factors embodied in the total development of each nation. Individuals are born into a particular society which has institutions, customs, norms and cultural patterns which are transmitted by the family and by others in authority, which the individual internalizes but upon which he can also react, or rather, can change. This cultural heritage consists of the dominant modes of reacting over a long period of time in a dynamic continuum and includes the historical, productive and social forces in a country. National character can change with social change; therefore in some respects it is transient. Other factors which determine national character besides the social structure, such as language, geography and various cultural traditions, can be said to be less susceptible to change and would probably continue after social changes took place. Thus there may be certain dominant social traits in the folkways of a nation, but they are never homogeneous. Inherent in the concept of national character is variation.
That the German have national characteristics different from American can readily be seen in this frame of reference. What is meant for instance by the American “go-getting” or Horatio Alger spirit, which is stereotyped to be sure and belongs actually to another era, but which still possesses some descriptive validity? It implies that the comparatively new, efficient and wealthy capitalist culture we live in, with its philosophy of free enterprise and laissez-faire, fostered such attitudes. We were a nation of boundless frontiers, and this produced an exuberant spirit of expansion and equalitarianism. Other peculiar aspects of American life have been its mobility, the stress on individual initiative, a belief in the “ladder of opportunity,” the possibility of rising above one’s position, emphasis on status and prestige, a certain standardization of ways of spending one’s leisure time and of cultural pursuits in general, a kind of political naiveté and backwardness of the population, a rather marked degree of social conservatism and a hostility to radical political ideas and movements. Here we see various “cultural lags” operating. From Middletown [3], an excellent study of personality in a typical American community of the twenties, we learn that earning a living is the dominant problem. The authors point to the almost universal “dominance of the dollar” and to the fact that people are “running for dear life to make the money they earn keep pace with the rapid growth of their subjective wants.” Again all are not swept up in such attitudes.
In Germany (after 1870), the political doctrine of the ruling class was the monocratic state based on allegiance to a dynasty and a hierarchy which pervaded the whole structure of the nation. Its economic doctrine was patrimony, the benevolent state, with the economic interest subordinated to the political interest. Unlike the United States, where free enterprise flourished, the state intervened actively in the development of industry. Authority, duty, honor and the dictum that the individual is the servant of the state, were its social doctrines. The Bismarckian state combined the monarchical concepts of feudalism with the growth of a highly centralized capitalism.
During this era Germans have been characterized as methodical, efficient, preoccupied with status, ethnocentric, of a philosophic bent, and have been said to have a characteristic belief in the importance of duty. Dependence on superiors has also been said to be a strong element in German life. Everyone was supposed to have had a calling or position and the nobility so common in America was rare. Centralization pervaded all spheres. But is all this something innate? Does it make the German less human? And does it really describe the range of his characteristics? We do not think so. We feel these traits which have become stereotyped and meaningless, and other traits, to the extent they existed at some time, some place or in some group, must be understood as flowing from the cultural and historical process interacting with individuals and groups. That the overfine theorizing and sentimental idealism of some philosophers and historians (Fichte, Treitschke, Nietzsche et al.) was tinged with fantasy and with an emphasis on heroic individuals and with theories of superiority, can then be seen as a reflection of the backwardness which Germany endured for so long. The backwardness of the country was rationalized into a species of superiority. This development is not uncommon among historically backward or oppressed nations.
National character is now seen as the product of the reciprocal relationships between individuals and an economic, historic and cultural tradition. This is not to say, however, that it plays the principal role in the historic process. For us the fundamental forces in this process are the interactions between the prevailing mode of production in every historical epoch, and the ensuing social and political organization. That is why classes occupying the same role in the productive process in different countries show greater similarity concerning organization, status and respective political roles than do different classes within the same country. Still the classes within one nation are similarly sensitized to distinctive habits, attitudes and prejudices, all encouraged by existing social norms. It is in this sense that Marxists accept national character to be in conformity with and not in contradiction to historical materialism.
* * *
How German Character Developed
In relation to the other nations of Europe, Germany in the middle of the nineteenth century was characterized by economic, political and social backwardness and by the lack of industrialization and unification. Several important characteristics set her apart from other Western countries: monarchical, aristocratic and feudal institutions had survived in powerful measure. Capitalism was still relatively undeveloped and the bourgeoisie and the industrial proletariat were still politically weak. The petty bourgeoisie, on the other hand, was uncommonly strong. Finally the country was politically disunited compared with other nations of Western Europe. No less than thirty-nine practically independent states were formally grouped in a loose confederation. (One may measure the distance separating her from England and France by Marx’s view that the revolution of 1848 would begin as a German edition of the revolutions of 1669 and 1789, though he had unwarranted hopes that it would be shortly followed by a proletarian revolution.)
The roots of this condition reached deep into the past. The development of the centralized monarchy, which had done so much to consolidate France as a nation and to undermine feudal institutions, had not been accomplished in Germany. The epochal shifting of world trade routes from the Mediterranean Sea to the Atlantic Ocean had dealt a heavy blow to Germany, for her position in the center of the continent had formerly been a great economic asset. The Germans were driven out of shipping by the Dutch and the English. No city acquired importance as an economic center of gravity for the whole country; Germany was, in a sense, landlocked. There was little internal mobility as travel from one principality to another was difficult. Consequently Germany was also extremely provincial.
The Thirty Years War which was fought by the great powers of the seventeenth century on German territory destroyed means of production as well as people and left the country prostrate for generations. The war confirmed the impotence of the Holy Roman Empire and Germany failed to develop the centralized state which Marx regarded as the concomitant of modern production. The same disunity blocked the way of effective revolutionary action on a national scale.
Though the bourgeoisie was weak and divided and the industrial proletariat was as retarded as the bourgeoisie, the petty bourgeoisie held an extremely important position in the country. Exceedingly increased because of the stunted development of the large capitalists and manufacturers, it formed a majority in the larger cities and dominated the smaller ones. “Humble and crouchingly submissive under a powerful monarchical government, the petty bourgeoisie turns to the side of liberalism when the middle class is in the ascendant; it becomes seized with violent democratic fits as soon as the middle class has secured its own supremacy, but falls back into the abject despondency of fear as soon as the class below itself, the proletariat, attempts an independent movement.” [4] The oscillations of this considerable segment of the population had national significance.
The same historical facts thus affected Germany differently than they did the Western European nations. England and France achieved national unification in the sixteenth century; Germany, even as late as the middle of the nineteenth century was a conglomeration of hundreds of principalities. France and England were world empires and subjected to an intensive process of cultural diffusion; Germany was landlocked. Industrialization began in England in the last quarter of the eighteenth century and in France at the beginning of the nineteenth century. Germany did not undertake industrialization until the middle of the nineteenth century.
While the French and English form of liberalism failed to make any deep or lasting impression upon Germany, the nationalist sentiment readily conquered the whole country, leaving its mark also on the Socialists. The achievement of unification through the erection of a powerful military, dynastic state under William I and his able Chancellor, Bismarck, and the defeat of France in the War of 1870, strengthened rather than weakened German nationalism. Her economic growth was now phenomenal. She was now a great power in Europe. But side by side with her economic progress there remained the cultural and political institutions of an old militaristic, authoritarian era.
The growth of industry from 1871 to 1914 was to a considerable extent state inspired. Loyalty to the state, cooperation with compatriots and a desire for national greatness were all stimulants to economic growth. Monopolistic production came early; with the development of cartels and the swiftly growing power of the big banks, economic direction became more and more concentrated. Economic Germany was under the absolute power of a group of men barely fifty in number. In Germany, developments which in England spread over a century, and in America over forty years, took place in a decade or so. In America, power passed over ultimately from industrialists to bankers; in Germany, the banks had power almost from the beginning of modern industry.
Thus Germany’s economic development showed a collective energy and skill such as no nation had previously displayed. The instability of this structure lay in the sudden change of habits of life from East Prussian agricultural subjection to the comparative emancipation of modern industry; in the case of large numbers of wage earners, from traditional, respectable poverty to sudden precarious luxury; among business men, from Lutheran God-fearing piety to the freedom q£ plutocratic Berlin. In countless hitherto simple families, this came about too quickly to be assimilated adequately. The result was a kind of hysterical intoxication and a belief in boundless possibilities of power and the superiority of everything German.
 
Period of the Weimar Republic
After defeat in the war the German Republic was proclaimed and provided with a democratic constitution by the Weimar Assembly in 1919. Despite intense political and economic crises, it managed to survive for fourteen years. This period presented many new features for the Germans. For the first time a liberal régime was at the helm which freely accorded a wide range of democracy. A new liberal and socialistic spirit prevailed which reflected itself in extremely modern and progressive intellectual and cultural currents.
However, the economic foundations did not afford a base for political stability. The class struggle tore the Weimar Republic into shreds. It could not pursue any consistent policy even in respect to reforms. Unable to resolve the economic problems, it could not withstand the opposition which beset it from the nationalist right and the proletarian left.
Endangered by the proletarian revolution in 1919, the Social-Democratic ministers called, upon the old army elements to restore order. As a result, “the Kaiser went, the generals remained.” In addition to the generals, many more of the old regime remained. The conservative and loyal personnel of the state bureaucracy remained intact and the controls of industry and banking remained in the same hands. This gave the ruling class the springboard necessary for its complete return to power.
In Germany, which had put in its claim for a place in the sun too late and therefore found itself lacking raw materials and markets, capitalism could not even begin to extricate itself from the economic crisis without replacing the democratic state by a dictatorial state, which alone could strip the masses of all means of defense. “If the economic evils of our epoch, in the last analysis result from the fact that the productive forces of humanity are incompatible with private ownership of the means of production as well as with national boundaries, German capitalism is going through the severest convulsions just because it is the most modern, most advanced and most dynamic capitalism on the continent of Europe,” wrote Trotsky in 1932. [5] Hitler became the favored candidate of the ruling class, of big business, for the position of leader of the nation in the renaissance of German imperialism.
In the face of a movement that threatened a coup d’état the Social Democrats stood firm on the ground of constitutional legality! Yet their mass base remained all but intact. This raised an interesting question about the German proletariat which Trotsky posed and answered as follows:
In their lucid moments the leaders of German Social-Democracy must ask themselves, “By what miracle does our party, after all the damage that it has done, still lead millions of workers? Certainly, great importance must be given to the conservatism innate in every mass organization. Several generations of the proletariat have gone through Social-Democracy as a political school; this has created a great tradition. Yet that is not the main reason for the vitality of reformism. The workers cannot simply leave the Social Democracy in spite of all the crimes of that party; they must be able to replace it by another party. Meanwhile the German Communist Party, in the person of its leaders, has for the last nine years done decidedly everything in its power to repel the masses, or at least prevent them from rallying around the Communist Party ... The situation in Germany is as if purposely created to make it possible for the Communist Party to win the majority of the workers in a short time. Only, it must understand that as yet, today, it represents the minority of the proletariat, and must firmly tread the road of united front tactics. Instead of this, it has made its own a tactic which can be expressed in the following words: not to give the German workers the possibility of carrying on economic struggles, or offering resistance to Fascism, or of seizing the weapon of the general strike, or of creating Soviets – before the entire proletariat recognizes in advance the leadership of the Communist Party. The political task is converted into an ultimatum.
We see then that Hitler could never have set marching such forces if the proletariat had not previously been paralyzed by the policies of its two leading parties and conditioned for the Nazi conquest. The middle classes, victims of the crisis of capitalism, were discontented with their condition, material as well as moral. They dreamed of a radical change. They made a turn to the left in 1923 but the leaders of the working class parties showed themselves incapable of satisfying the concrete hopes of the masses. Fascism exploited the discontent of these various social strata and aroused them against the “Marxists,” i.e., the organized proletariat.
The proletariat, however, remained loyal to its own parties. In the last free election in Germany in November 1932, the overwhelming majority of the proletariat gave their allegiance to the Socialist and Communist Parties. The speedy growth of the Nazi Party came at the expense of the bourgeois parties, whereas the workers’ parties maintained their following to the end.
The development of the German proletariat is one of the richest chapters in revolutionary history and a direct contrast to the popular myth of the German character. The Social Democratic Party, founded in 1869 under the leadership of Bebel and the elder Liebknecht, did not share the patriotic enthusiasm of the period and had in its first twenty-five years a wholehearted Marxist character. Gigantic historical forces – the continued success of the capitalist economy from 1870 to 1914, the consequent rise of an aristocracy of skilled labor and party and trade union functionaries which controlled the party, and the rise of an openly reformist wing – had transformed the party into one of liberal reform, an agency for the support of bourgeois reformism and of the First World War.
But this social patriotic disorientation was only temporary. The revolution of 1918 showed irrefutably the abyss between the ruling class and the proletariat, thereby disproving the propaganda which blamed the German people for the First World War, This revolutionary energy was crushed again and again by the opportunism of the leadership of the Social Democrats with its “legalism” and later by the disastrous theory of social fascism put forth by the Communist leaders. Fascism became a big movement and came to power only when the working class showed itself incapable of taking into its own hands the fate of society. The working class did not struggle for it was numbed and exhausted after a series of defeats and betrayals.
 
Roots of National Character
Enough is now known about the development of Germany, of the causes of her pursuit of a form of development different from that followed by the Western nations, and of the historical roots of German fascism – to pierce the mist enshrounding the fabulous monster erected by Allied propaganda in the course of two world wars. German national character is seen as a much maligned and vastly misunderstood concept, which in its contaminated form is strategically projected from time to time, whenever it serves the interests of the powers that be. The national characteristics of Germans (as of all national groups) are the result of the interaction of individuals with the peculiar economic, social, historical and cultural processes of their environment. The characteristics attributed to the Nazis are indeed brutal and terrible but they did not permeate the whole of the people.
In the course of this and a previous discussion we have attempted to illuminate several historical and psychological problems concerning national character.
Human nature everywhere displays much unity and much diversity. We do not agree that there are innate or universal “instincts” or character traits apart from their historical context. In Western civilization variations are to be found between nations and within a country as well. National character implies the presence of large elements of repetition and coherence in the culture and involves the prevailing and dominant modes of reacting of a group over a period of time where the social norms are transmitted by those in authority. However, national characteristics are not homogeneous, for dissident elements necessarily exist. Thus certain traits are common to the entire country and some only to particular groups. National character implicitly denotes variation and change as well as uniformity.
We have sought to show that all Germans did not embrace fascism; that the proletariat supported its own parties but that their leaders failed them; that it was big business which subsidized Hitler’s movement and the middle class which supplied its mass base and which sought refuge in fascist mysticism and social ideology as recompense for its economic misery; and that even under Hitler there was opposition. Likewise, fascism is not merely a German phenomenon but in essence is international – it is capitalism at its most brutal stage. No country has a tradition or national psychology rendering fascism inevitable or impossible. Germans therefore do not have a distinctive character which has always been evinced in authoritarianism, militarism or any of the other traits ascribed to them, for other nations share abundantly these traits. Certain dominant attitudes certainly mark the German character in each particular historical period, because of Germany’s own peculiar development These are not qualitatively different though from the characteristics of people of other nations, for all lie within the same range of human potentialities. There is room for variety in the world.

Footnotes
1. Mumford, Lewis – Letter to a German Professor, Saturday Review of Literature, Dec. 8, 1945.
2. Bloom, Sol – The World of Nations.
3. Lynd, R. & H. – Middletown.
4. Marx, K. – Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany. [This work was actually written by Friedrich Engels for the New York Daily Tribune on Marx’s behalf, but this only became clear after this article was written. – Note by ETOL]
5. Trotsky, L. – Germany, What Next, 1932.
 



To provide ideological aid to the Allied subjugation of Germany, a
large group of economists, psychologists, sociologists and
journalists have been propounding a theory that German character
contains unique elements which make it especially susceptible to
totalitarian movements. Germans are supposed to be traditionally
prone to militarism; they are said to be inherently submissive and
their greatest joy is found, we are told, in blind devotion to a
leader and adherence to barbarous acts .of brutality. Having welcomed
fascism, they are therefore held “collectively guilty” for its
crimes; and it is their “national character” which is at the root
of all this evil.
Thus are the complacent “victors” of the war constructing a
nebulous justification for their reactionary role in world
politics, at the same time that they succeed in beclouding the real
meaning of the conceptions of national character and national
differences. We shall here attempt to show that to postulate a
typical German “national character” is to distort deliberately
the evolutionary historical picture of German society; that not a
single trait of the formidable list of accusations is uniquely
German; and that, in particular, aggressiveness, allegiance to a
leader and tight discipline are universal characteristics of certain
kinds of groups.
It is worth while, at the beginning, to note that the most
important untruth arising from these accusations is the myth that
fascism in Germany was inevitable because of this German temperament.
If the theory is propagated that there is something inherently
Germanic about fascism; if fascism is regarded as a collective
madness peculiar to certain evil nations, it is impossible to explain
how it really arises, how it can be fought, or how to recognize it in
the United States, where as yet it wears no brown shirts.
A century ago the German was generally supposed to be intelligent,
kindly, peaceable, fond of music and the home. Other prevalent
stereotypes were concerned with his scientific-mindedness,
industriousness, stolidness, methodicalness and progressiveness.
During World War I, however, one became suspect if one did not
call the Germans bloodthirsty savages. These propagandist mythologies
about the rapacious Germans were forgotten during the spread of
post-war disillusionment and pacifism and amid the general
stabilization of capitalism. With the Second World War, this
extremely convenient theory was again trotted out. The attributes of
the national characteristics of the Germans were “changed” with
successive historical periods – the revolution of 1848, the
conservative traditions of the Hohenzollerns from 1871–1918, the
“democratic” Weimar Republic, and finally the Nazi terror regime
– depending upon the political propaganda needs of this school of
national character analysts.
However, while such a crude, propagandist concept of German
national character does not stand up in the face of its own
contradictions, does such a phenomenon exist at all? Can a group have
a common character any more than it can have a common pair of lungs
or, more important, a common soul? Or is the term merely a
demagogic tool used in behalf of prevailing power politics? Let us
see, then, how various writers and students approach this problem,
beginning with political analysts and proceeding then to
psychologists who apply their concepts to the problem.
 
The Ludwig and De Sales Schools
We can begin with the most depressing case, the notorious Emil
Ludwig [1]:
Knowledge of the German character might have prevented
World War II ... National character is a genuine reality; it is the
sum total of the traits which distinguish a nation as a whole –
even though some of these traits may be absent in individual members.
We are then told that the Germans are eternally dissatisfied, they
crave power, but at the same time their ambition is to obey; they are
inclined to harshness, do not know love of liberty, and have a
mystical urge for expansion.
The Germans had so long escaped a sense of personal
inferiority through refuge in self-identification with the state that
it became necessary psychologically to deny the defeat of 1918. This
created a political situation in which effective resistance to a
policy of revision or revenge was impossible and to which the logical
conclusion was Lidice. In perpetrating such crimes, the individual
feels himself an organ of the state. To be an efficient state organ
means much more to him than to be a valuable individual. The German
kills any neighbor he feels superior to ... Believing in his moral
right coolly and without emotion, he brings death to others and, if
need be, to himself.
Ludwig’s is the typical vulgarization of the entire problem; all
Germans are Nazis, all are guilty, all have possessed these traits
from time immemorial. The German people are born with these
personality characteristics full-blown. This is a return to old
theories of the immutability of human nature. Modern psychological
theory tells us that individuals are born with certain
potentialities, that the environment determines the degree to which
these may be attained, that there is constant interaction between
individual and environment and it is this interaction which
determines behavior. But this does not interest Ludwig; his only
concern is to indulge in hysterical and mystical chauvinism. Ludwig
is the crudest of his school, but there are others who, if more
subtle, are equally vicious. One such is Raoul De Sales [2]:
The German has two characters; as an individual he is
kindly, but in the mass he is brutal. It is with the “Volk”
that the rest of the world has to deal. Germanism in its most
positive manifestations is one of the most dangerous forms of human
destructiveness that history has known. Hitler is the last phase of
an evolution toward total evil which has been pursued under the
various incarnations of the primitive Teutonic tribe, the German
concept of the state, Prussian militarism and the nation of Volk
for several centuries.
De Sales’ description is simply incredible; it postulates a
Jekyll and Hyde, theory in which the individual and society lead a
kind of dualistic parallel existence but never meet or interact. Yet
it seems incongruous that the “Volk” aspect of German
character asserted by De Sales should not ultimately affect the
individual German – and there you have Ludwig’s theory. This
schizophrenic duality is given to German character as a means of
trying to escape Ludwig’s crass chauvinism, as a means of
projecting a national character for the Volk apart from the
observable characteristics of individual Germans. But the attempt
fails for the two cannot exist in isolation; the one must influence
the other and De Sales must end up in the camp of Ludwig.
If these theories were truly descriptive of the German people,
Hitler would have needed no concentration camps, no Gestapo, no
immense propaganda agency. no intensive education of the young, no
book-burning. The whole people would have been prepared to follow his
party from the start. These writers urge upon us a doctrine of racial
discrimination and attempt to persuade us that German fascism is a
peculiarly German phenomena. We are to forget the international
nature of fascism in the comfortable conviction that such ideas
flourish only in the “German mind.” Completely forgotten is the
role of the German working class. Why should fascism have paralyzed
proletarian resistance, destroyed the independent unions and stamped
out every vestige of the class struggle from its own “labor”
organizations if it did not fear the threat of the powerful class
sentiments and socialist aspirations of the, workers? If all Germans
are such singularly savage and amoral beings, why this dissidence?
From Seydowitz’s [3] description of Civil Life in Wartime
Germany, we learn how terror held the army and the home front
together during the war years. Seydowitz shows that after six years
of concentrated terror and propaganda to prepare the German people
for war “the lethargy of the masses at the beginning of the war
disproved the frequent and vociferous assertions that the German
nation stood unitedly behind its Fuehrer. Even at the time of
Hitler’s greatest successes, the major part of the people stood
aloof from Hitler’s volksgemeinschaft, assuming either a
passively waiting or indifferent attitude or one that was downright
hostile ... experience had taught the masses that even the most
striking victories seemed unable to restore peace.”
 
The Liberal Interpretation
By contrast, the writings of two liberals, Hamilton Fyfe and
George Soule, though often naive, are on this matter comparatively
sane and rational. The former, though his approach is journalistic,
has some interesting things to say: According to Fyfe [4],
... national characters are not distinct, homogeneous,
well-defined. A nation is not a natural unit like a herd of buffalos
... the nationality of large numbers has often been changed. A great
deal if not all the trouble in Europe is the result of people
everywhere being taught by rulers and newspapers to distrust one
another: to suppose their interests clash with those of their
neighbors; to regard these neighbors as inferior, presumptuous,
unfriendly. All of that teaching is based on the delusion that
nations have different characters and one forgetfulness of the fact
that when we speak of a “country” we mean the rulers of the country.
Having won the leadership of other elements in the
population, the Prussians have contributed most to the common belief
as to German qualities and characteristics ... What was glorified in
Germany during the short existence of the German Empire under the
Hohenzollerns was the personality of the ruler ... Yet so little
could the Kaiser influence the country’s political life that the
largest party in the Reichstag was the Social-Democrats, and so
little did the nation identify itself with him that in 1918 he was
told to go. It would be unjust to pretend that all Germans are guilty
alike. The course of national action is set by a few; they persuade
or compel a nation to follow. Vast numbers have been deluded, others
terrified into support of Hitler.
Fyfe’s is a healthy, questioning approach and gives some idea of
the German national character, but it is simplistic and suggestive
rather than concrete and integrative. It is true, as Fyfe says, that
rulers are identified with national character. Yet he disregards
totally the concept of class structure and is, we think, wrong in his
implicit rejection of national character. George Soule [5], on this
matter more sophisticated, writes:
The common observations about the German herd spirit and
Hitler’s ruthless drive to power are true enough but not
sufficiently scientific in so far as they posit the existence of
something in the German character which does not exist in some
variety or other among other peoples as well; and to the extent that
they assume that Hitler is a unique individual whose counterpart
could not be found elsewhere under some other form. After all,
fascism conquered in other countries than Germany, and though the
Nazi movement brought to its finest flower the destructive forces of
the human personality, traces of the same cruelties, exaggerated
attitudes, and will to brutal conquest may be discovered in many
parts of the world and in many situations of less moment.
It would be a mistake to suppose that there are not many
kinds of Germans, or that they all, through the decades, have been
subject to the same kind of upbringing. Yet there is generally
recognized, especially in the Prussian tradition, a certain hard and
authoritative attitude which is observable not only in public
institutions but in family mores. The father is usually the dominant
parent, and he is traditionally severe. This type of family
organization, with its continuity through many generations, has
doubtless left its mark on the national character which has often in
the past been noted in the army and the state ... A background of
insecurity has also left its mark on German culture. The short
history of unity, long after other great nations of Europe achieved
theirs, predisposed Germans to overvalue the national state as a
unifying force and as a way of compensating for the inferiority long
felt as newcomers.
The versions of national character promulgated by Soule and Fyfe
are obviously more tempered analyses and help us discern the
intricacies of a perplexing array of opinion. Especially helpful is
the emphasis upon the cultural indoctrination of patrimonial traits
in early childhood, for we know that the structure of the adult
personality is based on early experiences. The common weakness of
writers such as Fyfe and Soule is that they fail to consider class
relationships and stratifications within society as determinants of
character traits; they do not consider the role of economic and
political factors in their interrelationships, nor the dynamic role
of conscious classes and individuals in effecting change. As a result
they cannot rise above the merely descriptive level; they are welcome
antidotes to the Vansittartism of people like Ludwig and De Sales,
but they do not themselves provide satisfactory answers to either the
problem of fascism or of national character.
The concept of national character, however, necessarily contains
psychological ingredients as well as political, and if this review of
typical spokesmen for the official world of thought has not proven
satisfying, perhaps the practitioners of the psychiatric approach
have more to offer. Here we find the equivalents of Ludwig using a
new jargon but the same ideas.
According to Frederick Schuman [6], Nazism is a psychological
malady with which the German post-war middle-class was afflicted.
In the program of the Nazi Party it found solace for all
its woes, forgiveness for all its sins, justification for all its
hatreds, scapegoats for all misfortunes, and a millennial vision of
all its hopes.
Elucidating this collective neurosis, Schuman runs the gamut of
Freudian concepts. The discontent of the lower middle class he
attributes to a denial of satisfying expression of the “id-drives,”
and aggressiveness, to a weakened “superego” with the result that
sin becomes fashionable. Nationalism is traced to a “castration”
phobia arising from World War I, which “brought about the
amputation of various parts of the Fatherland and its reduction to
impotence.” The prevailing opposition to the Weimar Republic is
explained by the fact that it offered neither adequate “mother
symbols” nor “father symbols.” The conciliatory policy of the
Weimar regime was distasteful to a castrated and impotent patriotism
which had need of the “phallic symbol” of the bloody sword as an
emblem of recovered strength. The so-called popular acceptance of
Hitler’s leadership is interpreted as the most complete expression
of “the pathological regression to infantilism” of the lower
middle class.
If the neurotic burgher could not quite return to the
dark unconsciousness and the complete security of the unborn foetus
in the womb, he could at least become once more a little child, his
whole life controlled for him by a stern and loving father.
Schuman’s argument has a deceptive ring; he fails to offer any
evidence for the presence of the Freudian clinical symptoms which are
well-defined for purposes of individual psychology but which are
merely analogical and verbal substitutions when applied to social
groups. As an example of what is meant by analogical verbal
substitutions, consider his equation of nationalism with a castration
complex. A nationalistic German would be emotionally aroused by the
loss of territory suffered as a result of the Versailles Treaty. This
territory has been cut off from Germany. The term “cut off” is
analogous to “castration.” Result: Schuman’s equation of
national feeling with the “castration phobia,” even though there
is nothing in the nationalist feeling to indicate the characteristic
symptoms of the castration complex as clinically observed. A similar
substitution is made by equating Hitler’s bloody sword to the
phallic symbol. Such reasoning, involving substitutions from one
intellectual discipline to another, unrelated one, can only be
described as slipshod and dangerous.
A less Freudian but more circumspect interpretation is furnished
by Richard Brickner [7], who has submitted a plan to the State
Department aiming to change the “German character.” His diagnosis
that the German people have been suffering for more than a century
from a had case of “psychocultural aggression.”
German institutions have bred into the individual German
an aggressive concern for his “status.” In the family, the father
has long been absolute master. Business, education and politics have
likewise been ruled by an authoritarian system in which to assert and
defend his status, the German alternately commands and scrapes.
Unlike Americans and Englishmen, who consider it unsporting to exert
their full strength against weaker opponents, (! ! !)
Germans are traditionally more brutal and ruthless toward their
inferiors. In their relations with other nations, they have been
alternately arrogant and afflicted with a persecution complex, a
condition resembling paranoia. What distinguishes the Germans is not
their aggressiveness alone, but the megalomania, suspiciousness,
feeling of persecution, projection, complex rationalization,
retrospective falsification, sense of mission, exaggeration, and,
above all, the total irrationality with which that aggression is
manifested. Germany’s unremitting insistence on claims of “unjust
treatment,” “encirclement,” “need of living space,” etc.,
coupled with their martyr phraseology makes them appear typical and
by definition, insatiable paranoid demands.
From this diagnosis, Brickner deduced that it would be useless
merely to preach democracy to the German people; they are emotionally
unable to understand the democratic principle of give and take, and
cooperation among equals.
Nazism is merely the current expression of a paranoid
trend which has existed for over a hundred years. Although the trend
is cultural, it has the same implications as of the individual paranoic.
Here we witness the strange spectacle of paranoiac behavior
without a neuro-psychological basis; a whole population behaves as do
individual paranoics, yet is not affiicted with paranoia. What then
is the origin of this strange affliction?
 
Psychiatry and Social Phenomena
Schuman’s and Brickner’s interpretations of German character
are faulty in the misapplication to social phenomena of psychiatric
terms originally intended only for individual analysis. Psychiatric
concepts are concepts of individual psychology. If we apply them to
institutions and collective behavior without concerning ourselves
with clinical symptoms or the neurological basis which they imply, we
do not provide very much illumination. Our ability to understand, to
predict and to control is derived from our knowledge of causes;
argument by analogy is no substitute for causal analysis. Analogies
from individual psychology to social behavior have value only insofar
as it is always understood that they are merely analogies.
Also implied in the theses of Schuman and Brickner is the
assumption of a collective personality which can be described in
terms of individual personal disorder. It is our belief that groups
and classes in society do not have a personality structure in any
sense equivalent to that of an individual personality structure. The
character and mode of functioning of a group in society is not merely
the result of the sum of, the character and functioning of its
individual members; the group has an autonomous existence. Social
factors are seen to be caused by antecedent social factors and cannot
be referred back to individual characteristics.
In addition, the author’s Freudian orientation precludes a
complete understanding of cultural and social factors and their
interaction with the individual in society, for Freud’s system is
in the main instinctualist and thereby prey to “human nature”
theories. Freud and the earlier psychoanalysts carried on their
investigations entirely within the frame of European culture and
largely within that of a single class in European society. Lacking
comparative materials. they took many environmental factors for
granted and built up an elaborate theory of universal human
instincts. The various attempts which were made by Freud and others
to apply this instinctualist approach to the explanation of cultural
phenomena were not successful. Thus while recognizing his outstanding
insights into human motivation we do not agree with the Freudian
notion that man is inherently wicked and aggressive and that,
therefore wars are inevitable. An important implication of recent
psychological findings is that traits like aggressiveness or
submissiveness are not instinctual, innate or universal and therefore
cannot be spoken of in terms of “national” attributes permeating
the whole of a population. Nor can anyone trait like aggressiveness
for instance, ever reveal all about an individual or group.
Individuals are complex organisms; groups are more so. Aggression may
merely be one of a constellation of traits. Even when dominant it may
have varying underlying motivations. It has different meanings and
serves different functions according to the needs of the individual
and group in a particular situation. It may be a response to
frustration, simply a means of securing safety. or may embody other
meanings. People may be aggressive in one situation and not at all in another.
One final point needs to be made against the Schuman-Brickner
approach. Both of them implicitly accept Freud’s dictum that
“sociology which deals with the behavior of man in society, can be
nothing other than applied psychology.” (New Introductory
Lectures) The acceptance of this idea, if logically developed,
undermines any scientific approach to history or society; it makes of
politics and history merely sub-branches of psychoanalysis. We
believe rather in an approach which focuses attention first of all on
historical processes, on aspects of social structure and group mores
as clues to causal factors.
* * *
There still remains a group of scholars who have attempted to
relate historical, cultural and psychological approaches. Two such
writers, Abram Kardiner and Erich Fromm make interesting contributions.
Kardiner [8], combining anthropological and psychoanalytic
techniques in his study of the reciprocal relations between culture
and personality chose the term “basic personality structure” to
obviate the lack of clarity in the terms group. national or social
character. This is an attempt to apply to cultures a psychoanalytic
approach modified by a realization of the important part played by
social factors in determining psychological phenomena. The “basic
personality structure” for any society “represents the
constellation of personality characteristics congenial with the total
range of institutions comprised within a given culture.” It is
that’ personality configuration shared by the bulk of the society’s
members. as a result of the early experiences which they have in
common and need not correspond to the total personality of the
individual. No one individual is ever familiar with the whole of the
culture in which he participates nor does he express all its patterns
in his own behavior. The constellations identified in “basic
personality structure” are not finished personality traits but the
matrix in which such traits develop. In general the concept
represents that which differentiates the personalities of members of
two different cultural communities. Kardiner has also tried to
discover not only what the basic personality types were in the
various cultures studied but also how they were produced and what
influence they exerted on the culture itself. These dynamic features
are an integral part of the concept.
The “cultural approach” has enormous significance in the
attempt to understand the diversity of human cultures and the
plasticity and potentialities of human nature everywhere. it is most
meaningful when applied to simpler, primitive cultures which tend to
have a unity, a pattern and an organic wholeness of a kind. In such
homogeneous cultures one feature may become predominant in all
institutions and individual functions. This kind of approach,
however, often results in a mere amassing of facts where all facets
of the culture are given equal weight; it is superficial and
misleading when applied to the more complex patterns of western
society. Through their findings, anthropologists are led to question
many of the institutions of modern society, conclude that “we must
re-examine our basic institutions,” but go no further.
According to Kardiner then, no matter in what form and with what
qualifications we use his concept of “basic personality structure”
as a means of historical interpretation, we do away with a constant
human nature which can be counted upon to behave in a uniform manner
under all conditions. One need not agree with any particular estimate
of the value of Kardiner’s theory to realize that it is at least
scientifically permissible in approach, that it attempts to
investigate precisely those problems which others take for granted as
premises. Similarly with the writings of Erich Fromm [9], who tells
us that to understand the dynamics of the social process,
... we must understand the dynamics of the psychological
processes operating within the individual, just as to understand the
individual we must see him in the context of the culture which molds
him ... Freedom, though it brought man independence and rationality,
has made him isolated and thereby anxious and powerless. This
isolation is unbearable and the alternatives he is confronted with
are either to escape from the burden of this freedom into new
dependencies and submission, or to advance to the full realization of
positive freedom which is based upon the uniqueness and individuality
of man.
Nazism is an economic and political problem, but the hold
it has over a whole people has to be understood on psychological
grounds. What we are concerned with is this psychological aspect of
Nazism, its human basis. This suggests two problems: the character
structure of those people to whom it appealed, and the psychological
characteristics of the ideology that made it such an effective
instrument with regard to those very people.
In considering the psychological basis for the success of Nazism,
Fromm makes this differentiation: that one part of the population
bowed to the Nazi regime without any strong resistance, but also
without becoming admirers of the Nazi ideas – there were the
working class, the liberals and Catholics. This readiness to submit
is explained as mainly due to a state of inner tiredness and
resignation. Another part was deeply attracted to the new ideology
and fanatically attached to those who proclaimed it – these were
the lower strata of the middle class, composed of small shopkeepers,
artisans and white-collar workers. The reason why the Nazi ideology
was so appealing to them is to be sought in their social character,
their love of the strong and hatred of the weak; their pettiness,
hostility and thriftiness with feelings as well as with money. Their
outlook on life was narrow, they suspected and hated the stranger,
and they were curious and envious of their acquaintances,
rationalizing their envy as moral indignation; economically as well
as psychologically their life was based on the principle of scarcity.
The event that took place after 1914 intensified the very traits to
which the Nazis had its strong appeal: the craving for submission and
the lust for power.
Hitler’s personality, his teachings and the Nazi system express
an extreme form of the “authoritarian character,” the personality
structure of which is the human basis of fascism and by this very
fact, he made a powerful appeal to those parts of the population
which were more or less of the same character structure. The essence
of the authoritarian structure is described as the simultaneous
presence of sadistic and masochistic drives, the craving for power
over men and the longing for submission. Everyone thus has somebody
above him to submit to and somebody beneath him to dominate. (This is
somewhat akin to the anti-Semitism of some Negroes.)
Fromm believes there should be positive freedom, which consists of
the “spontaneous activity of the total, integrated personality.”
We are to achieve this desideratum through “democratic socialism
wherein the irrational, planless character of society must be
replaced by a planned economy.”
Fromm’s description utilizes Marxian concepts with some success.
He fails of course to state how his society is to be achieved. Before
individuals can become “productive and spontaneous” they must
first overthrow the society they live in and construct a socialist
society. Fromm is not correct in stating that the working class
showed no strong resistance to Hitler. His theory of an
“authoritarian character” as the basis for fascism is
unconvincing. His discussion of the role of the middle classes in
supporting Hitler is credible; yet the middle class, torn between two
extremes, always follows the party offering the most militant
program. In Germany, profoundly discontented with their condition,
they turned to Hitler because the working class leadership did not
show itself capable of leading the struggle. No doubt a number of
clashing interests and certain antipathies separated them from the
organized proletariat but these contlicts would have been surmounted
if the revolutionary proletariat had opened up for them an escape
from their misery. While Fromm thus clarifies somewhat the meaning of
national character and social forces, he neglects the overwhelming
importance of historical factors – of economic political forces, of
classes and parties.
Both Fromm and Kardiner display imaginative and challenging
approaches to the relationship between the individual and society.
Because of various common modes of development and though due to
intercommunication, cultural diffusion and other generally similar
factors found in western society, they properly choose to speak of
the character structure of “western man” instead of specific
national or racial groups; this of course includes the specific local
variations to be found everywhere.
Since the world is divided into nations, each with a typical
cultural and historical background, national characteristics among
nations differ, as individuals interact with their respective
environments. Similarly are there differences and variations within a
particular nation: economic, regional, religious, etc. Thus there are
mores common to the whole of a nation and there are those common only
to sub-groups. And within this sub-group individual differences
exist. In human behavior – individual, group or national – there
is much variation, much unity and much diversity. This must be
understood in a specific context – the cultural historical matrix.
German “national character” is seen as a much maligned and
vastly misunderstood concept, which in its contaminated form is
strategically projected from time to time, whenever it serves the
interests of the powers that be.

Footnotes
1. Ludwig, Emil, The Moral Conquest of Germany, 1945.
2. De Sales, Raoul, What Makes a German?, Atlantic
Monthly, 1942.
3. Seydowitz, Max, Civil Life in Wartime Germany, 1944.
4. Fyfe, Hamilton, The Illusion of National Character, 1940.
5. Soule, George, The Lessons of Last Time, 1943.
6. Schuman, Frederick, The Nazi Dictatorship, 1935.
7. Brickner, Richard, Is Germany Incurable?
8. Kardiner, Abram, Psychological Frontiers of Society.
9. Fromm, Erich, Escape from Freedom.
 



Patterns of Culture
by Ruth Benedict
Penguin. 25 Cents
This book, a classic of American anthropology, is an analysis of three strongly contrasting civilizations – the Zuni Indians of New Mexico, the Dobu tribe of Melanesia and the Kwakiutl Indians of Vancouver Island. When she wrote the book about ten years ago, Ruth Benedict deliberately chose these obscure primitive peoples because she felt that she would have less prejudice or passion toward them than toward peoples she knew well. She proceeds to contrast these three peoples as a means of discovering different “patterns” of social life.
The Zuni Indians are a ceremonious people who value sobriety and mildness above everything else. They believe in moderation and the self-effacement of the individual for the sake of society and they place a high value on peaceful cooperation. The ideal man among the Zuni Indians is a person of dignity and affability who has never tried to lead or to seek personal power. Pleasant relations between the sexes is merely one aspect of pleasant relations among human beings. Their lives lack intensity or conflict; they evade danger.
The Kwakiutl Indians, on the other hand; exalt rivalry, self-glorification and excessive individualism. Among these people each individual constantly vies with all others to acquire more property. On top of economic power, the Kwakiutl Indians construct a series of non-economic relationships: nobility, titles, crests, special privileges. Their life is oriented about the idea of participating in competitions in which they could shame their rivals. So the object of all Kwakiutl enterprise is to show oneself superior to one’s rivals. For them, triumph is an uninhibited indulgence of delusions of grandeur, and defeat a cause for shame which may even lead to death.
The Dobu people have points of similarity to the Kwakiutl Indians. Their values involve not so much triumph over others, but rather a constant ill-will and treachery, a jealousy and fierce exclusiveness of ownership, as well as an inability to construct a binding system of law for themselves.
What can we learn from the study of these three tribes?
 
Origins of Culture
Our “pattern of culture” – the product of a capitalist economy – is not universal and God-given, something which can never be disturbed or changed. While reading this book, we are jostled out of some of our dearly cherished notions about the superiority of our ways, and we are thereby made to question some of our basic institutions. More than that: we are made to see that it is absurd to pass judgment, to feel superior towards other societies and peoples; we lose some of the provincialism which is the curse of his country.
Another conclusion we may draw from Patterns of Culture is that the idea that there exists certain universal traits of human nature is folly. Each society tends to inculcate certain patterns of behavior in the people who live in it. Thus what is “norma!” for one society is not for another. For instance, many of the traits of the Kwakiutl Indians bear strong resemblance to what we would call a queer kind of frenzy, or what psychologists would call psychotic behavior; yet they, the Kwakiutl Indians, consider those traits perfectly normal.
Still another illuminating idea is suggested by Benedict’s study. Some of the traits which are considered normal in our society – competition, extreme individualism – are so exaggerated in the Kwakiutl society that we gain a clearer picture of their character because of the extremes to which the Kwakiutl people bring them.
Though Patterns of Culture is a valuable book, there are a few shortcomings that should briefly be noted. Most important, the author lacks an historical method, which results in an enormous amassing of facts she does not properly utilize. She does not attempt to question why these primitive peoples have different cultures; she does not. seek in their history or economic situation any reasons which might help to explain their varying “patterns of culture.” She merely describes without explaining.
Another difficulty is in her application to society of terms usually reserved for the psychological study of individuals. But it is questionable if the terms of individual psychology can be transferred so readily to entire societies.
In short, Benedict’s book suffers from some of the usual faults of present day American scholarship – an absence of the Marxist historical method. But that should not obscure the great value which it has.
 




Churchill
In 1895, when Winston Churchill was 21 years old, he was awarded the Spanish Order of Military Merit for his outstanding aid in the suppression of a Cuban rebellion: in 1896, he was in India where he fought against native uprisings in the Himalayas; by 1900, he was fighting against the Boers.
By this time, the Tories recognized him as a valuable servant of the Empire, and it was under their auspices that he was seated in Parliament. He then began to make the kind of speeches that he has made throughout his career – “In spite of every lie uttered or printed, the truth comes to the top, and it is known alike by peoples and rulers that British influence is on the whole healthy and kindly, and makes for the general welfare and happiness of mankind.”
Opportunist in his policies, he began to flirt with the Liberals on the basis of their Free Trade program, and he joined them in 1905.
 
“The Foul Baboonery of Bolshevism”
After the Russian Revolution, Churchill equipped from surplus Allies war stores the various White Armies, helped them with expert officers and tried. to promote an anti Bolshevik alliance among the, border states. He got the Cabinet in 1919 to authorize 28 million pounds credit to the Whites and to contribute materials amounting to 100 million pounds.
“A monster seated on a throne of skulls” – this was Churchill’s description of Lenin. He also spoke of “the foul baboonery of Bolshevism which has driven men from the civilization of the 20th century to a condition of barbarism worse than the Stone Age.”
The mild reformist Socialism of the British Labour Party was to Churchill “the most direct and formidable menace which, now that German civilization has been crushed, British civilization is faced.”
When the Lloyd George coalition government collapsed in 1924, Churchill began to feel his way back to the Conservatives. Just as he had supported the Liberals on the single plank of Free Trade, so he supported the Conservatives mainly on the basis of their Anti-Socialist program. Thus since his political baptism in 1899, he has made a complete circle Conservative, Unionist Free-Trader, Liberal, Coalition Liberal, Liberal Tree Trader, Anti-Socialist, Constitutionalist, and Conservative.
Churchill and Mussolini
In 1926, Churchill flew to Italy to visit Mussolini, where he was greeted as “the only British statesman who understands the spirit of Fascismo.” So open was his admiration for Il Duce that for a long time after, when he rose in the House of Commons, there were shouts of “Mussolini”.
During the General Strike in 1926, Churchill made outspoken attacks on the workers, and also took the job of editing a scab newspaper, called The British Gazette. It was the only paper printed during the strike except for the Trades’ Union paper. It harped on “the Russian plot behind the strike,” “the vicious crimes of the Socialists” and so on.
Churchill has always violently opposed any concessions to India. “The truth is that Gandhi-ism and all it stands for will sooner or later have to be grappled with and crushed,” he said in 1929. “We have no intention of casting away that most truly bright and precious jewel in the crown of the King. The loss of India would mark and consummate the downfall of our Empire ... Unless you are prepared to defend your rights and interests in India, you will be stripped of every vestige you possess and expelled with ignominy from its shores.”
A far-sighted imperialist, Churchill quickly recognized the Nazi threat to the British Empire. As early as 1934, he urged a war against Hitler. The appeasers labeled him “an alarmist”. Two years ago, Hitler declared in a speech that if Churchill came to power in Britain, Germany “would consider it cause for instantaneous war.”
Churchill could not, suppress a sneaking admiration for the Fuhrer: “One may dislike Hitler’s system and yet admit his patriotic achievement. If our country were defeated, I hope we should find a champion as indomitable to restore our courage and lead us back to our place among nations.”
Now that England is losing the war, certain sections of the British population and certainly Churchill himself seem to. think that the present Prime Minister is that champion.
Unless the British working-class take over the government, the choice ahead is either Hitlerism or Churchillism.


Reynaud
Paul Reynaud, was premier of France, comes from a middle-class family whose great wealth is derived from a chain of department stores originated in Mexico by grandpapa Reynaud.
In 1918, he was in Siberia, acting as a liaison officer with Kolchak’s White Russian Army; by 1937, he was considered the wizard of French finance.
But he didn’t bolster up French economy by any magic formula. It was the old army game of taking money from the workers and giving it to armaments,
He was an outspoken. opponent of the privileges won by the united efforts of the French workers, and called the 5-day week “a poisoned gift” because it curtailed production.
In negotiating with Leon Blum for the abolition of the 40-hour week, he said, “You cannot pursue a policy of expensive social improvements and at the same time expect the country to get prepared for a life and death struggle with a power twice the size of your own in men and resources.”
Before and after Munich, he was violently opposed to appeasement and urged for French preparedness with the insistence, if not the brilliance, of Churchill.
 
Reynaud Smashes 40-Hour Week
To bolster up the toppling financial structure of 1939, a Reynaud decree replaced the 40-hour week, called bitterly by him “the week with two Sundays”, with the 45-hour week. In addition, the workers got only 5% more than regular time for overtime, and they were given no opportunity to refuse to do extra work.
The April decrees further stated that no increase in wages was to accompany the rise in prices as the wages for the 45-hour week were sufficient to buy what the wages of the 40-hour week had bought before. Thus 2 to 3 billion dollars was saved to be turned over to munitions.
Reynaud urged the French workers not to support the general strike because “"the liberty of Europe depended on the production of our war materials and in order to develop them. I demand unanimity in France.”
And now the working men and women of France are being called on to make even greater sacrifices for what M. Reynaud calls “unity” – a unity that means nothing less than the Hitlerization of France.
Carl Friedrich, in the Atlantic Monthly (October 1939) says, “Altogether it is clear that M. Reynaud is not afraid of radical departure from 19th century Individualism. It shows that the integrated totalitarian war machine in Germany is forcing France as well as England into adopting similar methods.”
 

