 Three Thousand Years of History, Fifty Years of Revolution by Robert Louzon 1998


China: 3000 Years of History, 50 Years of Revolution. Robert Louzon 1998
Chapter II: The First Revolution (1901-1928)
Sun Yat-sen
Think of our coolies, stripped to the waist, hacking roads out of mountains. Do not think of our philosophers.  –  George Yeh [1]
It was just over 100 years ago, in 1853, that the British inaugurated the first railway line in India. In an article printed immediately afterwards in the New York Daily Tribune, Marx announced that this first railway was the start of the economic transformation of India which would in turn lead to its social and political transformation. [2]
You are obliged to build railways, said Marx to the British ‘millocracy’, because you want to obtain Hindu cotton at the cheapest possible price, and because you then want to convey it to the ports of embarkation by the speediest and most economic means. So you build railways, but to make them run you have then to set up in India itself workshops for maintenance and repair; you have to introduce mechanisation and modern technique into a country which was hitherto purely agricultural and backward. Now ‘once you have introduced mechanisation into the means of transport in a country that possesses coal and iron, you cannot prevent its manufacture’. Thus, whether you like it or not, you are transforming India into a new Britain, and this will mean a radical change in all the relations between the two countries.
During the 100 years that have unfolded since then, this dialectic has become progressively realised. From the very fact of its colonisation, India has become economically similar to the metropolitan country, and by the same token the colonisation has lost its basis. The very development of colonisation leads to the negation of colonisation.
What was true for India has equally been the case for China. Europe opened up China by force to its commerce and its industry. As in the case of India, it made China not only an agricultural and commercial country, but an industrial one as well. Europe’s capital and technicians built railways there, introduced a great textile industry, exploited the coal-fields, and built great furnaces. The natural and necessary result of this has been that new China, modern China, industrial China, has not ceased trying to rid itself of its masters.
Such then is the first characteristic of the history of this second phase of the European domination, in China as in India; the introduction of the industrial revolution into these countries gave rise to the will to free themselves from Europe and provided them with the means to do so; that is why during the last 50 years the entire political and even the social life of Asia was to be dominated by the war against Europe, no longer a war to return to the past, as in the time of the Sepoys and the Boxers, but to open up the future.
It follows that along with their struggle against foreign domination, the nationalist movements of the two countries were to struggle for an internal revolution, for the transformation of social relations within their ancient societies. Gandhi fought the caste system as much as he did British domination, [3] and Sun Yat-sen founded a republic in the oldest empire in the world.
Industrialisation
Before reviewing the principal phases of this joint struggle, let us first justify our assertion as regards the industrialisation of India and China.
The industry that was the first in Europe to experience the ‘industrial revolution’, the industry that was for decades the typical industry, was the textile industry. It was the same in the Far East. It was through spinning and weaving that the factory system penetrated and spread, in China as well as in India.
India contains two textile industries, that of cotton and that of jute. The cotton industry is for the most part concentrated on the western coast in Bombay, close to the clayey and fertile black earth of the north-west of the Deccan, the ‘regur’, on which cotton thrives best. That of jute is in the north-east of India, at Calcutta, alongside the delta of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra, in the lands where the plant grows.
In this classic land of the domestic system, hand-spinning disappeared decades ago; as far as weaving is concerned, if it is true that there are still handlooms in use, the number of mechanical looms in operation has increased no less rapidly, from 9139 in 1879 to 154 292 in 1925.
The same is true of jute: all handicraft work has disappeared. The jute industry is one of the most concentrated industries that there is: even the cultivation of the plant takes place on huge agricultural estates.
However, a country that only has a textile industry is a country only half industrialised. To be a real industrial country, it is also necessary to possess the second great industry: a metalworking industry.
For this, in the first place coal is necessary. India does have coal. It is not coal of the best quality, nor of enormous quantities, but it is sufficient to supply a national industry. Between the two world wars, India’s coal production reached about 20 million tons  –  that is, about half of France’s production during the same period. On the other hand, as India also possesses iron ore deposits not far from its coal and sometimes even mixed up with it, and is also one of the great world producers of manganese, a metal indispensable in the production of steel, a metallurgical industry was possible there, and so there was one. In 1909, a veritable city of steel arose in the shape of Jamshedpur, to the south-west of Calcutta, with great furnaces, steel works, coking kilns, etc., a city that can be compared to Le Creusot, and which employs 50 000 workers.
It is a remarkable fact that nearly all these industries, with the possible exception of jute, have from their beginnings been almost exclusively in the hands of Indians, not of Britons, or of other Europeans. Almost the whole of Bombay’s textile industry belongs to Indians, and the company that built Jamshedpur is the Tata company, which is exclusively Indian.
It is the same thing in China. Just as in India, an important textile industry exists there, Shanghai occupying the place of Bombay, whilst the iron centre of Hanyang on the middle reaches of the Blue River alongside Hankou, is the counterpart of the Indian Jamshedpur.
The Chinese textile industry, however, is on a smaller scale than that of India, because unlike India, China is not a great producer of cotton, especially good quality cotton. On the other hand, the Chinese metal industry has a very great future before it, for the reason that China’s coal-fields and iron ore deposits are far more extensive than those of India. The existence of coal-fields capable of producing a billion tons of coal has already been ascertained  –  a quantity, in other words, half as great as that which the USA is known to possess, the USA being the richest coal country in the world, whose subsoil has of course been much better explored than that of China, which also has a milliard tons of iron, almost as much as the famous American deposits of Lake Superior. And we should add to this the fact that China is the greatest world producer of tungsten, a metal as necessary to the production of high quality steel as manganese is to the production of ordinary steel.
Finally, as in India, the modern industry of China has from the first been in the hands of native capitalists, and not of Europeans. Just as the foundation of Jamshedpur was the exclusive work of Indians, that of Hanyang was the exclusive work of the Chinese. As regards the textile industry, the position is not so bright; of the 3.5 million cotton spindles possessed by China round about 1925, the Chinese themselves owned no more than two million, but more than a million others were owned by the Japanese, with the remaining few hundred thousand being shared out amongst the Europeans.
The ‘concessions’ that Europe had extracted at knife point in order to establish its factories in reality served as incubators for hatching out a great native industry, which was already provided with such modern utilities as electricity, tramways, etc. It must also be said that they afforded a certain measure of protection against the exactions of the mandarins.
If we compare the rhythm with which the two countries have become industrialised, we should note that both of them made a rapid leap round about 1920.
The first mechanical spinning machine for cotton in India dates back to 1818, but it was not until the end of the nineteenth century that it is possible to speak truly of an Indian industry and a Chinese industry, with an otherwise quite slow development. But the First World War came along in 1914, which had the effect of an immense catalyst in the East. Europe’s absence from the world markets throughout the entire war, and even for some years after it owing to the great destruction it wrought, left a complete void. It was the task of the Far East to fill it. The industry of Asia then took a sudden leap forward, the extent of which may be judged by these two figures: during the years 1910-14, British India with great difficulty produced 300 000 tons of yarn; in 1922, it produced 760 000 tons of it! The leap forward in all the other branches of industrial production was just as sharp.
This swift forward movement in industrialisation was also to be found at the same time in the evolution of the movements of national liberation, a fact that confirms that these latter were merely a reflection of the former. Just like the industrialisation, the All-India Congress in India [4] and the Guomindang in China originated before 1914, and had by then even achieved some success, especially the Guomindang, but it was only after 1918 that the two great parties of national liberation became strong enough to engage in the decisive struggle that was to free India from the British, and in China to liquidate both the ‘unequal treaties’ and the last remnants of the imperial regime.
As usual, this economic revolution and its political result were to give rise to an entire thought world that prolonged and strengthened them, and which is well summed up, so it seems to me, in the words I have put under the title of this chapter, which were said to Robert Payne some years ago by an important Guomindang figure who is, or was, I believe, one of Chiang Kai-shek’s ministers.
It was in this same spirit that an old Chinese professor, speaking with the enthusiasm of a youth, made the following declaration to the same Robert Payne:
Many years ago, I came upon Dr Sun Yat-sen’s book on the development of China... I was impressed by its lofty vision and the extraordinary way  –  it was extraordinary to my eyes  –  in which Sun Yat-sen regarded the earth of my country. It opened my eyes to the fact that there may be more wealth under the earth than in the top-soil; and I began to take an interest in metallurgy, mineralogy and geology. These are the great things in modern China, and it is from this point that modern China really begins. We are making plans for the future now. The renovation of the country goes hand in hand with the war. We have selected sites, built the road-beds, studied communications  –  in our mind’s eye we can see the great chain of factories spreading over China. There are 14 areas for development. There are six great areas for power. And though to you these words may mean nothing, they mean a great deal to us. We are working carefully. We have made contracts with American firms for the extension of our rolling-stock  –  all our communications will be got from America. Our shipyards will multiplied by 100; our foundries will be multiplied by 300; our cotton mills will eventually supply the whole of China. In 20 years time, though we are poor now, we shall be rich; and when that day comes we will no longer have to import on the scale that we imported before. China, with her tremendous manpower, her skill, her enthusiasm and the riches of her land, will become a great power. [5]
So be it.
‘Young China’
We now come to the events. Political power in India was exercised by the British, so the struggle for independence was purely and simply a struggle to abolish British domination over India. It was not the same in China. Even if the burden of Europe weighed heavily upon China, at any rate the country was not directly subject to the political domination of any European state; officially it remained independent, and the rights acquired by the Europeans on Chinese territory, whether as concessions or as leases, had at any rate been acquired by treaties in good and true form with the assent of the legitimate sovereign. China’s dependence on Europe was thus solely the consequence of the weakness of its own state, which had been unable to resist European claims; it therefore followed that the path of liberation must first of all pass through a transformation of the internal political regime. A preliminary condition for the removal of the ‘unequal treaties’ was the removal of the emperor, or rather of the entire mandarin-imperial regime that had existed in the country for more than 2000 years, and its replacement by a modern state of the European type, as only such a state would be strong enough to deal with the Europeans on equal terms. Thus it was the revolution that appeared to Chinese patriots as the first task to be accomplished.
It was this revolution, aimed solely at the modernisation of China by the Europeanisation of its state, that the Guomindang achieved. Its aim is comparable to the Russian Revolution of February 1917, and so it may be called the first Chinese Revolution, as the February Revolution was the first Russian Revolution.
However, again like the Russian Revolution, and in general terms like all great movements, the revolutionary activity of the Guomindang was preceded by a prologue. The prologue was played out during the preceding period, a little before the Boxer uprising.
We have seen that in June 1898, three years after the severe defeat of China by Japan, the young Emperor Guang Xu had promulgated a number of reforms  –  reforms that remained valid only for the length of a morning due to the coup d'état that was the empress’ immediate answer to them. It must be borne in mind that these reforms as such did not come ex abrupto into the mind of the emperor.
On the morrow of the Franco-British war against China, that is to say, in the 1860s, a certain number of Chinese, intellectuals for the most part, had understood, as their fellow Asiatics the Japanese, who had grasped the point on a wider scale, that Asia could escape from Europe only on condition that it imitated Europe. This current of thought, which could be compared mutatis mutandis to that which inspired the Russian liberals round about the accession of Alexander II, of whom Herzen is the best known, [6] crystallised around the personality of one man, Kang Youwei, who had brought out a book, Japan’s Renewal, in which he presented the modernisation of the neighbouring kingdom, then in the full flood of development, as an example to be followed by China. [7] Very soon a group of disciples formed itself around this master, and a party was created that called itself ‘Young China’.
The activity of this party consisted almost solely of addressing ‘memorials’ to the emperor, beseeching him to ‘reform’ the political administration of China. These memorials remained unanswered until one day, after being forced to hand over great territories on lease to the Russians, the British and the French, the emperor, whose tutor had formerly induced him to read Kang Youwei’s books, secretly summoned him to the palace, made him a ministerial secretary, and soon filled the council with his disciples. Less than three-and-a-half months later, the whole lot of them became victims of the massacre of 29 September, from which Kang himself escaped only by a precipitous flight.
This event is important from a general point of view, for it confirms that great political and social movements that emerge in history and are crowned with victory are often preceded by more modest movements which meet with defeat.
It is also important from another more particular point of view, which is that it was in the reforming Young China movement that Sun Yat-sen first made his appearance.
Another significant detail to be borne in mind is that Kang Youwei, like Sun Yat-sen, and his principal collaborators, was a Cantonese. Bearing in mind that no other part of China had been open to Europeans before the last century, we should recall that Canton possessed the trading stations of practically all of the great European powers ever since the seventeenth century. It was doubtless this prolonged contact with Europe, rather than to any racial characteristics of the Chinese of the south, that made Canton the cradle and, until the final victory, the fortress of the republican movement.
It was after the experiences of 1898 and 1900  –  in other words, after the empress’ coup d'état that showed that there was no hope of achieving reforms through court circles, and after the defeat of the Boxers that showed that even if old China was still strong enough to resist reforms by a palace coup, it was not strong enough to resist the foreigner  –  that the national revolutionary movement properly so-called began. It set itself the aim of dethroning the emperor, because whilst ever there was an emperor, the modernisation of China, and consequently its liberation from Europe, would not be possible.
The struggle was to continue for a quarter of a century. In its first phase, the empire was to be overthrown; in its second, amid the confusion of anarchy, an entirely new regime was to be elaborated.
The Assemblies of ‘Notables’
The French Revolution had as its fundamental cause the need to establish in France, and generally throughout Europe, a political and social regime that would allow the development of the productive forces resulting from the Industrial Revolution; the Chinese Revolution had as its aim the institution of a political and social regime in China that would allow the establishment and development of these same forces. It is therefore not surprising that these two revolutions, being of the same nature, should have unfolded along parallel lines, at least to begin with.
In the first place, both of them had the same agent; they were above all the work of the bourgeoisie; the merchants and the intelligentsia were the joint leaders of the movement that ended in the fall of the Chinese empire. The events themselves, moreover, followed quite closely the course taken by those that unfolded in France a little over a century earlier.
The prologue that we have just seen, with the Emperor Guang Xu summoning into office the reformer Kang Youwei, is the equivalent of the decision of Louis XVI to take on Turgot as his minister. [8] Similarly, as the court of Versailles, to ward off the storm gathering on the horizon, attempted to gain time by convoking an assembly of notables and promising them the States-General for which all were clamouring in five years’ time, so also the court of Beijing tried to gain time by introducing an assembly of provincial notables and promising them a parliament in nine years. But here as there, in Asia as in Europe, at the beginning of the twentieth century as at the end of the eighteenth, these dilatory methods only resulted in accelerating the development of the conflict.
The Dowager Empress who had caused the reformers to be murdered and who had stirred up the Boxer movement, after their defeat was herself obliged to play the rôle of reformer! However, she could only limit herself to making promises and only allow herself more or less superficial gestures.
It was only after her death came about in 1908 that the new imperial regent (the father of the new emperor, who was two years old, and brother of the former emperor) was obliged to carry out the most important of the promises made by the deceased empress  –  the convocation of assemblies of elected notabilities. [9]
Since the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-05, there was no turning back. Japan’s victory over Russia demonstrated in the most striking fashion that the modernisation of this Asiatic state had not only made it capable of vanquishing China, but had even made it capable of defeating a great European power. Thanks to the magic of European political institutions, for the first time for centuries yellow people had defeated whites. This was a proof so manifest, and a demonstration so irrefutable of the superiority of the modern state that it was not in anyone’s power to prevent the Chinese drawing the obvious conclusions. There are events in the face of which all falsehoods, all manoeuvres, all propaganda and even all the most forceful blows are rendered quite powerless.
That is why in October 1909, the elected assemblies, exclusively elected by the ‘notables’, were brought together in each of China’s provinces. Not only were the lists of electors carefully drawn up so as to include only socially privileged people, but their functions were also closely defined; so it was, for example, that even in purely local matters their deliberations could be annulled by a simple veto of the representative of the central authority. They were then, more or less, what appeared to be sleeping assemblies, or mere house meetings.
But they were nothing of the kind. The first act of these provincial assemblies was to exceed their prescribed functions by calling vigorously for the convocation of a parliament, and when a little later they were forced to call a national consultative assembly consisting of 100 delegates from the provincial assemblies and 130 government representatives in Beijing, this ‘provisional senate’ carried on a fierce and unrelenting struggle against the court, aiming in particular to get a government formed responsible to itself.
This struggle between the monarch and the assemblies, in the course of which every time he was pressed too far the monarch ceded something, but then immediately tried to take it back by wily interpretations, [10] is, as we can see, closely reminiscent of the behaviour of Louis XVI when he came to grips with the States General and the Constituent Assembly.
The Sworn Confederacy
But an assembly does not of itself dispose of any force. It has to be supported by an external force, which will often drag it further than it wishes to go.
In France this external, ‘physical’ force, was the Parisian people. It was thanks to the state of quasi-permanent rebellion maintained by the Parisian people from 14 July to 10 August that the assemblies ended up winning, and after having ceded everything, and then having attempted to take it all back, Citizen Capet had to abandon everything, even his head, without any possible hope of getting anything back. [11]
In China, the people of Beijing could not offer the ‘Provisional Senate’ the support that the French assemblies found amongst the people of Paris. Beijing, an administrative city and a centre of luxury, was neither commercial nor industrial, and, moreover, as one of the last places open to Europeans, of all China’s cities, it was the one where the reformist movement was at its weakest. The physical force that was to support the assembly and press it on to victory had therefore to be found elsewhere than in the capital; it had to come from the provinces, and more particularly from ‘China abroad’  –  in other words, from the rich and numerous Chinese colonies which had by now been established throughout the whole of the Far East. The organiser of this force was Sun Yat-sen. [12]
Whereas the Parisian violence was almost entirely spontaneous, the outcome of collective action in the face of events, in accordance with the centuries-old traditions of the country, revolutionary violence in China could only be the result of a slow, painstaking and careful organisation.
Thus, as we have already said, Sun Yat-sen was a Chinese from Canton province; the son of a coolie, and himself a coolie in his childhood, he had been one of the first students in the faculty of medicine founded in Hong Kong by the British, and since before 1900 had belonged to the ‘Young China’ group. He was part of the ‘left’ of this group, which means that he was one of those who believed that they should not limit themselves to addressing ‘memorials’ to the emperor, but that ‘a certain degree of violence is necessary’. That is why, after 1895, when the first requests of the reformers had been left unanswered, Sun organised an uprising in Canton. But this was a total failure, and Sun had to make a speedy exit from China. It was therefore from abroad, from Britain to begin with, and then mostly from Japan, that Sun organised the party, or, more precisely, the secret society, of the ‘carbonari’ type, which was to put an end to the imperial regime.
In 1901, Sun created a preparatory association, the Guomindang, or ‘Party of the Nation’s Mandate’, [13] which attempted several insurrectionary movements, but without success. No doubt taking the view that his party was constituted on principles that were too rigid and on bases that were too narrow, in 1908 Sun based it within a sort of Popular Front including all the reformist elements, which took the name of the ‘Sworn Confederacy’. It was this Sworn Confederacy that made the revolution, Sun providing it with a programme and money, and his collaborators in China, notably Huang Xing, [14] assuring its technical organisation.
In order to rally everybody, all who wanted to put an end to the existing regime, a simple slogan was necessary, easy to understand and evocative. Just as Gandhi did, Sun Yat-sen sought for a slogan in the traditions of his own country. It was upon the old Hindu tradition of respect for life and the rejection of violence that Gandhi based his policy of passive resistance and non-collaboration; it was upon the old national sentiments of the Chinese, and their horror of the barbarian, that Sun found the flag under which he was going to be able to gather all those who wanted ‘things to change'!
The dynasty which had now reigned over China for over 250 years was an alien dynasty, a dynasty of barbarians, the Manchu dynasty. Obviously, it had become very sinicised, and its administration in no way differed from that of the Chinese emperors; but it was nonetheless of Manchu descent. Hence ‘Down with the Manchus'!
Such was the simple and convenient slogan of the Sworn Confederacy. ‘The racial struggle against the Manchus is the first duty of the Chinese’, declared Sun in his programmatic speech in Tokyo as early as 1907, and when the first military uprising took place in 1911, the first proclamation issued and drawn up by the Sworn Confederacy said: ‘The population is persecuted by the Manchus and plunged into a sea of sorrows. The Manchus are not of our race. We want to destroy them, and all their traitors and thieves along with them... Let us unite, so that we can win back our China!’
Such was the objective proposed to the people by the reformers; it was not a social objective, or even a political objective properly so-called, but a purely national objective.
Money was provided in abundance by the Chinese abroad. All the Chinese colonies of Indo-China, Malaya and Indonesia responded with alacrity to Sun’s appeals for funds. In fact, their members were mainly merchants, often great international traders in close contact with the Europeans who then ruled the majority of the countries where they were established; and they could not fail to be for a revolution which, under the cover of a national revolt, was actually the revolution of their class. For with the victory of the Sworn Confederacy, it would be their class that would come to power in the motherland, and the economic development that it could not fail to promote would further extend the range of their dealings, which largely consisted of commercial operations between China and the other countries of the Far East.
There remained the internal organisation of the conspiracy. This was very quietly prepared. All the great cities had their ‘lodges’, with a stock of arms and a whole series of instructions on the sequence of operations that were to take place in the event of an insurrection (there were even manifestos already printed for distribution).
More important still was the composition of the lodges. These not only included industrialists, merchants and members of the liberal professions, but also a great many high governmental functionaries (about half of the provincial governors were in it, so it seems) including (and this is most interesting) a good number of generals and senior officers. All these lodges were subject to the authority of a central lodge, which had its seat first at Canton, but then, after the collapse of a coup d'état in this city at the beginning of 1911, in the Blue River region, at Hankou and Chengdu.
With such an organisation and with such cards to play, the Sworn Confederacy could be sure of success. Although some 10 or so attempted insurrections between 1908 and 1911 had successively collapsed, the hour of victory had of necessity to sound. That hour came on 10 October 1911.
The Army’s Intervention
However unpopular it may be, and however powerful may be the forces opposed to it, a government can always hold out so long as it can safely rely on the army behind it. But the day the loyalty of the latter is shaken, so is the government. If the French Revolution began on 14 July 1789, it is because on that day French soldiers took part in the capture of the Bastille, [15] and if we have quite recently seen a Belgian government and its king surrender in 24 hours, it is because the troops who had been set to ‘maintain order’ in Liège opened their ranks to the demonstrators. [16]
The Chinese revolution began on 10 October 1911 in the same way, because the garrison of Wuchang revolted on that day.
The head of China is difficult to place, but its heart is undoubtedly to be found in the middle reaches of the Blue River, where that river converges with its principle tributary, the Han River. There, separated from each other by the two rivers, are three great cities: Wuchang, an administrative city and the provincial capital, Hankou, the Blue River’s greatest port (where maritime navigation comes to an end, 900 kilometres from the sea), and Hanyang, an industrial city where there are blast furnaces.
On 10 October 1911, when the garrison at Wuchang had just received the order to repair to the nearby province of Sichuan in order to quell a violent disturbance resulting from a plan by the state to repurchase railway concessions formerly granted to companies of notables, a bomb exploded at Hankou. The governor, suspecting a plot, proceeded to order arrests and had four men beheaded. A plot did indeed exist, and in fact it was none other than the garrison commanders themselves who were in charge of it. They judged it prudent to make the first move: they alerted their troops and made them march illico [17] on the palace of the governor, who had just enough time to flee. The whole three-city agglomeration, Wuchang, Hanyang and Hankou, thus fell into the hands of the rebellious troops and their generals, in other words into the hands of the Sworn Confederacy.
The movement spread like wildfire. Apart from in the north, every province, either in agreement with its governor or against his will, declared its independence of the central power, and whilst for a time some of the troops remained loyal to the emperor (they even reoccupied Hanyang, but not Wuchang), others responded to the order to march upon the rebels by mutinying themselves; profiting from this unexpected support, the ‘provisional Senate’ in Beijing increased its pressure on the court. With the army, it had lost its only point of support. It only remained for it to attempt a manoeuvre, the final manoeuvre of those who have lost the game: to parley for terms.
Unlamented Abdication
To do this, it appealed to a typically Chinese person, a Chinese of the old type: Yuan Shikai. [18]
Yuan Shikai was a Chinese general and politician who had already earned a massive reputation for duplicity. As Commander-in-Chief of the Province of Beijing during the 1890s, he posed as a reformer by modernising the equipment and organisation of his troops, but as soon as the empress decided to put to death the reformers and dethrone the emperor, it was he who was charged with this operation. Then again assuming his mask as a ‘progressive’, he took the initiative in the various proclamations in which the empress ‘promised’ reforms.
He was removed from the government after the death of the empress, but as soon as the October events took place, he was hastily recalled by a tearful court, which begged him to save the throne and the dynasty. After making a slight show of refusal, Yuan finally accepted the proposal and set to work. But it was not in order to save the emperor: it was to put himself in his place.
His artifice was simple. He proceeded to obtain for himself from the court a series of concessions that would progressively deprive it of all its powers, and thanks to this, to enable him to represent himself to the revolutionaries as the man who had helped them to attain their aims easily, and therefore the ideal man to be placed at the head of the new regime. Did not the Han, Tang, Song and Ming dynasties each have a ‘soldier of fortune’ as a founder? Why should not the next dynasty have a ‘professional soldier’ as its first emperor?
The revolutionaries on their part were by no means inactive. Of the 18 provinces which made up the Chinese nation, the 14 that had declared their independence sent delegates to Shanghai to form a ‘central government of the republican provinces’, the presidency of which was assumed by Sun Yat-sen after he returned from exile in December.
It was consequently with this assembly of provincial delegates and the government that issued from it that Yuan Shikai undertook to negotiate, however much the ‘Provisional Senate’ in Beijing for its part attempted to secure the fulfilment of the imperial promises about granting a constitution.
Subject therefore to pressure from three sides, from the republicans in Shanghai, from the constitutionalists in Beijing, and finally from its own henchman Yuan Shikai, who conducted the whole orchestra, the imperial house found itself obliged to yield one position after another, as all regimes condemned by social development are bound to do, at all times and in all latitudes.
On 30 October, 20 days after the Wuchang uprising, the court had already in fact remitted all its powers into the hands of Yuan; on 2 November, a constitution drawn up by the Beijing senate was put into operation; on 6 December, the Regent was dismissed by the rescript of an empress who had to be sought out expressly for this purpose; on 28 December, the throne accepted in veiled terms the establishment of a republic ‘if the people so wish'; on 5 January 1912, Nanjing, which had now become the seat of the central government of the rebel provinces, solemnly proclaimed the republic; and finally, on 2 February, the emperor abdicated with the following declaration, which is not without a certain element of grandeur:
By reason of the uprising of the republican troops, the other provinces having responded to the movement, the Empire has seethed like a boiling cauldron, and the people find themselves in destitution. On that account, special orders were given to Yuan Shikai to dispatch officials to discuss with representatives of the republican army the general situation, and the opening of a national assembly which would determine the form of government to be installed. Already two months have passed, and no basis of agreement has been found. The South and the North being separated from each other, the course of trade has been interrupted and hostilities prolonged. As long as the form of government is undecided, the people cannot have peace. At this moment, the popular sentiment of the nation as a whole is in favour of a republic. The southern provinces have been the first to embrace this cause, and all the generals of the North have followed their example. The Will of Heaven may become manifest in the acceptance of these popular sentiments. How could we, for the glory of a single family, oppose the desire of millions of people? ... We entrust the sovereign power to the people, and we pronounce for a republican form of constitutional government.
It was understood that the emperor would remain the ‘great pontiff’, that he would continue to reside in Beijing, and that the republic would supply him with an income.
Thus the revolution, at least in its first chapter, when it was only a question of destroying what existed, had required less than four months. For the first time in their history, the Chinese were without a sovereign; they were now to experiment with one of those rare things that they had never tried before, a republic in other words, a political regime that had been brought to them ready-made from the West, very much as it had brought them during the preceding decades the technique that supports it.
The Effacement of Sun and His Party
With the abdication of the emperor, there therefore began the second phase of all revolutions, that during which it is necessary to build. This second phase began with a dramatic turn of events.
The republic had become China’s legal regime. This republic already had a president, a man who had been nominated as such before the emperor’s abdication by the assembly of the provinces in revolt: Sun Yat-sen. It was he, these provinces, the Nanjing assembly, the Sworn Confederacy who were the victors in the conflict, not Yuan Shikai, whose only rôle was to transmit their wishes to the imperial court and as far as possible save the face of the defeated regime. Now the first act of these victors was to efface themselves!
In fact, on 15 February, Sun Yat-sen relinquished the presidency, and the Nanjing assembly unanimously nominated in his place Yuan Shikai as the republic’s provisional president. Then the assembly itself dispersed to await the result of the elections that were to take place under the terms of the constitution.
The sudden disappearance from the political scene of men who had victoriously accomplished a change of regime is a rare event in history, and one that is always rather difficult to understand. Sun Yat-sen’s abdication is reminiscent of Sulla’s abdication, [19] and its causes are equally enigmatic.
Like Sulla, Sun had assured the institution of a new constitution, and, like Sulla, it is possible that he wanted to see how this constitution would function on its own without him. No more than his Roman predecessor, Sun was no vulgar politician, who sought only to enjoy power; he intended to work for the future. Now the best way to find out whether what you have done can function after your death is to see how it functions whilst you are still alive, but when you are not working it.
However, it would seem that there were more powerful motives behind Sun’s decision, that can be found in the speeches he made just after his resignation, and above all in what he set himself to do. The general theme of his speeches was that the political revolution had been accomplished, but something much more difficult remained to be done, the social revolution:
Some years ago a number of us met in Japan and formed the ‘Chinese Revolutionary Society’. We then adopted three great principles: the supremacy of the Chinese race, the government of the people by the people, and the supremacy of the people in the production of wealth. The first two aims have been attained by the abdication of the Manchu dynasty. We now have to make the economic revolution... If at the beginning of our Chinese republic’s career we neglect to defend ourselves against the establishment of capitalism, then in the very near future a new despotism, a hundred times more terrible than that of the Manchu Dynasty, awaits us, and rivers of blood will become necessary to deliver ourselves from it.
Very true! But we cannot see how abandoning power can be a means of helping to realise the third of the proposed aims.
To my mind, the real reason for Sun’s resignation is that this man, who had just devoted 20 years of his life to politics, simply did not believe in politics. Or rather, he only regarded it as a secondary matter, the main thing for him being technology. What seemed to be the essential task for him, upon which all else depended, was to modernise China in a technical sense, to provide it with the entire equipment, factories, railways, etc., which alone could make it the equal of the European powers. If until now he had been occupied with politics, it was solely because it had first been necessary to overthrow the obstructions of a political order that were opposed to industrial development. Now that these obstacles had been removed, he proceeded to devote himself to the essential task of China’s economic development.
That is why he hastened to accept the office of ‘Plenipotentiary Commissar for the Railways’ which Yuan offered him. [20] It was a rather vague title, and its functions were ill-defined, but precisely on that account it would permit him to intervene in all questions concerning mining concessions, in the establishment of new factories, in the foundation of banks, and so on. From now on, as a Frenchman who saw him at the time  –  1913  –  said, Sun was a mixture of ‘a prophet and a businessman’.
This idea of concentrating effort on China’s industrialisation not only inspired Sun himself, but his disciples as well. ‘It was thought that we made a revolution to establish a republic’, said a member of Sun’s party to a French resident in China also at this time: ‘No way! The republic is not an end in itself. We now want to cast aside the useless, encumbering vestiges of a dead civilisation so that the people will have the utmost freedom to apply themselves to enterprises that are productive of wealth.’ [21] And this is why, 20 years after Sun’s death, the old Chinese professor could still say to Robert Payne that it was after reading one of Sun Yat-sen’s books that he applied himself to the study of ‘metallurgy, mineralogy and geology’.
This was doubtless also partly the reason why China today has given its allegiance to Russia, hoping that ‘planning’ methods and forced accumulation will secure for it a more rapid industrialisation than those of traditional capitalism. [22]
Military Anarchy
If, as we have just seen, Sulla’s abdication had apparently nothing in common with Sun’s preoccupations, and if it differed profoundly from his in this respect, the self-effacement of the two men nonetheless had identical consequences in the short term.
When a political force has led a movement to its successful conclusion, and this force then suddenly disappears without meeting opposition from another force, whether it be a question of a reactionary movement like Sulla’s or a revolutionary movement like Sun’s, a gap is created in the political life of the country. The fallen regime has no forces wherewith to support its reappearance, and the victorious regime cannot subsist through lack of vital figures. We then pass into what has been appropriately called a period of ‘anarchy’: there is nothing around which the forces of order may arrange themselves. This ‘anarchy’ goes on as long as the work is not taken up again, or at least modified, either by those who have abdicated, or by their successors.
After the abdication of Sulla, Rome experienced anarchy until 30 years later Caesar gathered the succession to Sulla into his hands; [23] after the resignation of Sun Yat-sen, China passed through 15 years of anarchy until the day when Sun’s party, starting out from Canton, reconquered the whole of China, and once more made it into a state.
This Chinese anarchy was essentially a military anarchy. We have seen how the military played a most important rôle in the development of the events which forced the abdication of the Manchu dynasty, but the rôle played by the armed forces in a revolution, however decisive it may be, generally has no influence at all over the revolution’s future if the civilian revolutionary elements, who in fact always make up the revolution’s driving force, continue to play their part, because they represent the force that issues from the needs of society at the appropriate point. Arms always give way to the toga, [24] even if they do not take account of it; they are never, apart from in periods of complete decadence, any more than an instrument of the toga. But a toga there must be, and where was the toga now? Sun Yat-sen’s resignation and the fading away of the Nanjing assembly meant the disappearance of the entire civilian element in the revolution; the military were left on their own, and from then on they could do nothing else than take power themselves. This is what they did, and soon there was anarchy. In most of the provinces, all the power passed to the provincial military head.
So long as Yuan Shikai was alive, China could at least put on a show of unity, because all the military governors supported Yuan, who, like them, was a military man, and because his will to ‘maintain order’ and eliminate parliament suited the need for authority typical of all military men. On the other hand, Yuan, who had no other support than the army, dared not displease the provincial leaders, and consequently had to leave them to do whatever they liked in the provinces. Moreover, his ambition, a childish ambition, to call himself ‘emperor’, was to destroy him, and after his death the anarchy became total; there did not even remain the appearance of a Chinese state.
Let us take up again the course of events. In 1913, in accordance with the newly-established constitution, a parliamentary election took place.
The ‘Sworn Confederacy’, the Popular Front that had been founded with the sole aim of having the Manchus removed, had no further reason for existence after their abdication, so it broke up into several parties, the most important of which were the Gonghedang or ‘Republican Party’, which was the party of the moderates, royalists who had accepted the republic and soldiers, and the party of Sun Yat-sen, to which he again gave, slightly modified, the name of the first party that he had founded, the Guomindang (with min in the place of ming), or ‘National Peoples Party’.
How were the elections of 1913 held? We do not know much, but it is certain that it was the Guomindang that emerged from them with a small overall majority.
This was hardly to the liking of Yuan and his generals. So after ensuring his own re-election as president by the new assembly by means of corruption and violence (by during the count surrounding the parliament building with a cordon of troops with orders not to allow any of the deputies out until he had been elected), Yuan Shikai took the pretext of certain disturbances that had arisen in some of the southern provinces to dissolve the Guomindang and ‘purge’ parliament. All the MPs and senators of the Guomindang, to the number of 400, were declared deprived of their credentials; and shortly afterwards, in December 1913, the parliament, unable even to muster the quorum necessary for its deliberations, was purely and simply dissolved.
From this moment on, Yuan governed alone, along with just such councils nominated by himself as were required to provide a pseudo-parliamentary façade. This regime lasted until his death, that is, two-and-a-half years, but his death would only have come about later on if he had not made the same mistake as Caesar and Cromwell.
Absolute power was not enough for him; he also wanted the title. Caesar had himself offered the crown, and Cromwell the title of king; [25] Yuan Shikai had himself invited to be emperor, the first emperor of a new dynasty, a Chinese dynasty this time, and no longer a barbarian one. He went even further along that road than his two illustrious predecessors, both of whom had turned down the proposal at the last minute; he announced in fact that ‘obedient to the will of the people’ the monarchy would be re-established, and that he would be emperor starting from 1 January 1916.
But if men readily admit that the ancient forms of power, even those they have overthrown, may be re-established, they do not allow it under the old labels. Augustus in Rome certainly enjoyed powers greatly superior to those of the ancient kings, but as he only exercised these powers wearing the labels of consul, tribune, etc., the Romans continued to consider themselves as a republic; [26] in the same way Stalin was a more absolute despot than was any Romanov, but because he did not assume the title of Tsar and maintained the label of Soviet power, the Russian people and the greater part of the European proletariat pretended not to see that Tsarism had been re-established. Caesar, Cromwell and Yuan, on the other hand, wanted to deck themselves out in the old titles, such titles as corresponded to their real position, which resulted in immediate death for one of them, and such a loss of prestige for the other two that only an early death saved them from downfall.
The re-establishment of the empire on behalf of Yuan Shikai led to an uprising throughout most of the southern provinces, and to such a degree of hostility almost everywhere that on 23 February 1916, after less than two months of his reign, the new emperor resumed his simple title as president of the republic, and died in mysterious circumstances two months later in June 1916; it was said that he had committed suicide.
Yuan’s death led to the disappearance of all trace of a central power. The military chiefs of the provinces, the ‘dujun’ as they were called, each exercised sovereign power over his own state without reference to Beijing, and what was more serious, fighting amongst themselves, for there were always two or three of them, more ambitious than the others, who fought to extend their states, and sometimes one or other of them thought it advantageous to enter Beijing in order to have nominated there a pseudo-president of a republic that continued not to exist. [27] For a whole decade, all the world’s newspapers were full of the conflicts that took place between Zhang Zuolin, the dujun of Manchuria, [28] Feng Yuxiang the ‘Christian General’, [29] Wu Peifu, [30] who dominated Beijing, etc. Military anarchy held full sway. There was no ideal, and therefore no order.
Canton Rekindles the Flame
It was the Guomindang, which came back to life after its voluntary self-effacement in 1912 and the hard blow dealt it by Yuan Shikai in the following year, that put an end to this anarchy.
In August 1917, a year after Yuan’s death, the members of the parliament that had been dissolved in 1913, or at any rate those of them who had been ‘purged’ on account of their links with the Guomindang, reassembled in Canton, the old stronghold of the revolutionary movement, and there justifiably declared themselves the only legal power.
In fact, they could not for the time being attempt to establish their authority over the whole of China, but they could make an effort to do so over the provinces of the south. That is why they elected a ‘Directory’ with Sun Yat-sen at its head, and several ministers dependent on him, all these together forming the ‘Government of the Provinces of South-Eastern China’.
This government was to have a very troubled life, because there were not only dujun in the north, they were in the south as well. In the other provinces apart from Canton, the power of the Directory was for the greater part of the time more theoretical than real; and even in Canton the intervention of the neighbouring dujuns, or of even the Cantonese generals themselves, on two occasions (1919 and 1922) forced the Directory to cease to exist, with Sun Yat-sen fleeing to take refuge with the British in Hong Kong. [31] However, the regime always rose again from the ashes, for it represented the only real republican organisation, and it alone could lay claim to those principles and exercise its legitimacy.
Not only was it reborn, but each time it was reborn it appeared with increased strength and the ability to assert itself more widely. In 1921, its parliament transformed itself into a national assembly for the whole of China, and Sun Yat-sen assumed the title of President of the Republic; in 1922, after their second return, Sun and his collaborators made active preparations for the attainment of their great objective: the reconquest of the whole of China from the dujun.
A great movement, patriotic and social at the same time, of which Malraux has traced a vivid and impressive picture in his Les Conquérants, [32] was launched to support the strike of the Chinese dockers of Hong Kong against their British bosses by a boycott of all that came from Hong Kong. This action, which was crowned with success, created an atmosphere of patriotic unity, as well as a taste for the struggle and the euphoria of victory that were necessary to rally around the government and the Guomindang all those whom they were going to need for the adventurous campaign that they were planning, and to inspire them with the necessary enthusiasm.
Simultaneously, a military academy [33] was created for the purpose of training cadres for a truly modern army, capable of victoriously opposing those mercenary bands which any adventurer disposing of sufficient resources could raise almost anywhere in China, and which made up the ‘armies’ of the dujun.
The Triumphal March
On 12 March 1925, Sun Yat-sen died. But the regime of Canton was by now sufficiently consolidated and the military preparations were so far advanced that the Guomindang could go ahead without its leader.
In 1926, the signal for the great march northward was given, and its first objective, as in 1911, was the heart of China: the agglomeration of the three cities of Wuchang, Hankou and Hanyang. The three cities were captured on 8 September. From then onwards, the success of the campaign was a foregone conclusion, and even though it only proceeded slowly, it was no more than a formality. The troops of the Guomindang, commanded by Chiang Kai-shek, the former Director of the Canton Military Academy, [34] descended the Blue River, taking Nanjing on 22 March 1927, and entering Shanghai a few days later. The following year was the turn of the Yellow River: in May 1928, Shandong was occupied; and on 2 June, Beijing was evacuated by the most powerful of the dujun, the warlord of Manchuria, Zhang Zuolin, who two days later was blown up with the train taking him back to Manchuria.
The unity of China was thus restored, and it was restored under the form of a republic. It was restored by the same organisation, albeit under a different name, which had launched the revolution of 15 years earlier, and which, having become little more than a corpse, [35] had reappeared with total success. If Sun’s resignation in 1912 was due to his conviction that China was not yet mature enough for a republic, and that it was first of all necessary to go through the experience of a ‘transitional’ regime, he was not mistaken. Fifteen years of a ‘transitional’ regime had led China to regard the Guomindang as the only possible power.
In 1928, it could be said that the Chinese state was rebuilt. Its capital was the old Chinese city of Nanjing, and no longer Beijing, the creation of the barbarians, the city of the Khitan, the Mongols and the Manchus!
It was, to tell the truth, a state that was not a republic in the sense in which we understand the word, because no election had ever taken place there. It was a type of state that does not fit in with the categories of our traditional Western institutions. Aristotle did not define it. [36] It was not a democracy, nor an aristocracy, nor a dictatorship. It was the state of a party, a party that recruited to itself by cooption and derived its power from itself alone, whilst nonetheless at the same time claiming to be the nation’s real representative, and therefore possessing the right to govern without the need of any delegation. It was consequently a form of state identical with that installed in Russia by the Bolsheviks.
It was also a state in which many of the governors, especially those in the distant provinces like Yunnan, Sichuan and Guangxi, in fact enjoyed a great measure of independence, but at least they did not make war amongst themselves, and did not wage it against the central power either.
It was at any rate a state, a Chinese state intent on being a ‘modern’ state.
By the fact that the Chinese state was now rebuilt, the occupation of Beijing by the troops of the Guomindang thus completed the revolution begun in 1911, which in contrast with what was to follow, we can call the Chinese bourgeois revolution.
But in fact even before this revolution had ended, another was on its way.
Notes
1. Remarks made by Dr George Yeh of the Chinese Ministry of Information to Robert Payne, Chunking Diary, London, 1945, p9.
2. Karl Marx, ‘The Future Result of the British Rule in India’, 22 July 1853, New York Daily Tribune, 8 August 1853. It is possible that, like many of the articles in the New York Daily Tribune signed by Marx, this article had not been written by Marx, but by Engels. [Author’s note] We have simply translated directly from the French here, as the English of the Moscow version is quite execrable. See K Marx and F Engels, The First Indian War of Independence, 1857-1859, Moscow, 1975, p32. [Editor’s note]
3. Mohandas Karamchand ‘Mahatma’ Gandhi (1869-1948) not only inspired the Indian Congress movement, but led a struggle against the caste system on behalf of the Untouchables.
4. The idea to found the All-India National Congress in 1885 came from a British civil servant. Until the First World War, it only made progress among the upper and middle classes.
5. The conversation took place on 20 November 1943: Robert Payne, Chunking Diary, London, 1945, pp464-5. [Author’s note]
6. Aleksandr I Herzen (Yakovlev, 1812-1870) inspired a generation of revolutionaries in Russia to rise against Tsar Alexander II (1855-81) by disseminating his magazine Kolokol (The Bell) with its cry ‘To the People!’.
7. Kang Youwei (1858-1927) came from Guangdong. After addressing repeated memorials calling for reform to the court, he was finally appointed a counsellor by the Emperor Guang Xu in June 1898.
8. The French monarchy was faced with a mounting financial crisis at the end of the American War of Independence. In 1774, Louis XVI appointed the famous political economist Anne Robert Jacques Turgot (1727-1781) as Controller-General of Finance. He brought in free trade in corn, and abolished statute labour. Fearing that his reforms were undermining the whole political system, Louis XVI dismissed him in 1776.
9. The National Consultative Assembly was convened in Beijing in 1910 by the Imperial regent, Zai Feng (1908-1912). Louzon is comparing it here with the Assembly of Notables convened in Paris in February-May 1787 by Louis XVI.
10. For example, the regent finally agreed to accept the institution of a government responsible to the senate, but insisted that this government must be composed of members of the imperial family, who in this capacity would only be responsible to the emperor! [Author’s note]
11. ‘Citizen Capet’ was the legal name of King Louis XVI (1779-1792) once he had lost his powers and title as a result of the French Revolution.
12. Sun Yat-sen (1866-1925), the founder of Chinese nationalism, was the son of a Guangdong peasant sent as a youth to Honolulu, who trained as a doctor in Hong Kong, and devoted his life to organising rebellion against the Manchus.
13. A ‘Mandate of the Nation’ as opposed to the Mandate of Heaven. [Author’s note] The ‘Mandate of Heaven’ was the supposed authority upon which the Chinese emperors based their power. When a dynasty had begun to fall, it was considered that Heaven had withdrawn its mandate. [Editor’s note]
14. Huang Xing (1874-1916), Sun Yat-sen’s lieutenant, set up the Hua Xing Hui (Society for the Revival of the Chinese Nation) in Changsha in 1904. The raid he led in October 1911 sparked off the famous ‘Double Tenth’ Revolution.
15. Only when two regiments of mutinous soldiers turned up with their cannon were the Parisian insurgents able to storm the Bastille on 14 July 1789.
16. King Leopold III of Belgium (1934-1951) had surrendered to the Germans rather than join his exiled government in London, and spent the war years in Switzerland. When he returned to Brussels, an insurrection broke out in Liège and spread throughout the industrial districts of Flanders and Wallonia. After the shooting of three of the strikers at Grâce-Berleur, the Liège Central Strike Committee launched an appeal to arm the people, and a great march on the capital began, joined by workers from the Borinage, Antwerp and Ghent. When it became obvious that the monarchy could not rely on the support of its armed forces, the king stepped down on 11 August 1950, and was replaced by his son Baudouin a year later.
17. ‘On the spot’ (Latin).
18. Yuan Shikai (1859-1916) was commander of the small modernised section of the Manchu army stationed around Beijing. His dictatorship was so discredited by its acceptance of the Japanese ‘Twenty-One Demands’ in January 1915 that other warlords rebelled against him. He died of urenia, brought on by nervous prostration, not suicide as implied by Louzon.
19. Lucius Cornelius Sulla (138-78BC) was appointed dictator of Rome under the Lex Valeria after the Social War in 82BC. After reorganising the state and enacting new legislation, he resigned his office two years later.
20. It recalls the conduct of Cárdenas, the greatest democratic president Mexico ever had: when he left the presidency, he asked to be appointed Commissar General of Irrigation, because irrigation seemed to him to be Mexico’s main problem, and he did not, so it seems, cease doing his utmost in this capacity. [Author’s note] Lazáro Cárdenas del Rio (1895-1970) was a reforming president of Mexico who finally retired from politics in 1945 in order to promote cooperative agriculture, and ran the electricity scheme in the state of Guerrero from 1961 onwards. [Editor’s note]
21. Albert Maybon, La République chinoise, Paris, 1914, pp172-3. [Author’s note] The conversation to which Maybon refers was with a representative of the League of Sworn Brothers in Hong Kong. [Editor’s note]
22. The reference here is to Stalin’s forced industrialisation of the USSR by means of the Five-Year Plans from 1928 onwards.
23. Gaius Julius Caesar (100-44BC) restored order to Rome by assuming the office of Dictator after his defeat of Pompey.
24. By ‘toga’, Louzon means the legitimate civil power. Although ancient Rome was a warlike imperialist state, it was governed by the senate, whose members wore the toga as their badge of office.
25. Caesar was assassinated by republican senators after he had been offered the crown in 44BC. Oliver Cromwell (1599-1658) became Lord Protector in 1653 after the execution of Charles I, and twice refused the crown, though he obtained the title of ‘His Highness’ with the right to nominate his successor in 1656.
26. Octavianus Caesar (63BC-14AD) assumed the title of Augustus in 27BC after the defeat of Antony and Cleopatra at the Battle of Actium. From 23BC, he consolidated his rule as emperor by combining a number of offices and powers, so as not to appear to violate the republican constitution of Rome.
27. One of these militarists, Zhang Xun, even allowed himself the luxury of restoring the former Manchu emperor to his throne. But an alliance of the other dujun prevented this restoration from lasting for more than 13 days in July 1917. [Author’s note] Zhang Xun, the military governor of Anhui, restored Pu Yi to his throne on 1 July, but he was driven out 12 days later by another Anhui warlord, Duan Qirui. [Editor’s note]
28. Zhang Zuolin (1873-1928), the ‘Old Marshal’, was the warlord of Manchuria and northern China.
29. Feng Yuxiang (1882-1948) was a northern Chinese warlord. He is famous for baptising his soldiers with a hosepipe.
30. Wu Peifu (1874-1939) was warlord over the area of Henan, Hubei and Hunan in central China, as well as being a protégé of the British.
31. Sun Yat-sen was first forced to resign by the local warlords in 1919. After his return to power, General Chen Jiongming (1887-1933), the supposed republican governor of Guangdong, attempted to arrest him again in February 1922, and he only saved his life by a rapid flight.
32. Les Conquérants by André Malraux (1901-1976) was a vivid novel about the Chinese revolution published in 1928. See LD Trotsky, ‘The Strangled Revolution’, 9 February 1931, Leon Trotsky on China, New York, 1976, pp501-10.
33. The Huangpu Military Academy was opened in 1924 to train the officers of the Guomindang army for the march north to defeat the warlords. Its first principal was Chiang Kai-shek.
34. Chiang Kai-shek (1887-1975) was a son-in-law of Sun Yat-sen, and a wealthy stockbroker. He was President of China from 1927 to 1949, when he was overthrown on the mainland by Mao Zedong. After that, he continued to be President of the Nationalist Chinese regime on Taiwan.
35. Bourgeois historians are often laughably blind. This, for example, is what was written by one Valentin in a book entitled the Avènement d'une république [The Coming of a Republic] which appeared in 1926, and was therefore written shortly before the start of the march of the Cantonese towards the North: ‘The Guomindang still exists, but it seems to have had its day and shown its impotence... From the national party that it had been, it is more and more tending to becoming a provincial party... It is thanks to the regiments from Yunnan that Doctor Sun can still look like a leader, can put his enemies on the wrong track, and again dream of a power that had been unceasingly declining... The population is tired of this endless struggle for more than three years against the North, with much beating of drums, which has all too well demonstrated the lack of military value of the present Cantonese army and the incapacity of Doctor Sun to organise the slightest expeditionary force.’ [Author’s note] Ferdinand Valentin, L'avènement d'une république, Paris, 1926, pp285-6. [Editor’s note]
36. On Aristotle, see note 10, Part I, Chapter II. The reference is probably to his Politics, or perhaps the Aqhnaiwn Politeia [Athenaion Politeia].
 


Table of Contents




 Three Thousand Years of History, Fifty Years of Revolution by Robert Louzon 1998


China: 3000 Years of History, 50 Years of Revolution. Robert Louzon 1998
Chapter VI: The Mongols (1276-1368) and the Ming (1368-1644)
In this chapter, we are dealing with two successive dynasties, one barbarian and one Chinese. We are not only doing this because the first was of fairly short duration, but mainly because the monetary, and consequently the economic, policy of the second was but a continuation, or more exactly, a resumption, of the first.
Thus therefore, under the Mongol Dynasty that took power with Kublai Khan and assumed the Chinese patronymic of Yuan, Mongolia and China were again united in the bosom of the same empire under the same sovereign, just as in Han and Tang times, but now the sovereign was no longer civilised, he was a barbarian; no longer a Chinaman, but a Mongol. The Chinese empire was reconstituted, but it was no longer Chinese; the nomads usurped the place of the settled people, and the shepherds that of the peasants, in order to achieve the apparent synthesis of blending into the same political unity the two mutually antagonistic modes of production; the barbarian had replaced the civilised man in the direction of a political system that permitted an almost peaceful state of coexistence of the one with the other.
But the synthesis was a false synthesis, for both nomads and settled people as such remained counterposed, and their antagonism continued. Irrigators and horsemen were simply roped together by the bonds of the same state, that bridled their antagonism but did not suppress it; they were subjected to a common outside constraint  –  that of the state  –  that prevented their differences manifesting themselves under their usual forms, but it could not stop them appearing in another form. So instead of a conflict on the frontiers, there was a conflict within; instead of war against a neighbour, it was rebellion against ‘alien domination'; instead of conquest, it became a struggle for ‘national independence’.
The capital of the new empire was Beijing. From being the capital of northern China over a period of six centuries, apart from one brief interruption, Beijing was to become the capital of all China. As distinct from the old capitals  –  Chang'an, Luoyang and Kaifeng  –  Beijing had the advantage of being closer to the sea, a position made necessary by the part now played by maritime commerce in China’s economic activity. It had the further advantage over the Byzantine cities of the south  –  Nanjing and Hangzhou  –  of being nearer the regions of Mongolia, the place of origin and base of support of the new masters.
The Mongols’ Domestic Policy: Control and Inflation
During the 60 years that passed between Genghis Khan’s capture of Beijing and Kublai Khan’s coronation, the conquerors, like their predecessors, were progressively sinicised; and the inhabitants of the fields irrigated by the Yellow and Blue Rivers were not to be governed like the tribes of the Gobi or the Tarim. The Mongolian administration of China was therefore Chinese.
It was Chinese in terms of its personnel. The first ruler, Genghis Khan, chose as advisor a Chinese, or rather a former Khitan who had become completely sinicised, Yelü Chucai, [1] who continued his functions under Ogodai, and who was the real ruler of China during the crucial years when it may well have been asked whether China would remain China at all, or whether it would be transformed into a simple pasture land for Mongol herds, a transformation analogous to that to which certain Americans would like to have reduced Germany after the last war. [2]
The Mongolian administration was also Chinese in its social policy, which remained the same as that inaugurated by the Song. The controlled economy was maintained. It was maintained under the double form of price fixing and regularising supply and demand, the state absorbing all surplus products.
However, the Yuan Dynasty added something new to the policy of the Song; this was the devaluation of money. The banknote, which had already existed under the Song  –  that is, 600 years before it ever appeared in Europe  –  was compulsory currency from the first years of Kublai’s reign, at the time when he only occupied northern China. As happens with all compulsory currencies, issues of notes followed each other more and more frequently without the production of corresponding commodities, in such a way that the balance between the amount of money issued and the commodities available could only be established by a continual rise in prices. This depreciation in the value of money was the rule throughout the entire duration of the Mongol Dynasty.
In the depreciation of money, there is always a motive of an economic type and a motive of a social type, which, moreover, are always linked together to a greater or lesser extent.
In the circumstances with which we are dealing, the economic motive was obvious. It arose from 50 years of war, a war that had above all been a war of sieges, the form of warfare in which material destruction is greatest. In order to repair the ruins, it was therefore a matter of absolute necessity to draw on the newly-acquired wealth, and it is well known that inflation is the most convenient and efficacious way of doing this. Inflation, that is to say, the issue of unsecured banknotes, and the rise in prices that results from it, were imposed on a ravaged China by the war with the Mongols, just as they were imposed upon the France of 1918 and of 1945 after the country had been ravaged by its wars with Germany. [3]
The social motive for the same inflation was what we find just as often anywhere else in the history of monetary depreciation, notably in the numerous devaluations of the French livre throughout the Middle Ages and under the Ancien Régime: the need to lessen the burden on the tenant farmer.
When the Mongols entered China, they did what conquerors usually do, what the Hellenes did in Greece in the second millennium before our era, or the English in Ireland during the seventeenth century of the Christian era: they carried out primitive accumulation by reducing the native peasant to the condition of a serf. They appropriated vast estates whose cultivators, the Chinese peasants, from then on had to pay their rent to a Mongol feudal lord. This at least was what happened in the China of the south; in the China of the north the same process had already been accomplished by the Khitan and the Nüzhen, so that the Mongol in turn had nothing to do except merely replace the Nüzhen landlord.
Now whether it was because they did not want to see a rich and therefore powerful aristocracy beside them in rivalry, or whether they merely thought that the prevailing mode of tenure was not conducive to public tranquillity and economic development, Kublai and his successors sought, if not to ruin, at least to impoverish the landlord class. Proof of this lies in the fact that in certain provinces Kublai imposed a direct reduction in the payment of rents. But the depreciation of money is a far more convenient and effective means of achieving the same result without any sudden shock, and without seeming to interfere. This was the second motive for the inflation.
The coexistence of what we see at this time of inflation and a controlled economy deserves special attention. A controlled economy means fixing prices, whilst inflation means raising prices. They are thus two systems in apparent contradiction. In reality, however, they complement each other, each being the antidote of the other.
In practice, the true aim of a controlled economy is to assure the permanence of a stable economy by maintaining every branch of production and every producer in their respective situations. Now inflation, in other words a raising of prices in general, does not alter either the relations between the producers or between the branches of production, nor does it alter the relations between the producers and the non-producers, between ‘industrialists’ and ‘rentiers’ (to use Pareto’s terminology). [4] Consequently, in no way does it prevent a controlled economy from attaining its aim. On the other hand, it lessens the harmfulness of a controlled economy, because the great vice of one is that by maintaining each producer in his place, by suppressing the incentive of competition, it renders the economy stagnant. Now inflation, which continually increases the profits of the producers with the spoil of the rentiers, on the other hand stimulates the activity of the producers, and thus tends to neutralise the effects of slackening due to the control of the economy.
And so it turned out that in the long run, the Mongol period was for China, as all periods of inflation usually are, a period of great activity. We have direct evidence of this in the writings of Marco Polo, who journeyed to and dwelt in China for 20 years during the time of Kublai. This Venetian from the great epoch of Venice was truly astounded, and almost dumbfounded by the economic activity he witnessed, as well as the fact that at a time when only charcoal was known in Italy, Shanxi’s coal was used throughout the whole of northern China as well as in the regions of the Blue River, ‘the river on which sail more ships filled with rich merchandise than are to be found on all the rivers and all the seas of Christendom’. [5]
But prosperity is a very dangerous thing. As soon as it ceases, the violence of the reaction is in proportion to the length of time the period of prosperity has lasted. Inflation cannot go on for ever. By dint of lowering its value, money finally reaches zero, or something close to zero, and at that moment it ceases to fulfil its function as money. New money has then to be created.
This is what happened to the Mongol money during the early years of the fourteenth century. In 1309, it became necessary to do away with the old money and bring in a ‘new franc’. But with the inflation continuing, this second money ended up losing all its value in turn, and it became necessary to go on indefinitely creating new moneys. It eventually became necessary to get rid of paper money, and on this occasion to revert to metal. When ‘gold money’ was thus re-established, inflation necessarily ceased, and at once prosperity also ceased.
The ‘Nomads’ of the Sea
From the point of view of external relations, what most of all marked Yuan policy was that for the first time the focus of China’s foreign policy turned towards the sea. Even more than the shifting of the capitals to the east, this policy showed the importance which this ancient agricultural country attached to maritime commerce.
This policy manifested itself, on the one hand, by a failed expedition against Java at the end of the thirteenth century, [6] and, on the other, by something even more important  –  the two attempted expeditions against Japan in 1274 and 1281, both of which ended in disaster. [7]
The Japanese problem that confronted China was not of a very different nature from the Mongolian problem that had confronted it for thousands of years.
In a nutshell, islanders are essentially sailors; they are the nomads of the sea; the ocean is their domain, just as the steppe is that of the shepherds and horsemen. When the landsman sets out to transport his riches over the sea, it is like when the sedentary man seeks to cultivate the approaches to the steppe; a nomad reaction follows. In the case of the nomad, it manifests itself in ‘plundering raids’, and in that of the islander in ‘acts of piracy’.
The agricultural China of Chang'an during the Han and Tang eras finally protected itself against the raids of the Mongol plunderers by attacking and invading the steppe and annexing it. The commercial China of Beijing during the Mongol era sought to protect itself against the operations of the Japanese pirates in similar fashion by attacking and endeavouring to conquer the islands. But it is much more difficult for a land power to adapt itself to warfare on the sea than for a peasant state to adapt itself for warfare against nomads. France has always been beaten on the sea by England, whilst finding it quite easy, on the other hand, to build up an ‘Arab’ empire. Thus all China’s attempts against Japan were as futile as those of France against England. These attempts were never pressed home, and so the Chinese empire was never to embrace the Nippon archipelago. [8]
The End of the Mongols
The ‘stabilisation crisis’ that China experienced as a consequence of the return to metal coinage was no doubt the underlying cause of the insurrection that broke out in 1352 that was to end Mongol domination. [9] The development of this insurrection differs in two respects from those that had preceded it.
On the one hand, instead of Shandong being its starting point, it began and proceeded almost exclusively south of the Blue River, a fact that affords decisive proof that it was the China of the south that formed the heart of China, for there is no surer measure of the dynamic force of a country or region than its capacity for revolution. On the other hand, if this insurrection, like the previous ones, was closely bound up with a religious movement, that movement was no longer of Daoist origin, but was Buddhist, which demonstrates the importance now attached to this imported religion in the land of Confucius.
Like the other Mongolian peoples who had preceded them, the Mongols of China were Buddhist; and just as in the era of the Tuoba, they made Buddhism into the state religion. It is therefore a curious paradox to see a Buddhist sect becoming the instrument of the destruction of the Mongol dynasty, and moreover, ending up leading a Confucian reaction against Buddhism, which was to become extremely violent and was to last for several centuries. [10]
Like Protestantism, to which it may be compared in a number of ways, Buddhism has always been divided into numerous sects. One of these that existed at this time, the White Lotus, was millenarian; it announced the early advent of a Golden Age. Nothing serves to give greater courage to the oppressed classes than the belief that there is harmony between the revolution to which they aspire and the divine will. The White Lotus thus became the agent of a revolution caused by the arrest of inflation. The movement it launched soon snowballed. Armed bands of various origins and commanded by upstart leaders organised themselves nearly everywhere, often fighting amongst themselves whilst fighting the central power at the same time. In 1356, the leader of one of these bands, a former Buddhist monk named Zhu Yuanzhang, succeeded in making himself master of almost the entire basin of the Blue River. There he made Nanjing his capital, and 10 or so years later, in 1368, he ventured into the basin of the Yellow River. His success there was immediate: he captured Beijing, overthrew the last of the Mongols, and proclaimed himself emperor in his stead. He was the first Ming emperor. [11]
An Empire Again
Like the Han and the Tang dynasties, the new Ming Dynasty, which was to reign for nearly three centuries over the whole of China, thus began its history with the accession of a ‘soldier of fortune’. But there was this difference: this time the soldier of fortune was not a Chinaman of the north, but of the south. Zhu Yuanzhang was the son of a farmer of Anhui, the great province that the Blue River crosses a little before it flows into the sea. Thus it was that for the first time the Blue River mounted the throne in place of the Yellow River. The shifting of China’s centre of gravity was now complete. As though to emphasise this fact, the new sovereign set up his capital at Nanjing. It was also the first time that Nanjing had become the capital of the whole of China, and the first time that the capital of a united China had been a city of the Blue River, and not of the Yellow River, or even further up in the north. This state of affairs was not, however, to endure for long. Another consideration, always the same problem of defence against the barbarians, soon made it necessary to move the capital back nearer the north.
From the external point of view, Ming China was a natural continuation of Song China. The Song marked the start of China’s withdrawal; this withdrawal was to continue under the Ming.
There can be no doubt that, just like the Song in their early days, the Ming in their early days tried out an imperial policy. When the third Ming, Yong Le, transferred his capital from Nanjing to Beijing in 1409, it was symbolic of his whole programme, meaning that he intended to keep a close watch on the nomads of the north, and if need be, to invade their territory. [12]
Yong Le did in fact intervene directly in Mongolia by lending the aid of his armies to the tribes in revolt against the successors of Genghis Khan; he did this in the hope of establishing his own suzerainty over them. And everywhere else, this particular emperor’s foreign policy was active and aggressive. In the south he annexed Tonkin, and he dispatched his warships even to such faraway places as the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea. [13]
But times had changed, and the Chinese were no longer able to carry out a consistent policy of conquest. Yong Le only symbolised inert ambition. Less than 30 years after his death, those same Mongol tribes whom he had aided penetrated China in force and inflicted a decisive defeat upon the imperial army, and they even for a time held the emperor himself a prisoner. [14] The progress of events in Tonkin was even swifter; four years after Yong Le’s death, the Annamites in revolt had reconquered Hanoi and so recovered their independence. [15]
So it came about that the Ming never looked as though they wanted to re-establish an empire. On the other hand, the national territory could be safeguarded, notably against the enemy in the east, Japan, which we have already seen coming to the fore under the preceding dynasty, for Kublai’s attack on Japan was to receive its reply three centuries later. During the whole of this time, the Japanese, who had just become briefly united into one centralised state, did not cease scouring the coasts and the establishments of the Blue River and the Canton River, and in the final year of the sixteenth century invaded Korea, from where they threatened China, but they were not able to issue forth from Korea, and they finally had to evacuate it. [16]
The Chinese merchant and the Japanese seaman thus failed equally in their respective attempts to subjugate each other. For three centuries, they had to remain in their established positions and wait for our time for one of them to try his chances against the other once more.
Decay of Thought
If, from a political point of view, the Ming appeared to show progress over the Song, because in contrast with them they ruled uninterruptedly over both the Blue and the Yellow Rivers, their period nevertheless registered a vast retrogression in Chinese civilisation.
Obviously, it was still an age of luxury: it was Yong Le who was to build in Beijing the famous ‘imperial city’, whose palaces and gardens spread out over a considerable distance. [17] But art, a relaxation activity, is not itself civilisation, even if it is a sort of condensation of it, and as a result can provide a fair index of it, as this time presents obvious signs of pronounced decadence. Thus in porcelain, we find an abundance of glittering colours rather than a purity and delicacy of material. Everywhere inspiration was in short supply; to use the expression of an English critic, it lacked the ‘inner fire’ that had inspired the creativity of earlier periods.
But it was in the sphere of philosophy that the decline was most perceptible. The Ming era is marked by a violent reaction against Buddhism, because in spite of its original religion, the Ming dynasty was nonetheless a ‘national’ dynasty, and by that token, in the field of thought as in everything else, it had to represent pure sinicism as against the hybrid sinicism of the Mongols  –  in other words, Confucianism as against Buddhism. The Confucian literati were the great masters during the whole of this period, but they propagated a very particular kind of Confucianism, permeated by religiosity  –  mysticism, in other words.
The outstanding philosopher of the dynasty was Wang Yangming, who lived at the beginning of the seventeenth century. [18] He marked a reaction against reason. He appealed to intuition to grasp what could not be understood, and he regarded success as proof of the truth, not logical demonstration.
Thus we find in Wang Yangming a relationship with which we are perfectly familiar, because it marked Western philosophy at the beginning of the twentieth century  –  that between Bergson’s mysticism and William James’ pragmatism. [19]
If we require proof of the correctness of the inspiration that we have, then we cannot have recourse to reason, we must demand success instead. Nothing more surely reveals the state of decadence of a people than when it gives birth to and finds credence in such a philosophy. When appeal is made to instinct rather than to reason, when the attempt is made to uncover the laws of nature by introspection rather than by observation, when ‘intuition’ is substituted for ‘clear and distinct ideas’, then intelligence declines, and when intelligence declines, everything else declines.
Systems of thought based on mysticism possess a much greater influence than that possessed by systems of thought based on rationalism. Compare the pan-Asiatic expansion of Buddhism with that of Confucianism closely localised inside China; compare the spread of Christianity with that of Greek philosophy. By a curious contradiction, the faculty of reason  –  man’s sole universal tool  –  has always remained very much isolated and confined to certain peoples and to certain eras, and even with these peoples and amongst these peoples and in these eras it has always been restricted to a very small number of persons.
There was therefore nothing astonishing in the fact that the teaching of Wang Yangming emigrated on a wide scale. It secured a notable grip on Japan, where blended with Buddhism it was, according to the British historian Cranmer-Byng, the main cause of the rebirth of the Samurai spirit, the spirit of total sacrifice which, despising anything other than action, obliged each to affirm his faith by signing his own death sentence, the spirit of hara-kiri which so powerfully animated the Zen officers and the pilots of the suicide aircraft operating in the last war. [20]
Melting Money and Latifundia
If the foreign policy of the Ming and the state of Chinese civilisation in their time were reminiscent of the Song, their fiscal policy, on the other hand, was a continuation of that of the Mongols. Since the halt in the depreciation of money had led to the downfall of their predecessors, the Ming made it their first concern to return to it, and to make it more systematic.
The system they brought in was similar to that advocated during 1920-40 in certain parts of central Europe under the name of a ‘free economy’, which irreverent Frenchmen baptised with the name of ‘melting money’. It consisted of the following: banknotes had no further circulation two years after they were issued; they could then be returned to the state, which then exchanged them for others, but with a total value of two per cent less than the notes that had been returned. Thus, if prices remained stable, there was an automatic yearly reduction of one per cent on acquired wealth, or of debts incurred as a result of previous activity over present activity. This moderate reduction, however, proved insufficient, and it had to be accompanied by a still greater reduction  –  this, too, being operated by an old ‘anarchic’ method  –  the increase in prices.
This new method of inflation lasted for a good century. Like the previous one, it came to an end by having recourse to making payments in metal money. This was illegal, but the practice became more and more frequent.
On the other hand, the social policy of the Ming differed profoundly from that of almost all their predecessors, in that they did not make any effort to curb the concentration of property. Quite the contrary! The emperors of the Ming Dynasty not only built up enormous tax-free estates for the members of the royal family, but furthermore they did not make any effort to prevent the formation of great wealth by the highly placed government functionaries, whose estates were likewise exempt from taxation, and whose owners were made judges over their own tenant-farmers. China was thus becoming a feudal regime of great autonomous domains independent of the state.
Now this, as we know, is the great sign warning of the end of states. It was this sort of dismemberment of the state, enabling functionaries to transform themselves into feudal lords, which also accounted for the end of the ancient Egyptian empire, as well as of the Roman empire and the empire of Charlemagne. [21]
The Barbarians Intervene
But this process of disintegration was stopped by none other than the barbarians, who thus came to save the Chinese state in spite of itself. The barbarians, who already on two occasions, by the intervention of the Tuoba in the sixth century and of the Mongols in the thirteenth, had recreated the unity of China, were now in the seventeenth century to arrest its feudalisation through the intervention of the Manchus, who restored the system of the small-scale ownership of land.
By the beginning of the seventeenth century, because the consequences of the latifundia system had become unbearable, armed bands of expropriated peasants, created by destitution, sprang up everywhere. From 1620, Sichuan and Guizhou in the west and south-west, and Shandong in the north-east were in full revolt. Ten years later, the former two provinces drove out their governors, whilst the leader of the rebels in Shandong established his power over the whole of the eastern part of Jilin. Old China, that part comprising the north-eastern provinces of Shanxi and Henan, fell into the hands of the rebels under the leadership of one Li Zicheng, who was soon strong enough to march on Beijing, which he captured in 1644. Incapable of putting up any kind of resistance, the Ming emperor committed suicide, and his position was left vacant. [22]
But there were still ‘loyalists’. Just as under the Tang, and as in all eras and in all countries, as in France 150 years ago, the party of the fallen sovereign did not hesitate to appeal to the ‘foreigner’ in an effort to recover its privileges. Now it was just at this time that a Tungus tribe, the Manchus, were in full flower. Having descended from the forests of northern Manchuria, during the preceding 20 years the Manchus had possessed themselves of the vast plains of southern Manchuria, which beyond the Gulf of Jilin form an actual continuation of the Great Plain of China, from both the geological and the geographical point of view. Learning of the death of his emperor, the Chinese general who had the task of resisting the Manchus immediately ceased hostilities and pleaded with the barbarians to unite with him in order to drive the ‘usurper’ from Beijing. [23] This was no sooner said than done, but once in possession of the city the Manchus refused to leave, and forthwith proclaimed their own khan emperor in 1644. He was to be the first sovereign of the Manchu Dynasty, called Qing, which was to be China’s last. [24]
Thus, for the third time, the barbarians came to rule over the whole of China. On the first occasion, they were barbarians who were almost completely sinicised (the Tuoba); on the second, they were shepherds who had just emerged from their steppes (the Mongols); this time, they were hunters who had come out of their forests. Their power was to last considerably longer than that of their barbarian predecessors, the Sui and the Yuan, and for nearly as long as the Ming, almost three centuries, right up to 1912.
Notes
1. Yelü Chucai (1190-1244), a sinicised Khitan, administered northern China under Genghis Khan and Ogodai.
2. In neither case was this fear imaginary: to begin with the Mongols had forbidden land cultivation in the area of Beijing in order to allow grass to grow to supply their horses. [Author’s note] The reference here is to the plan advocated by US Treasury Secretary Henry Morgenthau, that the heavy industry of the Ruhr should be completely dismantled at the end of the Second World War. [Editor’s note]
3. The franc suffered massive depreciation in the aftermath of the First World War. When it was finally stabilised by Poincaré in 1926, it was worth less than a fifth of its pre-war value. After the Second World War, the depreciation of the franc was effected by bringing in a new franc and degrading the value of the old.
4. Vilfredo Pareto (1848-1923) was an Italian economist and sociologist. His theories about the distribution of power and income between the various élites in society were described in his Trattato di sociologia generale (1916).
5. Marco Polo (1254-1324), who came from a family of Italian explorers, arrived at the court of Kublai Khan in Shangdu in 1276, and left China in 1292. He described his travels in his famous book, Il Millione (English translation, The Travels of Marco Polo).
6. In 1292, Kublai Khan sent an expedition to conquer the Javanese Kingdom. After using the Mongol forces to restore the royal line, the king of Java’s son-in-law turned on them and drove them into the sea.
7. The Japanese were greatly assisted by stormy weather ('divine wind’) in repulsing Kublai’s attacks upon them in 1274 and 1281.
8. Even Formosa, which is only 200 kilometres from the Chinese coast, was not to be annexed to China until the end of the seventeenth century, and even then it was never really conquered, right up to the time the Japanese were to take it from China in 1895 to incorporate it into their island kingdom. [Author’s note]
9. Guo Zixing began a peasant revolt in Anhui in 1352. He was succeeded by Zhu Yuanzhang, who conquered most of the north in 1355. In 1368, the last Yuan emperor fled to Mongolia.
10. Zhu Yuanzhang began his career as a mendicant Buddhist monk. Since he had risen to power by means of the Maitreya Society, he understood the subversive potential of sectarian Buddhism, and renewed the Yuan prescription of the White Lotus and the White Cloud sects in 1370.
11. Zhu Yuanzhang, better known as Hong Wu (Emperor Tai Zu, 1368-1398), proclaimed his Ming ('Bright’) dynasty after driving out the Mongols in 1368, and conquered the rest of the country shortly afterwards.
12. Yong Le (Emperor Cheng Zu, 1402-1424) opened up fields for cultivation in the north and formally declared Beijing the capital in 1421. He attempted to assert Ming control over the Turkic and Mongolian peoples of the north and west.
13. Between 1407 and 1428, the Ming navy conquered Annam and added it to the empire. From 1403 to 1453, Admiral Zheng He was sent on repeated expeditions, penetrating as far as the Red Sea in search of allies against a threatened attack by Tamerlane.
14. In 1449, Emperor Ying Zong (Zhu Qizhen, 1435-1449, 1457-1464) was captured whilst leading his army against an attack by Esen, chief of the Oirat Mongols. He was later released and restored to the throne.
15. A Ming fleet was defeated at the mouth of the Red River in the Gulf of Tonkin in 1420, and after a further series of defeats the Chinese had to relinquish their hold on Annam in 1428.
16. In 1592, the Japanese warlord Hideyoshi invaded Korea, and the Chinese sent armies to assist the Koreans. In 1598, Hideyoshi died, and the Japanese withdrew shortly afterwards.
17. Yong Le began the construction of the Imperial City at Beijing in 1421. It took three-and-a-half years to build, employing 250 000 artisans and nearly a million peasants.
18. Wang Yangming (real name Wang Shouren, 1472-1528) advocated the theory of ‘innate knowledge’ in his books Record of Learning and Questions on the Great Learning.
19. Henri-Louis Bergson (1859-94) was a French philosopher. In his L'Évolution créatrice (1907), he argued for the impact of instinct and intelligence on evolution. William James (1842-1910) was a professor at Harvard University. In his Essays in Radical Empiricism, he put forward the most thoroughgoing pragmatism as a rule of understanding. He denied that truth or reality existed outside of this framework.
20. ‘And if you take away the influence of Chinese ideals on Japanese art, literature and ethics... what of permanent value would remain from the past? If we are to answer this question and do justice to the native spirit of Japan we must find meaning in the ancient cult of Shinto, and trace its development through Bushido into its flowering in the seventeenth century when grafted with the doctrine of Oyomei (the Japanese name for the Chinese philosopher Wang Yang Ming) by his Samurai disciple Nakae Toju.’ (Launcelot Cranmer-Byng, The Vision of Asia, London, 1934, p286)
21. Central power disintegrated in ancient Egypt during the twenty-second Dynasty (c945-713BC) when the Libyan ‘Princes of Ma’ set up semi-independent principalities. The great landowners of the late Roman Empire were able to accumulate local power by extending their hold over the peasantry through the patronage system. In 843, the Carolingian Empire was split into three parts at Verdun, but within each of the divisions only the counts had real power.
22. The last Ming emperor, Chong Zhen (Zhu Youjian, 1627-1644) hanged himself on Coal Hill behind the palace when Li Zicheng captured Beijing.
23. Wu Sangui, the Ming commander at the Shanhaiguan Pass, appealed to the invading Manchus to save the dynasty from the insurgent peasants.
24. The Manchu khan Aisin-Gioro Fu Lin (Emperor Shi Zu, 1644-1661) proclaimed the Qing, China’s last imperial dynasty, in 1644. It was only overthrown in the ‘Double Tenth’ Revolution of 1911.
 


Table of Contents




 Three Thousand Years of History, Fifty Years of Revolution by Robert Louzon 1998


China: 3000 Years of History, 50 Years of Revolution. Robert Louzon 1998
Part I: From the Origins to the Opium War
Chapter I: From the Origins to the Foundation of the Chinese State (to 221BC)
It is only during the course of the first millennium before the Christian era that history in China truly begins. [1] It is true that Chinese scholars represent the history of China as beginning at the start of the third millennium BC, but this history is no more than a series of legends, or rather an ‘edifying’ history intended to illustrate the moral principles which, for those who wrote it, should be the basis of all government. Insofar as it dealt with great events it was mingled with the genuine traditions of antiquity.
As in the case of all the ancient countries, the first question that arises in China’s case is, does Chinese civilisation  –  that is to say, Chinese irrigation  –  represent the activity of more or less autochthonous peoples worked out on the spot through their own experiences, or is it something imported? And as in the case of Chaldea, Egypt and the Indus, this question must remain unanswered in the present state of our knowledge. We will only mention the opinion long in favour that the origin of the Chinese and their civilisation lay in the oases around the Tarim, just as the origin of Sumerian civilisation, Chaldea’s earliest civilisation, is to be sought in other oases, those of Turkestan, according to certain writers. [2]
But whether indigenous or imported, in what period was this civilisation established in China? This question must similarly remain unanswered. The most that can be said is that its birth dates at least as far back as the beginning of the second millennium before our era.
On the other hand, one fact is fairly well established, and that is the place of its early development.
Place of Origin
Chinese civilisation took shape just where we find the political centre of gravity of China during the early centuries of the historic period  –  in other words, near to the point where the Yellow River, after having described its great curve towards the north, abandons its north-south direction, makes an abrupt turn and flows eastwards.
Why did it take shape in those regions? Let us call to mind that the basin of the Yellow River is the region of the yellow earth.
The yellow earth, a sort of porous silt, no doubt carried there and heaped hundreds of metres high by the desert winds, is of inexhaustible fertility. It is the only soil in the world that has furnished crops for thousands of years without manure and without its fertility diminishing.
So it was just the soil for cultivation. But the richest soils are incapable of producing the slightest crops if they are insufficiently watered. Less than 500mm of water fall every year in the region of the middle course of the Yellow River (the part between Lanzhou and the neighbourhood of Xi'an), and scarcely more than 500mm on its lower course. These quantities are too small to enable the maximum possible exploitation of the fertility of the yellow earth. This cannot ensure any really high productivity for human labour, the basis of all civilisation, unless it is irrigated. [3]
Now, as a general rule, the Yellow River is hardly suitable for irrigation. In its middle course, it flows over high plateaux formed by the yellow earth in which it hollows out deep gorges that are often full of water, and where there is no cultivable land. On the other hand, in its lower course, the Yellow River flows across an immense plain situated almost at sea level whose natural state (unless dykes are built) is a vast marshland. The plain is therefore no better suited than the gorge to irrigation that can be undertaken by primitive methods, which would not make it necessary to lift the water on to a plateau or to drain the plain by a system of dykes and drainage.
In fact, there is but one geographical position perfectly suited to irrigation: the valley, a valley broad enough to ensure that land will be left free beyond the bed of the river, but where the bank is sufficiently deep to ensure that the flow of water will not spread over the surrounding land.
Now it is precisely these kinds of valleys that are lacking in the basin of the Yellow River. They are almost entirely absent, except at one point. This point is the one we have indicated already; where the river turns its course to the east, where we encounter it passing from its middle to its lower course, where it leaves the plateau for the plain.
In fact, in these places the Yellow River has cut a great ditch about 40 kilometres broad running from the north-east to the south-west across this region, providing the valley with two tributaries, the Wei He on the right and the Fen He on the left in their lower courses, and with the Yellow River itself when it crosses it. It was just here that Chinese civilisation, the Chinese people, [4] and later the Chinese state took shape.
Clearly, this setting had nothing of the majestic unity of the Nile Valley, of the Indus with its ‘five rivers’, or even of the delta of the Tigris and Euphrates. Nonetheless, and perhaps because of this, it became the cradle of a civilisation that spread over an immense region, and became thereby the world’s most important irrigational civilisation. Beginning with these small plains at the junction of the Wei, Fen and Yellow Rivers, on the one hand, the Chinese proceeded to the conquest of the ‘Great Plain’, the vast plain traversed by the lower reaches of the Yellow River, and, on the other, to the conquest of the Blue River, called ‘the Great River’ by the Chinese.
The First Colonisation
This event appears to have occurred towards the middle of the second millennium, some time in the fourteenth century BC. If this is the case, and if it is also true that bronze was not introduced into China until the fifteenth century BC, then it would seem that there was some sort of cause and effect relationship between the two events.
The assault proceeded in two directions, eastward and southwards. On the one hand, colonisation went on down the Yellow River, where it soon found a secondary area of growth well beyond the area of flooding across the marshes of the Great Plain in the hills of Shandong, and, on the other hand, by crossing the Qinling Mountains bordering on the Wei valley on the south through a pass situated almost on the latitude of Xi'an, the tide of settlement reached the Han River, a great tributary of the Blue River, where it descended to its junction with the latter at Hankou. On reaching this point, we find ourselves in a country as easy as the country of the Yellow River is difficult: here the vegetation has only to be cleared away, and drainage is no longer necessary. Compared with its northern brother, the Blue River is a well-behaved and easy flowing river; it flows along quietly in its bed with fewer alluvial deposits, scarcely ever rising to the level of the surrounding earth, so that the lands surrounding it are not marshes. When its waters do rise other than in exceptional years, they are kept under effective control by an entire system of dams and canals, and they can be used without waste. As for the rest, the climate here is as mild as that north of Qinling is harsh, and the more substantial monsoon rains (more than a metre) are sufficient to ensure regular crops even without irrigation.
The Blue River is the south, whereas the Yellow River is the north, the continental north whose border is the desert. It was not on the banks of the easy-flowing Blue River, but in the difficult conditions beside the Yellow River that China’s centre of gravity has been throughout the periods when China was strong.
China’s future greatness was due to the scarcity of irrigational land in the birthplace of Chinese civilisation, and then to the effort required for the drainage and cultivation of the marshes of the Yellow River. The small size of the valleys in the areas of old China, often cut up into separate basins, involved working the available land to the limit, from which comes the meticulous care shown by the Chinese, and the exceptional intensity of their agriculture. It must moreover be borne in mind that there is no work that requires a stronger and more sustained effort than the drainage and improvement of the soil. In Europe, the draining of marshland is regarded as forced labour to be done by penal or concentration camp prisoners. In Asia, it has engendered in the Chinese a quite extraordinary capacity for work. ‘Everything comes into existence through necessity.’
It is the shortage of irrigable land in old China and the immensity of the plain below the Yellow River, requiring a Herculean effort in the latter and an elaborate technology in the former, that make China the country where the highest forms of civilisation based upon irrigation have been attained. The Chinese owes the skill and the work speed that have made him the most industrious man in the world, and his civilisation the most cultured, to the difficulties that have beset him. The obstacles presented by nature give rise to the development of the faculties that are required to mitigate and surmount them. Civilisation is never easily created.
The First Political Forms
What was the political regime in China during this early period? This is still a question that cannot be definitively answered. Like the Egyptians, the Chinese portray their primeval political regime as of a country governed by divine men. [5] The men who are so deified were no doubt those who planned and directed the first irrigation and drainage works. These divine men were apparently succeeded by emperors, who were themselves, of course, only men, but it is still very difficult to determine the extent and nature of their power. [6]
On the other hand, it is a well-established fact that at the dawn of the historical period, whether this was in the ninth or the eighth century BC, China consisted of a great number of small states  –  city states. There were several hundreds of them, and there may even once have been more.
It was a system of government perfectly suited to China’s social and economic development at the time. These small communities fitted in with the agricultural system; a valley bottom or a spot on the Great Plain where shallow marshes allowed for easier drainage. These communities were always surrounded by ‘barbarians’, in other words non-cultivators, or cultivators who did not irrigate their land, whether perched on plateaux dominating the valley, or, like the Hadjouts of Mitidja at the time of the conquest of Algeria, wandering across the marshes of the plain, and each settled community had to provide for its own defence and its own administration. That is why each of them was constituted as a city under the authority of a lord.
These cities were laid out in three parts; the lord’s castle, more or less fortified for the purposes of defence, the city proper where the inhabitants resided surrounded by a wall, and finally the fields themselves, surrounded by a second wall. [7] The lord’s first duty was, of course, to secure the defence of the city, and consequently he had responsibility both for political leadership and economic organisation; he had to ‘repair the borders and limits of the fields, to explore mountains, hills, slopes, plains and hollows, to decide on the cultivation suitable for each kind of soil and in what places the five cereals should be sown’. [8]
Warlord and organiser of new settlements  –  such were the essential functions of the lord of each of these economically and ethnically isolated miniature states.
Another of his functions consisted of distributing the lands amongst all the families of the community in proportion to the number of hands each had at its disposal, according to a system very analogous to the Russian mir or the German mark, [9] with the obligation imposed upon every group of eight families to cultivate, in addition to their own plots, a supplementary plot for the state (just as the European serf had to cultivate the land of his feudal lord in addition to his own).
Separated as they were, these small communities had nevertheless a feeling that they belonged to the same civilisation, and this sentiment showed itself in the recognition of their nominal subordination to the same lord, whom the Chinese historians call the ‘emperor’. He was, however, an ‘emperor’ whose functions appeared to be exclusively religious, or rather magical, because he had first and foremost to ensure that there were good harvests by the performance of certain appropriate ceremonies. In this emperor we find the human equivalent of the Apollo of Delphi or the Enlil of Nippur; [10] in other words, a symbol of the unity and origin of a civilisation; but in the case of the strongly unsuperstitious Chinese, the representation of this symbol was vested in a pontiff, not in a god.
From Lords To Princes (Seventh to Fifth Centuries BC)
The more the cultivated areas were extended, and the more the centres of cultivation grew closer to each other and fused, the more the great law of political concentration began to come into play in China, as elsewhere. The process was already in full development in the fifth century BC, and in the third century BC it was to end in the formation of the empire. It therefore took half a millennium.
This concentration had two aspects during its first period. On the one hand, the number of states diminished. According to the Chinese chronicles, they fell from 1700 to 50. In the eighth century, there had certainly still been some hundreds, whereas by the fifth century BC, there remained no more than a few dozen.
On the other hand, this concentration was accompanied by the formation of a feudal system properly so-called  –  that is, by the establishment of a hierarchy amongst the feudal lords. Some lords, more powerful than others, whose estates covered a greater extent of cultivated lands than did those of the others, or were strategically better placed, granted their protection to neighbouring lords, who in turn undertook to support them. These feudal lords with vassals at their disposal were those whom the Chinese historians call ‘the hegemons’. Some of these hegemons became even greater and became ‘great hegemons’. [11]
It is a remarkable fact that these powerful hegemons were not those who inhabited the centre of China, but those on the borderlands  –  those in direct contact with the external enemy, in other words, the barbarians. The five principal hegemons were in fact generally those of Jin, Qin, Chu, Qi and Song. The first three of these principalities were the ‘marches’ of the west  –  the first facing north, the second west, and the third west and south; the last two were the eastern marches, Qi facing north-east and Song facing south.
It was at this time that Chinese civilisation took shape. The period of the hegemons was China’s ‘classical’ period. It was the time when the great philosophers, Confucius, Lao Zi and their immediate followers lived. It was then that those great works were written that have remained the foundation of Chinese education for the next 2500 years. It was the era of creative philosophy and literary perfection.
It was also the era when the rules of courtesy and refinement which until yesterday were scrupulously observed by all well-bred Chinese were instituted in the courts of the smaller and middling lords.
In proportion as the power of the feudal lords increased, so did the cultivation of letters in the borderland regions of China, and for the same reason. Daoism came to life in Sichuan, in other words in the extreme south-west of the China of that time, whereas Confucius lived in Shandong  –  that is, in the extreme east. This is noted by Granet when he writes in his Chinese Civilisation: ‘It was in the provinces on the margin that Chinese civilisation blossomed more fully. It is there that... the pride of being Chinese was most strongly felt; it is there that men were most conscious of superiority over the Barbarian and of the duties this imposed.’ [12]
This was not a phenomenon peculiar to China alone. The same thing has been noted at other times, and in quite different countries  –  for example in Germany. It was in Saxony and Bohemia that the German language, the foundation of German culture, took shape. As Meillet says in his study entitled The Differentiation and Unification of Languages, ‘the common German language arose from a great movement of colonisation that gradually enabled the Germans to conquer all eastern Germany, which is the fundamental fact of German history’. [13]
In fact, it is only by opposing that we define ourselves. The habitual xenophobia characteristic of frontier populations in a country that is in the process of growth, as China was in the sixth century BC or Germany in the twelfth century AD, results in the creation of a ‘culture’, the only means of externalising and affirming its civilisation. It is by colliding with other civilisations that a civilisation becomes conscious of itself and becomes a civilisation ‘in itself'; the creation of a culture is the expression of this act of becoming conscious.
It should equally be noted that in China, just as certainly as in Chaldea, and doubtless in Egypt and India, as well as in Phoenicia, Greece and Italy, culture originated and reached its highest degree of development in a system of city states  –  that is to say, small and medium-sized states in constant mutual rivalry and often in open conflict with each other, none of which could claim to represent the entirety or even an important fraction of the people of the same civilisation who lived in them. It seems that a common culture is created as a reaction against political multiplicity when this has itself already diminished enough for it to be able to become conscious of the possibility of unity.
From Princes To Monarch (Fourth and Fifth Centuries BC)
In the course of the second half of the fourth century and all through the third century BC, the concentration of the Chinese states went on apace, until it ended with the unification of all China into a single and centralised state in 221BC.
This concentration was not only a territorial one, producing a reduction in the number of states and an expansion in the ones that remained. It was also a concentration of power. The feudal principalities were transformed into real states, and the hegemons became kings. What did this mean?
Under the former order, the feudal lord, whatever the extent of his importance, whether he be hegemon or small vassal, dwelt in his domain surrounded by ‘noblemen’  –  warriors, in other words, whose function was to fight. In the event of outside danger, he allied himself with the neighbouring lords under the command of one or other of them in order to repel the common enemy. This system was quite satisfactory when it was only a matter of reducing isolated groups of barbarians inside China or merely sorting out internal conflicts, but it was manifestly insufficient when it became necessary to organise remote expeditions, or even to resist great masses of enemy forces.
Now the more the Chinese cultures spread and transformed themselves into a coherent whole, the more tempting a prize they became to the barbarians themselves, forcing them to concentrate their forces against them. The foremost preoccupation of the hegemons, and particularly those of the frontier provinces, was therefore to substitute a corps of administrative officials closely and organically bound to the sovereign for the fragile personal links existing between the suzerain and his vassals, and more important still, to create a state army, as distinct from the simple levy of vassals.
This progress from a feudal system to state, and from a feudal army to a regular army, is a phenomenon with which we are quite familiar, since we experienced it ourselves at the end of the Middle Ages.
The transformation of a feudal army into a state army is, however, generally possible only through a change in weaponry, or at least a change in the methods of warfare. In the West, it was the use of gunpowder that made this transformation possible; in China, it was the suppression of chariots.
The feudal lord was accustomed to fight in a chariot; the weapons change that the last hegemons had to make was no longer to have chariotry as an essential component of their armies, but infantry and cavalry. Instead of a feudal lord fighting more or less isolated encounters from his chariot surrounded by his armed subordinates, there was now a uniform mass of soldiers fighting shoulder to shoulder. The feudal lord therefore disappeared from the battle line, and consequently he disappeared as a lord. From now on there were only ‘soldiers of the king’, and consequently only ‘subjects of the king’.
Thus it came about that in the years following the middle of the first millennium BC, the great hegemons ceased to be hegemons and became actual kings; and there were no longer any feudal lords, but heads of state.
Nowhere was the transformation pressed forward more vigorously than in the state of Qin. Not only was the army there radically defeudalised, the chariots being entirely abolished and replaced by cavalry, but extremely important social backing was provided for the new army by means of a no less radical agrarian reform. Serfdom and village communal ownership were abolished at one stroke. From being a simple tenant farmer, which he had been up until then, the peasant became the sole proprietor, endowed not only with the right to ‘enjoy’ his property, but also to ‘dispose’ of it.
Similarly, the old nobility, which was as suppressed in the civil domain by the abolition of serfdom as it was in the military domain by the elimination of chariots, was replaced with a new nobility who received their titles purely on the basis of merit, and military merit in particular. From then on every peasant had title deeds in his pocket, and a marshal’s baton in his knapsack.
The reason the state of Qin found itself at the forefront of this transformation was because such a position was more necessary for it than for any of the others. In fact, not only was it a ‘marcher’ state, but it was the most exposed march. Gansu was the easiest route for Mongol invasion. Skirting Tibet on the edge of the Gobi, the Mongols reached China from their grassy steppes by the shortest desert route. Now the gate through which they had to pass from Gansu into China was that state established in the Wei valley which closed it, and that was the state of Qin.
However, the military and social transformation that had been imposed by the necessity of defending themselves against the barbarians could also serve as a weapon against the Chinese themselves. Qin, China’s protector, was becoming its master. This is the usual destiny of marcher states. Qin was eventually even to give the whole country its name, or at least that with which Europeans are acquainted, for China is the European transcription of Qin.
Even the victorious defensive operations that Qin could carry out against the Mongols (then called Huns) could not last long. Defence alone cannot achieve victory. To gain a real victory, the enemy must be destroyed, and the Huns could only be destroyed by invading their territory. But that would require greater forces than Qin could dispose of on its own. It required the forces of the whole of China, and to do that it was first necessary to unite China.
And so it happened that, beginning in 316BC, Qin seized control of one Chinese state after another, until in 221BC it annexed the last, and the king of Qin could call himself Shi Huang Di, the First Emperor, Napoleon the First. The unification of China was completed. [14]
It had required a century of ferocious wars. The Chinese call this period of their history that of the ‘warring states’. They were veritable wars of extermination. After every expedition, the numbers of the beheaded amounted to tens of thousands. [15] Thus the struggle showed the usual characteristics of wars of unification. All the individual characteristics and all the set ways in which the thought of entire groups of the population had for centuries been cast resisted to the last gasp. For people were fighting not only for their honour and for their interests, but for their very existence. That is why the wars that precede a ‘Roman peace’ are always amongst the harshest, if not indeed the very harshest.
Once master of China, Shi Huang Di’s first task was to give it the political and social structure that had borne such abundant fruits in Qin. Everywhere the peasant was made the owner of his land. An entire centralised system of administration was set up, and under this the now redundant feudal lords were allowed to transform themselves into a court nobility with forced residence in the capital, as under Louis XIV. The systems of writing and of weights and measures were standardised. And finally, to this political and cultural unification was added a geographical one by means of a great system of imperial roadways converging on the same spot  –  the town of Kaifeng, situated on the edges of a plateau of the plain at the junction of the old and the new China. Moreover, all internal boundaries were demolished, particularly the walls that had separated the different states (for as their states had grown larger, the old cities had demolished their walls and replaced them with walls at strategic points on their frontiers), and these walls were replaced by an immense external wall protecting the northern frontier of the new state against the Mongol barbarian. This is the Great Wall of China, which runs from Jilin to Gansu for more than 1500 kilometres and still exists after 22 centuries, just as the barbarian threat has persisted for 22 centuries. Finally, to crown it all as a symbol of the unity of the Chinese state, Shi Huang Di instituted the imperial cult.
Whilst seeing to his northern defences along the desert line, Shi Huang Di pursued a vigorous policy of colonisation in the south. Going far beyond the Blue River, he annexed the basin of the Zhu Jiang (Canton), and may even have penetrated as far as the Red River (Tonkin). There are plains and rivers to be found there that resemble the dimensions and type of agriculture of the Great Plain more than the intervening region between the Blue River and the Chang Jiang, a region of woods and hills.
These territories in the extreme south were thus advance posts for colonisation placed well forward, something in the nature of a forlorn hope. Because of this, a rather exceptional procedure had to be adopted to make them attractive. The state of Shi Huang Di, perhaps one of the most ‘modern’ states that China has ever produced, employed in these regions the very ‘modern’ method of colonisation by criminals and ‘undesirables’: tens of thousands of these types of people were forcibly transported to these remote territories with the object of having them peopled and cultivated, a method that anticipated by more than 2000 years those used to colonise Australia and Siberia.
However, the necessity that obliged Qin to be forever on guard against the barbarians nearby, and which had made the social revolution that began in 361BC an easy matter for that state, was far from making itself felt in so pressing a manner in the rest of China. The barbarian, after all, was so very far away! It followed that Shi Huang Di’s reforms encountered a lively resistance. All the feudal reactionaries, whose spokesmen were those literati whose numbers had increased enormously in the royal courts and entourage of the lords, rose up against the reformer. He resisted resolutely. Boldly attacking what was most worthy of respect in the tradition to which they would have him return, he had all books burned, those books that were held to oppose his reforming will. All books, except those of the state of Qin and technical books, were destroyed.
Even so, the reaction was too strong to be overcome at a single blow. Shi Huang Di’s first successor was deposed in 208BC, and the ancient kingdoms were re-established. [16] But this ‘restoration’ was destined to last an even shorter time than the French restoration after 1815, not even as long as the regime it had wanted to abolish. In 203BC, the Former Han re-established the unity of China. [17]
Notes
1. ‘We must resign ourselves... to leaving without dates all the periods anterior to the year 841BC.’ (Granet, Chinese Civilisation, London, 1930, pp56-7) [Author’s note] This date, the first year of the Gonghe, the period of the ducal regency according to Sima Qian, is regarded as the first fixed date in Chinese history.
2. The theory that Sumerian civilisation originated in the eastern oases was first put forward by Raphael Pumpelly in his Explorations in Turkestan in 1905-08. It was not wholly accepted at the time, and has not gained much in popularity since.
3. ‘The yellow earth only really has the fertility ascribed to it where it extends in a rather narrow bed amid the sands and alluvial plains, where its surface is close to underground water tables or other sources of water supply.’ (Jules Sion, Géographie Universelle, Volume 9, Asie des moussons, Paris, 1928, p68) [Author’s note]
4. Cf the map drawn up by Élisée Réclus, following the Yukung, in his Géographie Universelle, Volume 7, a map showing the density of the population of China in ancient times. The Yukung is a document going back to the twenty-second century BC, according to Chinese chronicles. To these valleys, as places of the origin of Chinese civilisation, it is necessary to add the scattered spots where the rivers, leaving the plateau zone, spread abundant alluvium over the plain. [Author’s note]  The ‘Tribute of Yu’ is a document contained in the Book of History ascribed to Confucius, where it appears as the tribute roll of the Emperor Yu, the legendary founder of the Xia Dynasty. Part of it purports to be an account of the regulation of the waters by Yu, and the other is an ancient geographical survey of China, with tax rolls and particulars of the most direct routes to the capital. For an English translation of this latter part of the document, see R Wilhelm, A Short History of Chinese Civilisation, London, 1929, pp90-2. [Editor’s note]
5. The Turin Papyrus (column 1, fragments 11 and 12) and Manetho (Waddell ed, pp2, 4) show that the Egyptians believed that the first to rule in Egypt were the gods. The Book of Changes and the Book of History represent the first semi-divine culture heroes of Chinese civilisation in the form of ‘The Five Emperors’.
6. The last of the ‘Five Emperors’ was supposed to have been followed on the throne by Yu, the first emperor of the Xia Dynasty. No traces of its rule can be identified, but the historicity of the following dynasty, the Shang (1523-1027BC), is no longer in doubt since the discovery of oracle bones from its last three capitals. Of the 30 Shang kings listed by the later Grand Historian Sima Qian, only three cases of inversion and two incorrect filiations have been identified. But when inscriptions upon bronzes and literary information first become abundant, China was under the nominal rule of the Zhou Dynasty (1027-249BC), divided into the Western Zhou, with its capital at Hao, near Xi'an (1027-770), and the Eastern Zhou (770-249), with its capital at Luoyang.
7. In Morocco, Meknès, an Arab town situated close to the Berber tribe, also had its fields surrounded by a wall. [Author’s note]
8. Li Ji, or The Book of Rites. [Author’s note] See note 18, Introduction.
9. Peasant ownership of land in Russia during the nineteenth century was not on an individual basis, but was vested in the village commune, the mir, which regulated its affairs by means of a village assembly. The mark was a large tract of land in pre-feudal Germany containing several villages where the land was collectively owned, even when it was individually tilled, for the land was parcelled out again from time to time.
10. The centre of the cult of the Sumerian god Enlil was the E-kur temple at Nippur. He was credited with planning and creating the most productive features of the cosmos, laying the plans that brought forth all seeds, plants and trees from the earth, and inventing the pickaxe and the plough. The chief oracle of the Greek god Apollo was at Delphi. He was regarded as the originator of colonisation and fosterer of flocks and herds, and several of his festivals celebrated the renewal of vegetation in the spring.
11. The Great Hegemons of the Eastern Zhou period were Duke Huan of Qi (685-643BC), Duke Mu of Qin (659-621BC), Duke Xiang of Song (650-637BC), Duke Wen of Jin (636-628BC) and Duke Zhuang of Chu (613-591BC). It is doubtful whether the small state of Song wielded anything like the power of the others, but Duke Xiang’s name was probably added to bring the figure up to five, the customary number for such classifications.
12. Marcel Granet, Chinese Civilisation, London, 1930, p85.
13. Paul Jules Antoine Meillet, ‘Différentiation et unification dans les langues’, Linguistique historique et linguistique générale, Paris, 1921, p123.
14. King Ying Zheng of Qin (246-210BC) proclaimed himself Emperor Shi Huang Di in 221BC after eliminating the states of Han (230), Zhao (228), Wei (225), Chu (223), Yan (222) and Qi (221).
15. The death toll during the final period of the Warring States was very heavy. The state of Zhao was said to have lost 400 000 men at the time of its defeat by Qin at Changping in 260BC, and the corpses of some of them who had been buried alive were discovered at Gaoping in Shanxi in 1995. Qin followed up several of its victories with a number of similar massacres.
16. Hu Hai, Emperor Erh Shi Huang Di (210-207BC), the second son of Shi Huang Di, was deposed and murdered by the eunuch Zhao Gao, who placed his nephew Zi Ying on the throne.
17. Liu Bang officially ascended the throne in 202BC, and is known under the posthumous name period of the Emperor Gao Zu (206-194 BC). He began the Han Dynasty (206BC-221AD), generally divided into the Western, or former Han Dynasty, with its capital at Chang'an (206BC-25AD), and the Eastern, or later Han Dynasty, with its capital at Luoyang (25-221AD).
 


Table of Contents




 Three Thousand Years of History, Fifty Years of Revolution by Robert Louzon 1998


China: 3000 Years of History, 50 Years of Revolution. Robert Louzon 1998
Preamble
It is a known fact that the first great civilisations were civilisations of irrigation. It is the productivity of human labour  –  that is, the utilisation by man of the sources of natural energy  –  which enables him to produce more than is strictly necessary for the maintenance of life, that makes civilisation possible, and is the measure of its development.
Since agriculture by irrigation was the technique that enabled man to produce for the first time a substantial surplus of food over and above what was necessary to save him from starvation, because this agriculture was mainly perfected in the valleys of the great rivers of the sub-tropical region, it was in these valleys that the first civilisations flourished.
These great civilisations of irrigation are divided into three main groups, each of which embraces the valleys of two rivers sufficiently close to each other to be in easy relationship and  –  despite certain differences  –  to be included in the same civilisation and in the same history.
The first group of these civilisations is to be found in the Middle East, and is based upon the two rivers of the Nile and the Euphrates; the second is in the Indian subcontinent, its two rivers being the Indus and the Ganges; the third, in the Far East, is based on the Yellow River (Huang He) and on the Blue River (Chang Jiang).
It is to this last civilisation, and to the state to which it gave birth  –  China  –  that the following pages are devoted in a brief effort to retrace its history.
Civilisation based on irrigation is therefore basically agricultural; the cultivation of the soil dominates its entire history, and activities other than agricultural, such as commerce, are generally only necessary extensions of it.
That, however, was only completely true until recently. Recently, that is to say, in the course of the last 100 years, or more precisely from the start of the Opium War in 1840, China in fact found itself penetrated by an entirely alien civilisation born under other skies in a much more recent era than its own, and based upon the utilisation of an entirely different source of energy: fire  –  in other words, the chemical energy released by the combination of carbon with oxygen, and utilised by means of the steam engine. This, some 150 years ago, provided the Western peoples with the means of increasing the productivity of human labour far more than irrigation had done over a period of 4000 or 5000 years.
This sudden bringing of the aboriginal agricultural civilisation of China into contact with the imported industrial civilisation of the West was inevitably bound to lead to a complete change in China’s political, social and intellectual institutions. It is this revolution which is at the moment in full course of development.
For that reason, this little work will be divided into two parts. The first will go over the broad lines of the history of agricultural China, traditional China, from its origins up to its contact with Europe; the second will deal with the different phases through which the Chinese crisis passed from the beginning of its contact with Europe up to the coming to power of Mao Zedong.
The first part will cover 2000 years or more; the second, a century. Because of the greater interest of the second part on account of its topical nature, we shall give roughly equal space to each, which is not without its problems, for it will tend to give our readers a misleading view of the relative time spans involved. We hope that they will attempt to avoid this mistake as far as possible by always bearing in mind that they will be devoting the same time to reading what took 20 times longer to happen in the first part than in the second.
 


Table of Contents




 Three Thousand Years of History, Fifty Years of Revolution by Robert Louzon 1998


China: 3000 Years of History, 50 Years of Revolution. Robert Louzon 1998
Chapter III: The First Middle Ages (220-588)
The Chinese Han empire has often been compared with the Roman empire. If the facts that both were empires, and that both were nearly contemporaneous and lasted for almost the same length of time are not sufficient to justify us to come to any conclusion as to their basic identity, we must on the other hand note that the situations in which these two regions of Eurasia found themselves after the destruction of their empires were fundamentally similar. Each of them had to pass through a period of ‘Middle Ages’, that is to say, through a period in which their ancient culture and organisation were submerged by the arrival of the barbarian peoples who had destroyed them and were at the same time assimilated by them. Once this assimilation was completed, the ‘Middle Ages’ came to an end.
Just as at this time the pressure of the Romans on the barbarian world beyond the Rhine and Danube had led to a counter-flow of the Germanic peoples towards the Mediterranean, so the pressure undergone by the peoples beyond the Yellow River under the Han dynasty led to the counter-flow of Hunnish peoples as a first stage on to the Yellow River, and as a second stage as far as the Blue River.
The ‘Three Kingdoms’
We have described how, following the movement of the Yellow Turbans, which can be compared with the Bagaudae in Gaul or with the circumcellions of northern Africa [1] (also caused by the development of private property), the victorious Chinese generals carved out three great kingdoms from what had once been China. This period of the ‘Three Kingdoms’, as Chinese historians call it, did not last longer than 60 years, but it is interesting because it brings into focus two important traits of Chinese history that have retained their validity down to our own day.
The first is that China was not divided into two kingdoms  –  those of the Yellow River and of the Blue River  –  but into three. Along with China’s northern and southern kingdoms, there is a third  –  China’s western kingdom. This last occupied an area more or less identical with the modern province of Sichuan.
The existence of this third kingdom was not a simple accident of history; Sichuan was destined from the beginning to play its own rôle in the history of China. Although manifesting all the characteristics of Chinese agriculture, Sichuan forms a basin partially separated from the rest of China by a series of mountain ranges, and which, more importantly, is so favoured by the gods as to be self-supporting, a fact that accounts for its special characteristics.
Sichuan is a mountain valley. It lies in a basin of subsident earth at the foot of lofty mountains  –  the Alps of Sichuan  –  which provide it with a great number of rivers, [2] fertile water for irrigation, which added to abundant rainfall enables the fertile red soil reinforced by alluvium washed down from the mountains to yield three harvests a year  –  fodder, corn and rice. The sides of these Alpine valleys are covered with fruit trees, vines and mulberries. This is indeed a region for cultivation.
Coal is found at ground level, and there is iron ore alongside it. Substantial salt beds mingle with oil deposits. It is a real region of mineral wealth!
It is in Sichuan that China produces the best silk, and it is here too that China’s best paper is manufactured. It is indeed a region of industry.
Finally, the easy life, ‘the good life’ in Sichuan has at all times attracted a flow of immigrants from almost everywhere, and this has produced a mixed population, which like all such populations is noted for its amiability, courtesy and extreme politeness, outstanding even in China  –  which is saying a great deal, as well as for its artistic temperament. The capital of Sichuan is called ‘the Paris of China’.
And since this Eden is bordered on the west, north and east by mountain ranges, and as the Blue River on its southern border forms a barrier to the entry of ships by the rapids at its exit from Sichuan, it is easy to understand that although it is Chinese in all its essential characteristics, the province has always had the tendency to keep to itself, to ‘live a life of its own’, as far away as possible from the troubled outside.
However, every privilege involves obligations. The fact that it is at the same time the jewel and the retreat of China has in grave circumstances obliged Sichuan to be its refuge.
Thus we can see that during the epoch we are now in, Sichuan provided shelter for the last of the Han. In fact, it was a prince of that family that Sichuan accepted as king, a king who still even claimed to be emperor, albeit without an empire, and without even the hope of ever having one, as Sichuan did not ever aspire to governing China.
Later on, two Tang emperors, at intervals of a hundred years, likewise had occasion to take shelter there, [3] and it is only 20 years ago that Chiang Kai-shek’s government, driven out of all the coastal provinces by the Japanese, contrived to establish its capital at Chongqing, [4] the province’s commercial and financial centre, where he was treated more like the guest of the Governor of Sichuan than as his chief.
The second characteristic of this era is the rôle that Nanjing began to play. In the year 229, Nanjing became the capital of the kingdom of the Blue River, [5] and it was to remain the capital of the whole of the south  –  that is, of all that part of China that remained unconquered by the barbarians, until the empire was reconstituted  –  for three-and-a-half centuries, in other words.
So far from the historic capitals of old China at Chang'an and Luoyang, cities on the Yellow River, and still in the mountain region, a new metropolis was to arise in the open plain by the Blue River. This indicates the progress of land development in China, and the move in its centre of gravity towards the sea and the south. What is more, it is from now on that this new China was going to be the real China, far more than old China, which was too often destined to fall under the yoke of the barbarians. The China that grew up in the Wei Valley was to maintain itself in the lower reaches of the Blue River. Chinese civilisation and the Chinese state were created in a hard, difficult border country, but it was in easy, sheltered country that it achieved its fullest development, and where it resisted best. Birth comes about by effort, but we keep going by our bulk.
The Coming of the Barbarians
After the period of the Three Kingdoms, the unity of China was reconstituted by a sort of mayor of the palace of the kingdom of the Yellow River who founded the Jin dynasty, which, however, was only temporary. [6] Thirty years after having mounted the imperial throne, the Jin no longer ruled over anything apart from the Blue River.
What in fact happened was this. Just as Rome at around this time found it expedient to leave its watch on the Rhine in the hands of the Germanic tribes who had been enrolled under the eagles for this purpose and settled on its left bank, so since the year 48AD the Han had settled first the Huns and then the Tungus on the inside of the Great Wall in order to use them as a defence against their compatriots. And just as with the Roman empire, as soon as these mercenaries had become civilised enough to be effective in the struggle against their masters, they cast off their allegiance and became invaders.
They first founded a kingdom in Shanxi on the left bank of the middle reaches of the Yellow River, and in 311 they seized the Jin emperor, whose successor was obliged to take refuge in Nanjing. [7]
Thus began the onslaught by all the Hunnish and Tungus tribes on China’s northern region. For a century, it was divided into a number of ‘barbarian kingdoms’ that succeeded one another and changed themselves in accordance with arrival of fresh tribes and changes of domination. [8] It was just like Western Europe in the fifth century.
In about the beginning of the fifth century, one of these tribes  –  the Tuoba, posing as defenders of Chinese civilisation, just as the Franks of the same era in Gaul were posing as defenders of Roman civilisation, and, like them, doubtless thanks to an alliance they were able to make, as Clovis did, with the civilised natives  –  succeeded in triumphing over their rivals and achieving the unity of China along the Yellow River. [9]
This Sino-Mongol hybrid had not unimportant consequences. At first, the invasions were stopped. The poacher became gamekeeper. Not content with merely defending China’s frontier, the Tuoba carried out many a raid into the lands which had formerly been their cradle. Amongst other things, they severely chastised the Avars there, who were the most audacious Mongol tribe of the time, just as Charlemagne’s Franks were later to chastise the Saxons no less severely. [10]
It was also a period of great art, of religious art, for this was also the era of the great development of Buddhism in the Far East, and this was its most important characteristic.
With the installation of barbarian kingdoms in northern China, Buddhism in fact ceased to be the belief of a small number of the faithful and became an official religion. With some rare exceptions, all the barbarian chiefs, and especially the Tuoba, were convinced Buddhists, just as the Germans who had installed themselves in the Roman Empire were dead set on Christianity.
Buddhism, like Christianity, responded to the need the barbarians had of ridding themselves of the sentiment of inferiority they could not fail to have felt penetrating even as conquerors amongst a people who enjoyed a civilisation whose superiority they could not but acknowledge.
In fact Buddhism, just like Christianity but even more so, is a religion of humanity, a ‘universal’ religion, not the religion of a people or of a race. It is, as has been said, ‘a moral system where all men may be united’. [11]
Buddhism was born as a reaction against the racism of the Hindu Brahmin, just as Christianity was a reaction against the racism of the Jewish Pharisee. ‘The Brahmin is born of woman just as the pariah, the least of humans is, against whom he bars the way of salvation’, proclaimed Buddha. Thus Buddhism teaches that everyone, whatever his race or his position in the social scale, may attain salvation alone by virtue of his individual conduct. All men are therefore equal, at least before God.
It is understandable how such religions suit times of invasion, when it is a matter of assimilating two races and two civilisations. They suit the vanquished and the victorious alike  –  the vanquished because they assure them that, in spite of their defeat, they are still the equals of their conquerors; the conquerors, because they convince them that in spite of the inferiority of their own culture they are the equals of the conquered people whose moral and intellectual superiority they experience every day.
Universal religions are at once the religions of slaves and of masters, the religion of the conquered and of the conquering, for the reason that they enable you to achieve spiritual equality with the master who crushes you or the subject who despises you, whichever is the case. [12]
This explains the amazing paradox which has so astounded historians; how a religion of meekness and charity, as all universal religions are of necessity, comes to be practised by violent and vindictive barbarians; how so extreme a devotion comes to be allied with such ferocious cruelty. Whilst some of the Hun kings had the women of their harems beheaded and their bodies served up as dishes at the table, they were at the same time founding Buddhist monasteries, [13] just as Fredegund heaped up gifts on the abbeys and chose priests to carry out her crimes, hoping to mitigate the wrath of heaven in this way. [14]
It is this cruelty, this unbridled and uncontrollable violence, that gives the barbarian his sense of inferiority, and it is this inferiority that he tries to expiate by piety towards He who decrees respect for human life.
In the last analysis, therefore, it is thanks to the barbarians and their invasions that Buddhism and Christianity became for thousands of years the two most important religions in the world.
Buddhism, however, did not triumph so completely in China as Christianity did in Europe, because the penetration of the Mongol peoples into China was nearly always restricted to the north, whilst that of the Germanic peoples extended to every European part of the Roman empire. Confucianism and Daoism have consequently existed side by side with the new religion. But they have not been more than minority religions; moreover, both of them, and especially Daoism, have been profoundly influenced and modified by Buddhism.
The End of ‘Byzantium’ and the Restoration of Unity
Whilst these events were taking place in the north, the China of the Blue River remained united, first of all under the sceptre of the Jin Dynasty, and then under other dynasties that were likewise Chinese, with Nanjing as their capital, [15] just as the eastern Mediterranean was to stay under the authority of Byzantium, the ‘Second Rome’, throughout the whole of the era of the ‘barbarian kingdoms’ of the west. The morals of Nanjing were moreover as dissolute, and even more so, than those known in Byzantium; pederasty and assassination were the rule.
Also, as they became almost completely sinicised, the northern barbarians were able without difficulty to complete their work of finally seizing the China of the south. The first representative of a new Tuoba dynasty, the Sui, made himself master and sovereign of Nanjing in 588. [16] China’s unity was then restored. The Middle Ages were at an end.
The first Chinese Middle Ages were of a shorter duration than were our own  –  three-and-a-half centuries instead of 10, and the rupture was also of less consequence.
It would have been abnormal had it been otherwise, because civilisation had taken far deeper root in the soil of China than in that of the Mediterranean. Whilst the end of the Roman empire led to the disappearance of Mediterranean trade, on which the ancient civilisation was based, the end of the Han empire left untouched the Yellow and Blue Rivers, with their irrigable lands. That is why, not only in the basin of the Blue River, but also in that of the Yellow River, even under the domination of the barbarians, Chinese civilisation managed more or less to survive. The Middle Ages in China were not completely ‘dark’.
On the other hand, when these Middle Ages were over, it was not to give birth, as it was with us, to a new civilisation, but only to give a new lease of life to the old Chinese tradition of the Han, which resumed its course as it had been. The Chinese Middle Ages were no more than a simple breach in the same civilisation, and not a passage from one civilisation to another.
Notes
1. The circumcellions were the rural supporters of the rigorist Christian sect of the Donatists founded in north Africa in 312AD, who resisted the authority of both emperor and church. The Bagaudae were Gallic peasantry whose uprisings began during the reign of the Emperor Diocletian and went on intermittently until late in the fourth century.
2. ‘Sichuan’ means ‘the country of four rivers’. It means the Min River and three of its tributaries; these are real mountain rivers. But the country is also watered by the Fu Jiang and the Jialing, not to mention the Blue River, which is its southern boundary. [Author’s note]
3. In 755, General An Lushan led a revolt against the Tang Emperor Xuan Zong (712-756), who fled south to Chengdu in Sichuan. In 880, a peasant insurrection approached the Tang capital of Chang'an, and the Emperor Xi Zong (873-888) again fled to Chengdu.
4. Between July and October 1938, the Japanese army moved closer to Wuhan, the Guomindang capital after the fall of Nanjing and Hankou. Chiang decided to evacuate the government to the south-west, to Chongqing in Sichuan.
5. In 229, Sun Quan set up the kingdom of Wu with its capital at Jianye, now Nanjing.
6. In 263, the Kingdom of Wei annihilated Shu, and three years later Sima Yan (Emperor Wu Di, 266-290) removed the last Wei emperor and founded the Western Jin Dynasty (266-316) using the former capital of Wei at Luoyang as its centre. In 280, the third kingdom, Wu, was conquered, so reuniting the country for a short time under the rule of Jin.
7. In 304, a Xiongnu noble, Liu Yuan, declared himself emperor and founded the Northern Han, or Former Zhao Dynasty (304-329), with its capital at Pingyang in Shanxi. In 311, his son Liu Cong captured Chang'an and took prisoner the Western Jin Emperor Min Di (Sima Ye, 313-316). A year later, Sima Rui (Emperor Yuan Di, 317-322) set up the Eastern Jin Dynasty (317-420) with its capital at Jiankang (now Nanjing). The consensus amongst modern scholars is that the Xiongnu of the Chinese texts are not to be identified with the Huns who attacked the West.
8. The period following the collapse of the Western Jin Dynasty is one of great political confusion. The following states competed with and supplanted each other in rapid succession: Northern Han, or Former Zhao (304-329); Cheng Han (304-347); Former Liang (313-376); Later Zhao (319-352); Former Yan (337-370); Former Qin (351-394); Western Yan (384-396); Later Yan (384-408); Later Qin (384-417); Later Liang (385-403); Western Qin (385-431); Northern Wei (386-535); Southern Liang (397-414); Northern Liang (397-439); Southern Yan (398-410); Western Liang (400-421); Xia (407-431); Northern Yan (409-436).
9. In 386, Tuoba Gui (Emperor Dao Wu Di, 386-409) founded the Kingdom of the Northern Wei with its capital at Pingcheng in Shanxi. In 439, his second successor Tuoba Tao (Emperor Tai Wu Di, 423-451) conquered the Northern Liang state and united the whole of northern China.  Clovis (481-511), king of the Salian Franks, conquered what had been the Roman province of Gaul, and by accepting orthodox Christianity as his religion proclaimed himself heir and protector of Roman civilisation.
10. The armies of Tuoba Tao crossed the Gobi desert to strike at the Avars in 429, 443 and 449. The Great Wall was repaired and extended as far as Kalgan, and in 445 and 448 the Tuoba army penetrated as far as Khojo in Chinese Turkestan. Charlemagne’s conquest of the Saxons (772-805) was ruthlessly carried out, including the massacre of 5000 hostages in 782, and the forced conversion of the Saxons and their king to Christianity.
11. Przyluski, Le boudhisme, Paris, 1932, pp5-6. [Author’s note]
12. The When counter-invasions take place, in other words, when it is a people of a superior civilisation that invades the country of an inferior civilisation, or of an equivalent civilisation, and establishes its domination, nothing of the sort takes place. On the contrary! The invader, who enjoys at the same time both cultural and political superiority, has no need of equalising himself with the conquered, in whatever way this might be. Consequently, far from a religious fusion taking place between the two peoples by means of a universal religion, the religion of both of them takes on racist characteristics, or the differences they already have are accentuated, and the opposition of religions is appealed to, by both conquered and conquerors, to reinforce their social separation and their political opposition (for example: Islam and Christianity in the African colonies; Catholicism in Ireland and Poland, conquered by Protestant England and Orthodox Russia). [Author’s note]
13. Xiongnu Emperor Shih Hu (334-349) of the Later Zhao Dynasty used to have his most attractive concubines roasted and served up for dinner, passing their heads around for the admiration of his guests. He was at the same time ‘one of the most zealous protectors of Buddhism’ (René Grousset, The Rise of the Chinese Empire, London, 1952, p106).
14. Fredegund was the wife of Chilperic I (561-584), Merovingian King of Soissons. She was ruthlessly murderous and sadistically cruel, being responsible for killing King Sigebert I of Austrasia in 575, as well as attempts upon the lives of Sigebert II of Burgundy and her own sister, Brunhild.
15. In 420, a general of the Eastern Jin state, Liu Yu (Emperor Wu Di, 420-422), dethroned the last Jin emperor and inaugurated the Song Dynasty (420-479). This was in turn followed by the Qi (479-502), Liang (502-557) and Chen (557-589) dynasties, which ruled over the south from Jiankang (Nanjing).
16. When the last emperor of the Northern Zhou dynasty came to the throne at the age of eight, power fell into the hands of Yang Jian, a royal relative on the female side. In 581, Yang Jian (Emperor Wen Di, 581-604) dethroned him and set up the short-lived Sui Dynasty (581-618).
 


Table of Contents




 Three Thousand Years of History, Fifty Years of Revolution by Robert Louzon 1998


China: 3000 Years of History, 50 Years of Revolution. Robert Louzon 1998
Chapter V: The Second Period of Middle Ages (907-1276)
This second period of Middle Ages very closely resembled that which followed the Han era, at least in the sequence of its events. The succession of events was the same. At first, there was a 60 year period of ‘anarchy’ during which China, the China of the north and of the south, was divided into a great number of rival states whose frontiers were more or less constantly changing. This is the period which, as a counterpart to the period of the ‘Three Kingdoms’ that existed at the start of the first Middle Ages period, Chinese historians describe as that of the ‘Seven Kingdoms’, because of the number of states into which the China of the south was divided at the close of the period. [1]
Then, in a second phase, a Chinese succeeded for a while in recreating national unity, but his successors could not maintain their authority over the China of the north, and finally had to be content with reigning over the regions of the Blue River, whilst the Yellow River was under the domination of a Mongolian people. This dynasty, which was that of the Song, was thus the equivalent of that of the former Jin. [2]
Finally, after three centuries, an alien dynasty once more, like the Tuoba Sui Dynasty, was to achieve China’s unity.
Fundamentally, however, there was a profound difference between the two periods of Middle Ages. Whilst the first was no more than a moment’s interruption in the course of a period whose general line was in the ascendant, this second period of Middle Ages was something in the nature of an interlude between the end of the ascendant period and the beginning of the period of decline.
This decline was revealed in one way by the fact that the Chinese empire had no further period of rebirth. It is true that there were still to be occasions when China was again an empire, but it was no longer the work of the Chinese themselves, but rather that of alien conquerors who moulded an empire in which, although China proper was certainly the preponderant part, the Chinese themselves were not the masters. On the other hand, during those brief spells when China was governed by Chinese sovereigns, it was no longer an empire they ruled, but a China in recoil upon itself, a China that had once again become a purely national state, scrupulously abstaining from all conquests and from all forms of imperialism. The aspirations of the poet Du Fu were then fulfilled. In striking contrast with the two great imperial Chinese dynasties of Han and Tang, which marked the first 12 centuries of China’s national history, there were only dynasties of ‘little Chinese’, that of the Song in the eleventh and twelfth centuries during the Middle Ages, and then later, in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, that of the Ming.
The Song: Recoil and Planning
China’s policy of withdrawal was not pursued out of set purpose, but was imposed upon it by necessity.
When, after the era of the Seven Kingdoms, the general who was destined to become the first ruler of the Song Dynasty had himself nominated as emperor by his soldiers in 960, [3] and had established his authority over almost the whole of China, his successor’s principal task was to complete the unity of his realm by incorporating into it the last provincial state that remained, that of Beijing, ruled by a Mongol people known as the Khitan (Qidan). But in spite of two campaigns against them, he failed to do this. [4] Moreover, a little while later, the Khitan themselves took the offensive, which led them almost to the gates of the imperial capital.
It was from this time (1004) that the Song abandoned the policy of making war and decided to leave the barbarians undisturbed, not only in their steppes beyond the Great Wall, but also on the inner side of it, in the Chinese territories of the far north, in their Kingdom of Beijing. It was also from this time on that Beijing began to play an important part in the history of China, though that city was not the creation of the Chinese themselves, but of the barbarians.
Thus a century passed during which the Song ruled over the whole of China except Beijing. Their capital could no longer therefore be one of the old capitals of the marches  –  Chang'an or Luoyang in the mountains, but Kaifeng, a city situated scarcely more than 200 kilometres east of Luoyang, but in the very heart of the Great Plain  –  that plain which is the land of peace.
The equilibrium thus achieved was destroyed in 1126. At that time, the Mongols, who were represented no longer by the Khitan, but by another tribe that had freshly emerged from barbarism, the Nüzhen, whom the Song Emperor Hui Zong had the imprudence to rouse against the Khitan, made themselves masters first over the Khitan in Beijing, and then over the Chinese in Kaifeng. [5]
Pacifism, like every other policy, must be undertaken as a whole. It cannot be practised partially. If it is to succeed, it must be total, without the slightest deviation. By having attempted to reconquer Beijing by means of the Nüzhen and thus having adopted a policy of war by proxy, the Song were thenceforward deprived not only of their capital, but of the whole of northern China. The history of Byzantium and of Nanjing was to be repeated; the Chinese now reigned only over the Blue River, the Yellow River remaining entirely under the domination of the Nüzhen.
We have thus returned to the situation of the fourth century, when the north was united into a single kingdom under the barbarians, instead of being divided into several kingdoms, and the counterpart of Byzantium would no longer be Nanjing, on the banks of the Blue River, but Hangzhou, to the south of the river and on the coast. The centre of Chinese civilisation thus continued to shift from north to south, and from mountain to sea.
As for the capital of the Nüzhen kingdom, it remained Beijing, the old capital of the Khitan, which also implied a shift nearer to the sea, because in ancient times it was Shaanxi in the bend of the Yellow River that was the barbarians’ favourite territory; now it was the coastal province of Jilin.
This last move, however, did more than reveal the increasingly commercial and maritime character of the Chinese economy; it is also to be explained by the origin of the new occupiers.
The barbarians who dwell along China’s frontiers are really of two different kinds. Some, of whom we have almost exclusively spoken so far, are shepherds of the Mongolian steppes; but to their east there is another country, Manchuria, which owing to its proximity to the sea is much better watered, and instead of steppes possesses great stretches of forest. The nomads who inhabit it belong to the Mongol branch  –  the Tungus, who also populate the forests of eastern Siberia. It is these who now penetrate China, and who naturally penetrate it by means of Jilin, the closest Chinese province to Manchuria. The Khitan were Tungus, and so were the Nüzhen, and it was Tungus who were to rule China from the seventeenth to the twentieth century.
The loss of northern China as a consequence of their attempt to reconquer Beijing was a lesson for the Song that they did not forget. At the court of Hangzhou, it was the pacifists, thoroughgoing pacifists, who held undivided sway in the emperor’s councils. They wanted peace at any price to such an extent that they did not hesitate to disgrace and even execute generals found ‘guilty’ of gaining a victory. Such was notably the fate of general Yue Fei. [6] The dreams of the poet Du Fu were now indeed more than satisfied.
What was it that caused this Chinese withdrawal in the face of the barbarians  –  a withdrawal that began then and has lasted down to our own day? Like all such withdrawals, it was occasioned by an arrest in technical progress. It is technical progress that is the great factor of disequilibrium in human societies. Technical revolutions and the economic developments that follow them disturb the state of equilibrium of a society, and set in motion all the political and social processes that make up its history. They are as much the cause of conflicts with people abroad as they are of internal ones.
Now at the time with which we are dealing, Chinese technique and the economy had attained their full development. We have seen that it was under the Tang that Chinese industries acquired a complete mastery of their technique, and that it was at the same time that the colonisation and assimilation of the south had been completed, whilst maritime commerce had established itself upon the largest possible scale on the basis of the navigation then available. Thenceforward, in the absence of any new technical revolution, the Chinese economy was bound to stagnate, but a stagnant economy is incompatible with political expansion. Political expansion, even a purely defensive one, can only be brought about under the stimulus of economic expansion, which at one and the same time demands and permits it. If the Song resigned themselves first to the loss of Beijing, and afterwards to the loss of the Yellow River, it was because the Chinese technique and economy were themselves already in a state of ‘retreat’.
The Song era was certainly a great one for those who pursued the arts. Precisely because technique had completed its development and attained perfection, it was bound to produce masterpieces; the products of the Song pottery are marvels of craftsmanship. It was also the great era of painting. Even so, pottery and painting are but minor arts beside the architecture and sculpture that flourished under the Han and Tang dynasties.
It was above all in the domain of economic and social policy that the stagnation of technique produced its most remarkable results.
As abroad, so also at home it was a policy of peace that the Song pursued. The refusal to expand abroad was accompanied by a corresponding refusal to expand within. This refusal to expand within found expression in the pursuit of a total economic equilibrium by means of a controlled economy.
The end of the first Song period  –  the period during which they had held Kaifeng as capital and ruled both the Yellow and the Blue Rivers  –  was a great era of ‘reforms’. For more than half a century, from 1069 to 1126, the ‘reformers’, the most famous of whom was the scholar Wang Anshi, [7] had the direction of Chinese policy almost without interruption.
Their policy consisted of the application of two great measures, each complementary to the other.
The first, by which any controlled economy begins, was the fixing of prices. It was necessary to stabilise the economy, and to that end to stabilise prices, because it was the variation in prices that led to economic disequilibrium. The mandarins were accordingly charged with the task of fixing the prices of all commodities in every region, and these prices were made rigorously obligatory for everyone.
Nevertheless, stable as technique might have been, and insignificant as progress might be, there is a class of variations in production that cannot be avoided, and this is variations in production due to irregular atmospheric conditions. In China, as everywhere, and even more often in China than anywhere else, harvests may be very good or very bad. In order to avoid the consequences of this irregularity, two methods were simultaneously adopted.
In the first place, the state put in reserve the surplus harvests of the good years, and released them on the market during the bad years. But this method was very dangerous, for it is undialectical: unlike the variation of prices, it tends not to allow the balance between production and consumption to be re-established. In a nutshell, after the farmer has reaped a good harvest and made a considerable amount of money (since the unit prices did not vary), he is tempted to sow a great deal more, and the surplus tends to become excessive. The opposite happens in the event of a bad harvest: since the low yield is not compensated for by a rise in price, the farmer was unable to recover his expenses, and so became disposed to abandon or neglect the cultivation of a product that was manifestly in short supply. With the object of overcoming this second and most immediately dangerous phenomenon, the Chinese reformers proceeded to complete their system of fixed prices by establishing a great credit institution by means of which the state made yearly loans to agriculturists, enabling them to sow and grow their crops when there had been a shortfall in the harvest of the previous year.
This credit to agriculture was followed by credits to commerce and industry. A country’s economy is all of a piece. If we want to direct one branch of it, we are led inevitably to direct the whole lot.
When a poor harvest leads to a lessening in the demand for industrial products by the cultivator, the manufacturer, not being allowed to go below the fixed prices, is unable to put his goods within reach of his customer’s purse, and so he cannot sell them. If he is then to continue in business, he must borrow. So the state was obliged to lend money to industrialists as well as to cultivators.
Fixing of prices by the state, stockpiling of goods by the state, and granting credit by the state, these were the three measures by which Song China attempted to stabilise the national economy, thereby ensuring that, come what may, commodity production would always be on an even level, and always at the same rhythm.
These methods are to be found at the roots of any controlled economy in any country and in any era, for ways of controlling the economy are not unlimited. State-fixed prices, state purchases and state loans were the measures, as we have seen, that were even decreed by the Emperor Wang Mang in the first century of the Christian era; they were also the measures adopted in the Egypt of the Pharaohs; they were the measures adopted by Diocletian [8] when he inaugurated the lower empire, those that were practised by the Incas, [9] and those which states sometimes still try to adopt even in our own day.
It goes without saying that this stabilisation of the economy can only succeed in eras in which technical innovation is dormant, because the variations in production engendered by technical progress would break through the strong strait-jacket aimed at preventing their existence.
On the other hand, in times that immediately follow periods of great progress, it is quite clear that a controlled economy arouses the liveliest interest, for the simple reason that, wearied by continual upheavals and the constant insecurity that technical progress brings into everyday life, people everywhere are eager for a respite.
So it came about that as the creative genius of China had not been exhausted at the time of the Emperor Wang Mang, the controlled economy remained at the planning stage, a state in which the laws were never enforced. With Wang Anshi, on the other hand, this policy was really put into practice, and for several centuries, with adjustments of one kind or another, it continued to influence not only the last Song emperors, but even their successors  –  those of the Mongol Dynasty. [10]
This policy of directing the economy was accompanied by a democratic policy. Not only were measures adopted to advance education, examination fees being reduced in the proportion of 100 to two, but there was also the most ambitious attempt made since Athenian times to suppress the two great pillars of the state  –  the army and the administration  –  as distinct bodies separated from the people.
In 1070, Wang Anshi in effect decreed the arming of the people; all able-bodied men were to be armed on the spot as a popular militia. In addition, a three-year period of compulsory service in government offices was imposed on everyone. With the application of these two measures, the state was united with the people. It was none other than the key concept propounded by Lenin when he wrote State and Revolution. [11] But this daring attempt by the great Chinese reformer miscarried, just as nearly a thousand years later the similar attempt miscarried in the case of the Russian Revolution. The state remained distinct from the people.
On the other hand, the policy as a whole succeeded in achieving the principal aim of all controlled economies: tranquillity. The Song era does not appear to have been troubled by great popular uprisings, as were the Han and Tang epochs.
The arrest in technical progress, confinement within national frontiers, a controlled economy, the appeasement of the class struggle  –  all these things between them together formed a complex interconnection representing diverse manifestations of the same state: a state of lethargy. The disposition to leave things as they were, the fear of change, the fear of growth, a fear even of defending oneself  –  this was the general inclination. China had come to a state of deadlock.
Deadlock, however, does not imply an absence of prosperity. On the contrary, the controlled economy vigorously introduced by the Song of Kaifeng and continued more moderately by the Song of Hangzhou, combined with the pacifism resolutely practised by the latter, was conducive to a state of general ease and well-being which expressed itself in the highly characteristic fact that at the end of the twelfth century it was one day noticed that the prisons were empty.
But it was also, and precisely for the same reason, a bleak and melancholy era, an era of ‘melancholy refinement’, as the Sinologist Soulié de Morant [12] described it. Melancholy bleakness is in essence the price of tranquillity. Consider the Sweden of today, for example, where people are reduced to drunkenness in an effort to escape from the bleakness and boredom of their lives. A melancholy bleakness is the inevitable accompaniment of material well-being. It springs from an unsatisfied need for action and adventure.
The Coming of the Mongols
For all these reasons the Song, unlike their predecessors, were not the victims of any popular uprising. Their fall was solely due to foreign events, the origin and development of which were not China’s work.
As we have said, in the course of the previous centuries, Islam had set up a barrier in the west of Asia. The Islamised Turks on the western side of the Pamirs had blocked the passage through which the nomads of the eastern steppes were wont to expand. Now the force that impels the horsemen of central Asia to press towards the west is something that cannot be held down. It again manifested itself, and this time with a violence that was all the greater because of the forces opposed to it. The thirteenth century produced the gigantic Mongolian cavalcade that was only equalled in power by Attila’s, the formidable outburst of Genghis Khan [13] and his lieutenants.
These Mongol invasions were the counterpart of the Crusades. They were Asia’s counter-offensive against Islam, just as a short time previously the Crusades had been Europe’s counter-offensive against this same Islam. The success of this counter-attack, just like that of Europe, was at first total. Just as the Crusades had led to the capture of Jerusalem in 1099, [14] so in 1259 the Asian crusades were to capture Baghdad, the seat of the Caliphate. [15] But although as simple counter-attacks designed to halt the Muslim pressure, the two Crusades achieved their aims, these counter-attacks were not transformed into counter-invasions, so the Mongols as well as the Latins had to abandon their conquests, and Islam regained complete possession of its former territories. The Latin kingdom of Jerusalem did not last a century, [16] and Mongol domination of the Middle East only lasted a little longer, 150 years. [17]
Before turning against the Muslims of the west, Genghis Khan deemed it prudent first of all to secure his rear by subduing his compatriots, the Nüzhen, who had been established for a century behind the Great Wall, and reigned over the whole of northern China. Accordingly, in 1211, Genghis Khan crossed the Great Wall, razed Beijing, pushed into Shandong, and reduced the Nüzhen kingdom to Kaifeng and the area around it. [18] He and his successors were thus in a position to pass on with equanimity to the west as far as Poland and Hungary, some 7000 kilometres from the point of their departure.
China, however, the old traditional Mongol objective, was not to be spared for too long from fresh incursions on the part of those powerful tribes who were in the process of conquering almost the whole of Eurasia. So it happened that in 1233, Genghis Khan’s first successor, Ogodai, began his conquest of what remained of the Nüzhen kingdom, and so became master of all northern China. [19]
On the morrow of this event, a new situation arose. We have seen that hitherto the Mongolian pressure had exerted itself almost without ceasing on the China of the Yellow River, the barbarians hardly ever failing to occupy it, at least in part, either as mercenaries or as rulers. On the other hand, the China of the Blue River had almost always remained untouched, a fact that conferred on it the distinction of becoming the true Chinese territory, the asylum alike of Chinese civilisation and of Chinese independence.
From now on, it was no longer to be the same. There was to be no more Byzantium. From now on, every time that the barbarians entered China, it was not only to establish their dominion locally, but to establish their power over the entire country, as much over the Blue River as over the Yellow River, from Beijing down to Canton. This was doubtless a result of the strengthening of China’s geographical unity due to the great development of the means of communication. [20]
Thus then, after having gained possession of northern China, again with the aid of the Song, who, repeating their former error, had supported the Mongols against the Nüzhen, [21] just as a century earlier they had supported the Nüzhen against the Khitan, Ogodai threw his hordes against the China of the south, and finally Kublai Khan, Genghis Khan’s fourth successor and grandson, completed the conquest in 1276 by the capture of the capital, Hanghzhou, and of Canton, the most southerly of China’s great cities.
Kublai Khan could then legitimately proclaim himself emperor of China, [22] but it had taken the Mongols a good 50 years to achieve their objective, because in spite of their former pacifism, the Song had made a desperate resistance to the invaders over a period of 40 years, and after the last defeat the last Chinese general jumped into the sea with the last Song emperor. [23]
Notes
1. The period following the fall of the Tang Dynasty, a period of extreme confusion, is generally called that of the Five Dynasties and the Ten States. The Five Dynasties were the Later Liang (907-923), the Later Tang (923-936), the Later Jin (936-947), the Later Han (947-950) and the Later Zhou (951-960). The Ten States, to begin with founded by soldiers who had served as local garrison commanders under the Tang, were Wu (920-937), Wuyue (907-978), Southern Han (907-971), Chu (907-951), Former Shu (907-925), Min (909-945), Jingnan (Nanping, 924-963), Later Shu (934-965), Southern Tang (937-975) and Northern Han (951-979).
2. The Song Dynasty is divided between the Northern Song (960-1127), ruling over the whole country, and the Southern Song (1127-1276), ruling only over the south. Its competitor for the control of the north during the earlier period was the Khitan (Qidan) Dynasty.
3. Zhao Kuangyin, the commander of the imperial army of the Later Zhou dynasty, overthrew the regime and proclaimed himself emperor (Tai Zu, 960-976), founding the Northern Song Dynasty (960-1127) with its capital at Kaifeng, now renamed the Eastern Capital (Dongjing). He took 15 years to conquer the states of Jingnan, Later Shu, Southern Han and Southern Tang, and in 978-79 eliminated the Wuyue and Northern Han states, thus uniting all that part of China not held by the Khitan.
4. The Khitan or Liao Dynasty (916-1125) was founded by Yelu Aboaji (Emperor Tai Zu, 960-976), and reigned from Yanjing (modern Beijing). The Song ruler Zhao Kuangyi (Northern Song Emperor Tai Zong, 976-997) made two attacks on the Khitan state that were badly defeated at Gaolianghe, near Beijing (979) and the Qigouguan Pass in Hebei (986). Peace was finally concluded between the two states at Tanzhou in 1004.
5. The Nüzhen were a subject tribe of the Liao who lived in the Songhua River valley. In 1114, their chief Wanyan Aguda threw off the yoke of the Khitan, and proclaimed himself emperor (Tai Zu, 1115-1123) and first ruler of the Jin Dynasty (1115-1276). In 1122, the Northern Song Emperor Hui Zong (1100-1125) allied with the Nüzhen in a war against the Khitan. The Nüzhen captured the Khitan emperor in 1125, and brought his dynasty to an end. They then carried out a successful raid upon Dongjing in 1127, and captured the Northern Song emperor. The emperor’s brother Zhao Gou (Emperor Gao Zong, 1127-1162) then established the Southern Song Dynasty (1127-1276) in a new capital at Nanjing.
6. In 1134, General Yue Fei (1103-1141) recovered several prefectures in northern Hubei and southern Henan from the Jin, and in 1140, he won a decisive battle at Yancheng and recovered Zhengzhou and Luoyang from the enemy. But the emperor, who was determined to sue for peace, had him recalled and thrown into prison on false charges, where he was murdered.
7. The leading reformer of the time, Wang Anshi (1021-1086), was a materialist philosopher. His theory of ‘the new learning’ formed the basis of the administrative measures that were introduced at that time. Shen Kou (1031-1095) was also a reformer and a scientist. They were opposed by such conservatives as Sima Guang (1019-1086) and Cheng Hao (1032-1085).
8. The Roman Emperor Diocletian (284-305AD) attempted to fix wages and prices in his Edictum de Pretiis issued in 302AD. In spite of harsh penalties, it never really worked. Such a mechanism was not really available to the Egyptian Pharaohs as Louzon states, since real Egyptian coinage did not begin to circulate until the fourth century BC, although the state had always attempted to regulate the supply of precious metals and foodstuffs using its control of the temple storehouses.
9. The Inca Empire attempted to regulate the economy by stockpiling supplies in state storehouses (pirua). See Louis Baudin, A Socialist Empire: The Incas of Peru, New York, 1961, pp144-6; Alfred Métraux, The History of the Incas, New York, 1969, p105.
10. Kublai Khan officially proclaimed the Yuan (Mongol) Dynasty in 1271, but as the Song Dynasty was not brought to an end until 1276, its dates are generally reckoned from then (1276-1368).
11. Lenin’s State and Revolution was written in the course of the Russian Revolution of 1917. In it he advocated the abolition of the separation between state and people, and between rulers and ruled.
12. ‘They [Song paintings] are all animated by the same dreamy melancholy which animates the poems of the time. An excess of emotion generally shows itself in melancholy.’ (George Soulié de Morant, A History of Chinese Art, London, 1931, p170)
13. Temujin (1162-1227), the leader of one of the Mongol clans, was proclaimed Genghis Khan, ruler of all the Mongols, at a kuriltai on the banks of the Onon River in 1206.
14. The army of the First Crusade commanded by Godfrey de Bouillon and Raymond of Toulouse captured Jerusalem in 1099, subjecting its defenceless population to a frightful massacre.
15. The Mongol army of Hulagu, son of Tule, the fourth son of Genghis Khan, captured Baghdad in 1259 after a campaign against the Assassins. The last Abbasid Caliph, Mutassim, was trampled to death by horses, and the city was put to the sword.
16. Yusuf, Salah al-Din (Saladin) defeated the Crusader army at the Horns of Hattin near Lake Tiberias in 1187, and captured Jerusalem shortly afterwards.
17. The Ilkhanate begun by Hulagu in Persia was repeatedly defeated after his death by the Egyptian Mamelukes in its attempts to take over Syria, and fell apart after the death of Abu Said in 1335.
18. Genghis Khan began his attacks on the Jin (Nüzhen) in 1211, and took their capital, Zhongdu, in 1215.
19. Ogodai began his onset upon the remains of the Nüzhen kingdom in 1229. In 1233, he captured Caizhou (Kaifeng), and the last Jin emperor committed suicide.
20. On the development of the latter at the time of the Mongol Dynasty, we have two contemporary sources: that of Marco Polo and that of the Franciscan missionary, brother Odoric, who came to China at the beginning of the fourteenth century. This is what the latter wrote: ‘Couriers galloped, belly to earth, on incredibly fast horses, or used camels. When they came within sight of the relay stations, they sounded a horn to announce their approach. So alerted, the guardians prepared another camel driver with another mount. He seized hold of the dispatches and galloped to the next relay station, where the same change took place. In this way in 24 hours, the Great Khan obtained news coming from countries that were normally as far away as at least three days journey on horseback.’ [Author’s note] Odorico de Pordenone visited China in 1325, and returned to Europe in 1330. [Editor’s note]
21. When Ogodai invested the Jin capital at Caizhou in 1233, the Southern Song Emperor Li Zong (Zhao Tian, 1224-1264) sent his troops to help surround the city. He was repaid by a two-pronged attack by Ogodai upon the Song state itself in 1235.
22. Kublai succeeded Mangu as Great Khan in 1260, and ruled to 1294, proclaiming the Yuan Dynasty in 1271.
23. After a final battle near Canton in 1279, the Song commander threw himself into the sea with the last infant emperor on his back.
 


Table of Contents




 Three Thousand Years of History, Fifty Years of Revolution by Robert Louzon 1998


China: 3000 Years of History, 50 Years of Revolution. Robert Louzon 1998
Introduction
If books were graded in importance by the time spent in producing them, this one would be a classic of world literature. It first appeared as the third in the series ‘Collection de la Révolution Prolétarienne’ in the year after Mao’s proclamation of the Chinese People’s Republic, and the permission to publish it in English was given by Robert Louzon to his old friend Frank Ridley. A preliminary draft translation was completed for him by FJ O'Dempsey in 1959, and Ridley handed on the manuscript for Socialist Platform to get ready for the printer a few years before his death in 1994.
We had the sheets bound up not long after receiving them, but when we came to compare the text with the original French, we found that there were numerous examples of mistranslation, and that sections of the text and footnotes had been omitted. There were also large numbers of literary and historical allusions that were quite unfamiliar to English readers. Louzon had in addition cited a number of books without indicating the precise pages he had in mind, not only from French sources, but from some that were in English to begin with, or had been translated subsequently into that language from French. On top of this the new Pinyin mode of transliterating Chinese names had now become widespread, so an entire reworking on a considerable scale had to be undertaken before the book was in a fit state to be issued to the public. Many of these difficulties have taken some time to iron out, and the text now in the reader’s hands has been carefully checked against the original. Ian Birchall was kind enough to remove the final batch of errors, and an equal courtesy by Greg Benton has allowed us to use the Pinyin spellings throughout. Readers unfamiliar with these should check the index carefully for the old Wade-Giles equivalents, though in a few cases we have left the names of important ports and cities in their familiar garb. [1] We have been careful to distinguish between Louzon’s footnotes and our own.
But why should such a book be published, so long after the circumstances that gave rise to it?
The personality of its author is sufficient justification, if any more were needed. For nearly a century Robert Louzon, along with Pierre Monatte and Alfred Rosmer, dominated the proud tradition of French Anarcho-Syndicalism. Born in 1882, he studied mining engineering, and joined the Parti ouvrier socialiste révolutionnaire in 1900, and the SFIO in 1905. He helped Monatte found and edit La Vie ouvrière, for which he wrote his first article in December 1909. Four years later, he went off to farm in Tunisia, and when the SFIO split at the Congress of Tours, he became a founder member of the French Communist Party, and Secretary of its Tunisian federation. In 1922, he was jailed for six months in Algiers for supporting the cause of Arab nationalism, and was then expelled from the colony. On his return to France, he rejoined Monatte and the group around La Vie ouvrière, and began to write articles on economics for L'Humanité. He supported the struggle of the Left Opposition in the Soviet Union, and left the Communist Party when Monatte and Rosmer were expelled in 1924. But he remained a revolutionary Syndicalist rather than a Trotskyist, and subsequently developed differences with Trotsky over the attitude to be taken towards the continued Soviet control of the Chinese East Asian Railway.
From 1925 onwards, he edited La Révolution prolétarienne, and in 1936 went to Morocco on behalf of the CNT to impede Franco’s recruitment among the Rif. A year later, at the age of 55, he joined the CNT militia at the front, and his reports in La Révolution prolétarienne give a valuable insider’s view of the problems of the Spanish revolution and Civil War. He was again condemned to 15 months in prison in absentia in France in July 1939 for supporting the independence of Tunisia, and was once more arrested in May 1940 for his opposition to the war. He was released from a detention camp in Algeria in August 1941. He resumed publication of La Révolution prolétarienne in 1947, and he died in 1976.
This is the last of his major works, and we believe that it retains a considerable amount of its original value. To begin with, it is extraordinarily prophetic. Readers of Louzon’s final section will be struck straight away by his prediction of the Sino-Soviet split nearly a decade before it became public. He clearly demonstrates that the Third Chinese Revolution, in no way proletarian, is the logical conclusion of a long tradition of peasant-based insurrection organised by secret societies based upon clear dogmatic principles, drawing its inspiration to begin with from native culture (Daoism and Buddhism) and later from the West (the Taipings, nationalism and Stalinism). He sketches out China’s future industrialisation by the methods of what he calls ‘state capitalism’, and its rise to superpower status, drawing our attention both to its imitation of the Russian model and its rejection of Russian tutelage. Its development in the direction of the more familiar economic forms of capitalism in the last two decades would not have surprised him.
Moreover, this is very much a treatment of Chinese history using the methods of Marxist analysis, in ways that do not appear in the regime’s official historiography, based as they are upon dogmatic and Europe-based schemas inherited from the fourth chapter of Stalin’s notorious History of the CPSU (Short Course). Although Louzon describes the period of the Eastern Zhou and Warring States in terms of ‘feudalism’, and points to parallels with the Roman, Dark Ages and Medieval periods in Europe, he refuses to be drawn into the Byzantine discussions of modern official Chinese historiography as to exactly when China became a slave, a feudal or a capitalist state, discussions that have led to such widely divergent results in periodisation. [2] He wisely limits himself to the remark that ‘China was to experience all the property forms; feudal, capitalist and peasant. A complete system of individual property was to be found there, as well as that of simple right of use, with all the forms of ownership in between.’
His refusal to become bogged down in such definitions frees him to use dialectical forms of analysis in much more varied and subtle ways. He shows an extraordinary awareness of what is unique and what is general in Chinese society and civilisation, and how these are reflected in politics, philosophy, literature and even the visual arts. He explores, for example, the interaction between barbarian cattle herder and settled Chinese agriculturalist; between internally divided kingdoms and the great empire state; between expansion and isolationism, and between agriculture and commerce. He identifies and explains the lack of religious feeling in its purest form, while analysing the interplay between state ideology and high philosophy and peasant consciousness. He highlights and explains the steady shift in the focus of Chinese history from north to south, a shift that is gaining in momentum at the present day. He uncovers the relationship between peasant revolt and barbarian invasion, and how it is that the most conservative and stable state in world history has so often been wracked by revolutionary disturbances. He shows how the development of China becomes more constricted from Song times onwards, only to receive an immense boost and a new direction through contact with Western industrialised civilisation during the nineteenth century. He explains how the seemingly inexhaustible capacity of China to absorb its invaders began to break down at that time. Finally, he draws attention to the overall rhythms of Chinese history, of major dynasties uniting the country and dominating the area around, alternating with what he calls ‘Middle Ages’, in which it is regionally divided, accompanied by large-scale internal discontent and foreign invasion. Within this pattern he identifies a phase of overall ascent up to Tang times, and of overall decline since. This is a very significant observation, since the same schema can be applied to other pre-classical civilisations, such as ancient Egypt.
Obviously, we cannot claim that where the great classics of world history have failed to provide a synthesis, of these and similar questions, Louzon has succeeded. The sources he indicates in his footnotes are generally works of popularisation, he lacks the full battery of modern scholarship as applied to Chinese history, and obviously does not set out to compete with it. Some of the facts he states, and some of the conclusions he draws, are clearly invalid, and a few of the more striking of these have been indicated in our footnotes. But we do think that the book deserves careful study for at least trying to follow Engels’ example in attempting a general historical treatment. For if such general sketches from a left point of view are never made, Marxists must restrict themselves to the minutiae, and leave the official historiography of the bourgeois world unchallenged on all the important questions. So whilst finally fulfilling our promise to Frank Ridley, we at Socialist Platform are pleased to bring out Louzon’s book as one of our ‘histories from below’.
It only remains for me to put on record our thanks to Ian Birchall and Greg Benton, who bear no further responsibility for the book or its mistakes, and to Paul Flewers for his usual exacting standards of presentation.
Al Richardson
Notes
1. The list is given at the end of the text.
2. For example, Kouo Mo-Jo, ‘La société esclaviste chinoise’, in État et classes dans l'Antiquité esclaviste, Cahier no 2 of Recherches internationales à la lumière du marxisme (Paris, May-June 1957), pp 30-51, describes the Shang-Yin, Zhou and Qin dynasties as slave societies, but not the following Han dynasty; whereas Bao Shouyi, in An Outline History of China (Beijing, 1982), regards the Qin and all successive dynasties as feudal until the nineteenth century. All Stalinist and Stalinist-influenced writers, as well as Perry Anderson (see his appendix to Lineages of the Absolutist State, London, 1974) are agreed, for obvious political reasons, that Marx’s concept of the Asiatic mode is inapplicable, either in general or to Chinese history in particular (see Revolutionary History, Volume 2, no 4, Spring 1990, pp 47-48). The only fresh and illuminating attempt to apply Marx’s theory coming from inside China is Wu Dakun’s essay, ‘The Asiatic Mode of Production in History as Viewed by Political Economy in Its Broad Sense’, in Marxism in China (Nottingham, 1983), pp 53-77. A true appreciation of the whole problem can only be gained from Umberto Melotti’s Marx and the Third World (London, 1977), updated by Stephen Dunne’s The Fall and Rise of the Asiatic Mode of Production (London, 1982).
 


Table of Contents




 Three Thousand Years of History, Fifty Years of Revolution by Robert Louzon 1998


China: 3000 Years of History, 50 Years of Revolution. Robert Louzon 1998
Chapter III: The Second Revolution (1927-1949)
Mao Zedong
The Guomindang’s revolution had one great weakness: it had been carried out by a means other than those of traditional Chinese revolutions, and was an imported product. And what in fact was the Guomindang? It was just a certain number of intellectuals who for the most part had numerous overseas links, and who were convinced  –  and they were moreover right about this, and it explains their success  –  that China could only resist the pressure of European colonialism by ‘modernising’ itself. ‘Modernising’ itself of course meant ‘Europeanising’ itself; it was necessary to copy the institutions of Europe in the same way that it was necessary to copy its technology, taking over its ideas as well as its methods. To sum up, the revolution that the Guomindang proposed for China was a revolution of imitation.
It was a revolution of the type that had been made half a century earlier by Japan, and which had turned out to be a magnificent success.
In Japan, the traditional power, that of the Shogun, [1] who personified old Japan, had been overthrown, and Europe had been copied. Factories and workshops were built on the European model, production was in the hands of private capitalists, as in Europe, and the state functioned by means of an elected parliament and ministers responsible to it, as in Europe. Now this servile imitation succeeded in less than 50 years in making Japan into one of the greatest economic powers and one of the strongest states in the world.
Why should what had succeeded in Japan not also succeed in China? It was only a matter of overthrowing the emperor, the personification of the old China, just as Japan had overthrown the shogun, the personification of the old Japan, and then of setting about copying Europe. Such was the underlying idea of the Guomindang, that inspired its whole policy.
But China is not Japan. Throughout its long history, Japan has never been any more than an imitator, and it has always accepted without ever giving anything in return. It was China, in the sixth century BC, that gave Japan its first religion, Shintoism, based on ancestor-worship, and its first moral code, that of Confucius; [2] a thousand years later it was through China that Buddhism came to it, after first having been digested by the Chinese; [3] it was China which taught it to write (about the fifth century AD); [4] its arts, sculpture and painting are Buddhist, and its music is Chinese; it was on the model of the emperor of China as the ‘son of heaven’ that Japan had its emperor, also the ‘son of heaven’, surrounded by ceremonial copied from that of the Chinese court. More important still, it was China which taught it to grow tea and cotton, gave it the mulberry tree and acquainted it with silk; it was China which, in the fourth century AD, taught it how to weave, [5] and in the sixteenth century taught it the art of porcelain. [6]
So by copying Europe, Japan was only changing the source of its imitations, and remained true to its tradition of imitation.
China, on the other hand, has hardly ever imitated; it has always drawn upon its own resources. The little that came to it from abroad, like Buddhism, it profoundly transformed, recasting it in its own moulds. The Guomindang, which had only offered the Chinese people European institutions such as capitalism, the republic, and the opium of such phrases as ‘social reforms’, could not therefore satisfy China’s creative genius. Therein, so it seems to me, lies the basic reason for its failure.
This failure, in any case, was total. During the 20 or more years when it was in power, from 1928 to 1949, not only did it fail to carry out its programme, it hardly even outlined it; and nowhere did it succeed in copying Europe. It did not even succeed in borrowing one of Europe’s most superficial and easily transferable traits: the political regime. This relatively simple matter, which consists of instituting a parliament, proceeding to elections and governing by means of responsible ministers, was not even attempted, as we have seen. Under the new ‘republic’, China was governed as dictatorially as under the empire, with the Guomindang cliques struggling for influence just as the court cliques had done formerly.
As regards the other points of its modernisation programme, the Guomindang was no better able to realise them. It did not succeed in making China into an industrial country. Industry, even where the capital and management were purely Chinese, remained almost exclusively confined within the limits of the foreign ‘concessions'; elsewhere the Guomindang was not able to go beyond the stage of paper planning: a Chinese capitalist class could no more cover China with a vast network of industries than had foreign capital; the railways, the basic element in any industrialisation and of the entire ‘modernisation’ of a state, especially in such a vast continent as China, were only built at a snail’s pace.
Finally, the agricultural system remained as it was. The French Revolution had established capitalism by embarking on a vast scheme of land expropriation which had furnished the capital necessary for the needs of industrialisation; but however much Sun Yat-sen had inscribed in his programme an agrarian reform, the Guomindang did nothing to bring it into operation.
To sum up, the Guomindang did not satisfy any of the three needs that were its reason for existence: it did not make the tiller of the soil its owner; China did not become an industrial country, and it was not governed in accordance with a constitutional regime. The attempt to imitate Europe had accordingly achieved nothing. Hence the second revolution.
Prologue to the New Revolution: The Break with the Russians
We have seen that in 1921, the Guomindang parliament in Canton felt itself strong enough to assert its independence of the Beijing puppet-presidents by proclaiming itself an independent republic and appointing Sun Yat-sen its president.
Now 1921 was the time when the new Russian regime also began to consolidate itself, when the forces of the Tsarist generals had been defeated and dispersed, and consequently Russia was able to play some sort of rôle abroad, and look for allies, and perhaps even subjects, outside its own frontiers. Now the chaotic state of China at this time offered an eminently favourable opportunity for outside intervention, and Russia seized it.
It offered its services to the Guomindang to help it in the struggle against the northern generals, and the offer was warmly accepted. As a result, Moscow sent a political advisor to Canton, Borodin, [7] a military advisor, Blücher, [8] and more important still, equipment and weapons. At the same time, a Chinese Communist Party was organised and ordered to march hand in hand with the Guomindang bourgeoisie, whilst being ever ready to shoot it in the back at the first opportunity. [9]
And so it happened that in actual fact it was a Communist-Guomindang army, but under the command of the Guomindang general Chiang Kai-shek, that undertook the march to Hankou, and it was the workers of Shanghai, who under Communist inspiration, had taken over the city by means of a general strike and insurrection, even before Chiang Kai-shek’s forces had entered it. [10]
By acting in this way, the Russians evidently had the aim of Russifying China. They proposed that it should no longer ‘modernise’ itself, as the Guomindang was inviting it to, by copying Europe and America, with their private capital and their democracy, but by copying Russia with its much more up-to-date methods of state capitalism and dictatorship.
This collaboration with the Guomindang, an attempt to penetrate China by means of infiltration into the heart of bourgeois movements, which 20 years later was to be so successful in Czechoslovakia, [11] and only narrowly failed in France and Italy, [12] was a complete fiasco in China. No sooner had the forces of the Guomindang entered Shanghai than Chiang resolutely set about ridding himself of his ‘Communist’ allies, even though the whole of northern China was still in the hands of the dujun, by one of the most unexpected and bloodiest coups in history.
Since Shanghai was the greatest industrial centre in China, it was in Shanghai where the main forces of the Chinese Communist Party were; the Communists counted on the workers of Shanghai first of all to increase their influence in the coalition, and afterwards to be able to expel their partners. That is why, realising that it was necessary to strike at the head, it was in Shanghai that the Guomindang struck its blow, 15 days after the capture of the city. On 12 April 1927, using those same troops who had entered the city as ‘liberators’, and on whose loyalty he knew he could safely rely, Chiang Kai-shek disarmed the workers’ militia that had taken over the city, sacked the headquarters of the workers’ organisations, and set about the methodical massacre of all the ‘Communists’ and sympathisers there were in Shanghai, and all the proletarians who showed any degree of militancy. [13]
That was the end of the Russian experiment, or at least of its first experiment. Borodin and all the members of his mission had to flee. Any Communist who was in the country, and not only in Shanghai, was hunted down, arrested, beheaded or shot. A last attempt at resistance, ordered personally by Stalin, took place in Canton on 11 December 1927 in the form of an armed insurrection, but the Guomindang forces had the upper hand in 48 hours, and this was only an opportunity for them to destroy the Communists in the south as thoroughly as they had done in central China. [14]
Starting from this time, a real iron curtain was drawn between China and Russia. For the first time, the Chinese worker was left to himself, free of both bourgeois and Russian influence.
He was free of bourgeois influence because the Shanghai massacre had been for him what the June days had been for the Parisian workers in the last century. [15] For the previous decades, the Chinese proletariat had been under the influence of the Guomindang, which it had followed during its revolutionary struggle against the emperor and military anarchy, just as until February 1848 the proletariat of Paris had been under the influence of the republicans who had led it in the assault upon throne and altar, but the blood of April in Shanghai had broken the allegiance of the Chinese worker to the Guomindang, just as that of June in Paris had broken the French workers’ loyalty to the republic.
In the second place, by the same token the Chinese proletariat was freed from the Russian leadership that had begun to implant itself within it, for the sole and simple reason that the Russians had disappeared. For not only had the Russians properly so-called disappeared, but so had the Chinese whom the Russians had placed in the leadership of the Communist Party, who were liquidated by what remained of the party; in fact on 7 August, the Central Committee of the Communist Party dismissed Chen Duxiu, who until then had been the General Secretary of the party, and Moscow’s trusted man. [16]
The Chinese workers were thus left to themselves, and that is why they became more conscious of themselves. [17] From now on, they began to build their movement by themselves and for themselves. That is why the birth of the Second Chinese Revolution dates from the morrow of the massacre of Shanghai.
The Precursors: The Taipings
The precursors of this revolution were all those popular movements, those revolts of the ‘vagabonds’ which we have seen occupying so great a place in the history of China ever since the third century before our era; its immediate precursor, the last of these revolts, which took place when China was first making contact with Europe, 10 or more years after the Opium War, was the work of the Taiping.
At the end of 1849 and the beginning of 1850, almost on the morrow of the 1848 European revolution, in other words  –  is this a coincidence, or a remote echo? [18]  –  some peasants in the region of Canton belonging to an ethnic group considered to be pure descendants of Chinese immigrants from the north, connected with an old secret society, that of the ‘Triads’, who wore long hair as a mark of distinction, armed themselves, rose in revolt, and under the command of one of their own leaders, Hong Xiuquan, set out on a march to the north. [19]
Just as the Guomindang were to do three-quarters of a century later, to begin with they made for Hankou, the heart of China; they took it in 1852, and then, just as the armies of the Guomindang were to do, they descended the course of the Blue River and captured Nanjing in 1853; finally, again like Chiang Kai-shek, they pushed towards the north, won over the basin of the Yellow River, occupying Shanxi there and finally camping on the outskirts of Tianjin in 1853. But the Manchu emperor had time to place Beijing in a state of defence; the Taiping, as the insurgents were now called, did not dare attack the capital, and they withdrew to the south, where they felt they were strongest. There they installed themselves, and set up a state that was to extend over all the provinces on the right bank of the Blue River, covering part of Hunan, all of Jiangxi, part of Zhejiang, Anhui and Jiangsu: its capital was Nanjing, on the very border of the new state.
The Taipings therefore occupied one of China’s richest regions, if not the richest, with a surface area of some 400 000 or 500 000 square kilometres, and a population that can be estimated as at least 40 million inhabitants.
The Taiping movement was partly political, for it had the abolition of the Manchu dynasty in its programme, but it was above all a social movement, whose principal aim was the division of the land into equal plots on each of which would be established a group of 25 families  –  a sort of agricultural phalanstery. [20]
It is a curious, but on reflection not a surprising fact, that this movement, essentially peasant and thoroughly Chinese, should feel the need to place itself under the banner of a foreign ideology. The prestige of Europe, a continent that had hardly been revealed to the Chinese, was already so great that it was in the name of the Gospel and of Jesus that the Taiping launched their armies and divided up the land. [21] There is in fact nothing that more strengthens belief in the success of a cause than to adorn it with a banner that has the lure of mystery just because it hails from afar, and of force because it is that of a power. The Taipings of 1850 were ‘Christians’ for the same reason that their successors of 1950 are ‘Communists’.
The Taiping state lasted for more than 12 years, and its life would no doubt have been much longer if it had not come into collision with the Europeans, whose faith it shared.
The Taiping state almost reached the gates of Shanghai. These social reformers, who based their claim on the Gospel, were rightly regarded as extremely dangerous by the very Christian Europeans who were then in the process of installing themselves in the ‘concessions’ that had just been assigned to them after the Opium War. And since it was obvious that official China, that of Beijing, was incapable of getting rid of them with its own forces, it was the Europeans of Shanghai who took the matter in hand; they enrolled mercenary troops composed of men of all nationalities, under the command of American, British and French adventurers, and launched them against the Taipings.
After two years of bitter struggle, their capital, Nanjing, was captured on 19 July 1864, their leader committed suicide, and 100 000 persons were massacred by the victors in Nanjing alone. The remainder of the Taipings withdrew and dispersed. The Taiping state had spent itself. [22]
The Birth of the Soviet Revolution
Let us return to contemporary events. Chiang’s attack upon the Communists on 27 April had of course led to great bewilderment in the ranks of what remained of the members of Moscow’s party. They could no longer count on help from their natural ally, the left wing of the Guomindang, which having already formed its own government in Hankou in opposition to Chiang Kai-shek, and having begun by excluding the Communists from its own ranks, was then shortly afterwards in its turn destroyed by Chiang Kai-shek, [23] who beginning from this time had become the only leader of both the Guomindang and of China.
It was then in these difficult circumstances that quite independently of the Communist Party, and in direct contradiction with the line followed by it until then, a Communist militant, who until then had been of the second rank, had a clear vision of what had to be done.
This man, who was called Mao Zedong, was the son of a farmer of Hunan, [24] a province in that region south of the Blue River, where not so long before the Taiping had been so deeply rooted. He had been in disagreement with his party for a long time on two points. One was a political point: according to him, it was necessary to break with the Guomindang and to organise on a class basis, [25] without any collaboration with the bourgeoisie; the other was a social point: this class basis must above all be not as the party leaders were proclaiming, amongst the workers of the cities, but amongst the peasants. They must arm the peasants, and they should take the land!
The state of decomposition in which the Communist Party found itself after the Shanghai massacre and the abortive Canton uprising enabled Mao to act independently in the direction he had always advocated, without troubling as to what the party high-ups might think or say. At the close of 1927, the Kremlin had dispatched a special mission to China charged not only with launching the Canton insurrection but also with ‘reorganising’ the Central Committee by placing at its head a new Moscow man, Li Lisan, [26] whose main task was particularly to struggle against Mao’s ‘deviations'; so he and his friends were in constant antagonism with the official Moscow representatives until the day when their movement had acquired sufficient strength that it was hopeless to try to break them. At that time (1931), Li Li-san was recalled to Moscow, and there he remained for 15 years  –  until the arrival of Russian troops in Manchuria. [27]
So acting contrary to the party directives, from the autumn of 1927, Mao took the initiative by assembling all he could find in order to constitute the nucleus of an armed force: the miners of Hanyang, the mutinous soldiers of Wuchang, and the local peasant militiamen of his own native province  –  all these together just forming a regiment. It was, however, an armed force sufficient to overcome the resistance of the local Guomindang forces, and to gain possession of an almost inaccessible mountain stronghold, a veritable natural fortress which had from time immemorial served as a refuge for bandits  –  to wit, Jinggangshan, on the boundary of Hunan and Jiangxi, in the very centre of what had been the Taiping state, in other words. Furthermore, Mao found there two bandit chiefs who readily joined him with their men, and thus raised his forces to nearly three regiments. Shortly afterwards, some of the troops of Nanchang in Jiangxi, who had revolted against the Guomindang on 1 August 1927, also joined him under the command of their own general, Zhu De. [28]
It was Zhu De who was soon to become the military commander of the entire force, Mao himself thenceforth devoting himself to the political side of the movement. It was one of Mao’s brilliant insights that an armed force amounted to nothing of itself and that it was of no revolutionary value unless it immediately put into operation a political and social programme. As a consequence, Mao decided to establish at once in all the villages that made up the area occupied by his troops councils or soviets of peasants, and what was of still more importance, to proceed at once with the division of the land.
All these proceedings, as well as the formation of an autonomous army, were contrary to the ‘line’ of the party, and got him dismissed from all his posts within it.
Nonetheless, he continued on his way, and the more so as his forces were steadily growing. In greater or smaller numbers, the soldiers in many areas were rising in revolt against the Guomindang, which had now become the symbol of bourgeois reaction, and were joining the ranks of the Jiangxi ‘army of peasants and workers’.
The increase due to new arrivals was such that it was impossible for the 50 kilometres which formed the diameter of the Jinggangshan area to provide the means of subsistence for them all. They accordingly ascended into the plain, and little by little occupied all the southern part of Jiangxi.
This was too much. The Guomindang could no longer ignore the existence of these ‘bands’, and so it resolved to exterminate them. Accordingly, at the end of 1930, three years after the arrival of the first rebels in the province, a first great campaign was launched against the ‘army of the provincial Soviet Government of Jiangxi’. A hundred thousand men took part in this campaign on the side of the Guomindang, whilst Mao and his associates disposed of no more than 40 000 soldiers. After January 1931, however, the attack of the Guomindang was completely broken, and their troops were obliged to retire.
This success, like those which followed it, was largely due to the tactic introduced on this occasion by Zhu De, from which he never subsequently deviated, which consisted of refusing to engage in a war of position, of only accepting a war of movement, and in the course of this being far quicker than his adversary, so as to be able to group all his forces against only one section of the enemy troops, then to regroup them against another section, and so on. [29] It was the tactic of Horatius against the Curatii. [30] ‘Admitting the enemy troops deeply into Soviet territory’, Mao told the American journalist Edgar Snow, ‘we staged launched sudden concentrated attacks, in superior numbers, on isolated units of the Guomindang troops, achieving positions of manoeuvre in which, momentarily, we could encircle them, thus reversing the general strategic advantage enjoyed by a numerically greatly superior enemy.’ [31]
Four months later, the Guomindang reopened their campaign  –  this time with 200 000 men. The same tactics were employed by the Red Army, and the same defeat was inflicted on the Guomindang.
A month later a third campaign was opened up  –  this time with 300 000 men, and under the personal command of Chiang Kai-shek. Again the same tactics were used, and again there was the same defeat, ending in October 1931.
The Soviets were then to have nearly two years of respite, and they used them to extend the area of their territory, notably in Fujian, the adjoining province.
However, in April 1933, a fourth campaign was launched by the Guomindang. This, like the previous campaigns, terminated in disaster.
Some months later, in October, a fifth campaign was started. This time 400 000 men were engaged against a Red Army of 180 000 men, of which no more than 100 000 were armed. This time a new and more serious tactic was adopted.
What had particularly helped the Red Army’s strategy during the preceding campaigns was the fact that in their desire to encircle the ‘Reds’ to be able to annihilate them, the Guomindang forces divided themselves up into several columns which made for the centre of the enemy region by different routes in such a way as to enable Zhu De to attack them one at a time, and so destroy them in turn.
It appears that, on the advice of their German military advisers, [32] the Guomindang generals in launching this fifth campaign adopted the tactic of blockade  –  that is, of blockading the Red territory by a whole system of blockhouses and fortifications, and then bombarding it with aircraft.
This new tactic was a hard blow for the small Soviet state. The Red troops could not hope to escape indefinitely suffocation in the interior of a circle which continually contracted, and from which they could not break out through lack of artillery. They succeeded, however, in holding out for a full year. According to the calculations of the Guomindang, it was a year during which a million men, civilian or military, died inside the Soviet zone, from military operations or from hunger.
Accordingly, the Soviet chiefs were eventually driven to the conclusion that if they were not to perish they must move out. [33] It was then that they began their preparations for a ‘retreat’ that was one of the most extraordinary military exploits of all time.
The ‘Long March’
What they had decided to do was to evacuate Jiangxi completely, situated as it was, let us once more remind ourselves, in the south-east of China, and make their way with their own troops and even with the able-bodied civilian population to the region of Gansu and Shaanxi, to China’s extreme north-west, in other words, where a movement similar to that of Jiangxi had already been established for three years under the control of Liu Zhidan. [34]
Between these two regions, there was a stretch of some 1200 kilometres as the crow flies, but there could be no question of passing from one region to another in a straight line, because for that it would be necessary to cross a great part of the Chinese plain where the immense armies of the Guomindang could easily overcome the small Soviet force. It was necessary to reach Shaanxi without hardly ever leaving the shelter of the mountains.
That is why, after breaking through the wall, or rather the successive walls of forts that surrounded them, in October 1934 the troops of Mao Zedong were to make a detour round the whole of China, by directing themselves in a straight line towards the west across Hunan and Guizhou, crossing the Blue River amid the mountains of Yunnan, then turning towards the north along the high mountains that border on Tibet towards Gansu, where they turned towards the north-east in order to establish themselves finally in the southern part of the great bend of the Yellow River on the borders of Gansu and Shaanxi.
Measured in a direct line, the distance covered altogether would be some 3000 kilometres, but in order to evade the enemy, or give him the slip, on several occasions it was necessary to double back, and even sometimes completely to retrace their steps, so that it is estimated that the actual distance traversed was actually about 9000 kilometres. These were 9000 kilometres without roads, often at very high altitudes, in freezing temperatures, and with aircraft whirling almost incessantly overhead, not to mention the skirmishes and pitched battles that had to be fought almost every day during the early part of the journey. By a curious coincidence, the most critical position in which Mao’s troops found themselves happened on the day when they had to cross the Dadu River in Sichuan, for it was in the gorges of this river that the last of the Taiping refugees had been exterminated after the fall of Nanjing.
Such was the ‘Long March’, a retreat that by far dwarfs that of the Ten Thousand, or of Napoleon from Russia. [35]
It was to last for a year. On 20 October 1935, exactly a year after their departure from Jiangxi, Mao Zedong’s soldiers reached northern Shaanxi, which had already been sovietised by the troops of Liu Zhidan. Since all the Red forces, or almost all of them, now found themselves reunited, the state in Shaanxi now took the name of the Chinese Soviet Republic of Workers and Peasants. A capital was established, first at Bao'an, and then at Yan'an, and they proceeded to distribute the land and to carry out military operations with the object of defending and extending the Soviet zone. [36]
But soon China’s position abroad was going to lead to a complete transformation in the relations between the state of Shaanxi and the Guomindang. This transformation, which dates from the years 1936-37, was to close the first phase of the peasant revolution, the phase during which it was pure and untainted, and open up a second phase, during which it was to become far more national than peasant.
But we must now double back to follow the events abroad that led to the situation of 1936-37.
The Struggle Between Russia and Japan
When dealing with the subject of China’s foreign affairs, we ended with an account of the despatch of a European army against Beijing in 1900 after the Boxer Rising, and we noted that during the preceding period the slightest incident was enough for the European powers to exact from China veritable partitions of its sovereignty, but that on that occasion they had demanded little more of China.
In fact, the year 1900 marked the beginning of Europe’s decline. The fact was that from that date China had little more to fear from Western Europe. Indeed, the Western powers were more concerned to hold onto the privileges that they had already obtained, rather than to seek to extend them.
On the other hand, China’s two closest neighbours  –  Japan, now a great power, and Russia  –  were to follow in the footsteps of France, Britain and Germany in the race to dismember China. The conflicts between them and with China fill the history of this part of the world throughout the whole of the first half of our present century.
It was the same sort of story as that of the struggle of the Dutch and Portuguese for the possession of Indonesia, or of the British and the French for the possession of India. Even the very forms assumed by these clashes between Russia and Japan in their quarrels over China were the same as those assumed two centuries earlier in the clashes between Britain and France over India. Sometimes there were veritable wars, formally declared and widespread; sometimes there were undeclared wars, limited to local operations over the coveted territories.
The initial advantages in this struggle were gained by Russia. We saw how, at the end of Japan’s victorious war against China in 1895, the European powers had compelled it to abandon all it had conquered from China, and then obtained from China considerable gains for themselves. It was Russia which gained the biggest chunk in this affair. Not only did China lease to it Port Arthur, a remarkably well-protected outlet at the far end of the Liaodong peninsula commanding Beijing’s access to the sea (which Russia was later to develop into a great military port), along with all the adjoining territory (including Dalian, where it was to establish a great commercial port), but it was also given practically complete control over Manchuria.
Manchuria, the Pacific borderland of the Mongolian steppe, well watered due to its proximity to the ocean, crossed by two important rivers  –  the Sungari in the north, a tributary of the Amur, and the Liao in the south, which flows directly into the Yellow Sea  –  was, as its name indicates, the place where the Manchus lived.
It is a country where plains alternate with mountains, formerly covered with forests, that the Manchu emperors had for a long time sought to guard against the Chinese, in order, as it were, to preserve their ‘family property’ in its natural state. However, when Beijing had to remove the last of the restrictions against Chinese immigration under pressure from the land-hungry Chinese peasants in 1878, the land turned out to be of extraordinary fertility, whilst at the same time coal deposits were found in many places.
In 1896, Russia obtained the concession for a railway line crossing the whole of northern Manchuria from west to east, with the object of linking up Vladivostok with the Trans-Siberian railway; it later obtained the further concession for a railway crossing the whole of Manchuria from north to south linking up with the former line from Port Arthur at Harbin.
There was more to come. These railway concessions were accompanied by a grant of wide stretches of territory along the two lines, as well as all kinds of economic privileges, and finally Russia was given the right to station garrisons of troops in the regions conceded in order to ‘maintain order’. Thus Manchuria practically became part of Russian territory.
This was a mortal blow for the Japanese designs on China. The only base of departure which Japan could now use for the conquest of China was Korea. This country, which is separated from Japan by a strait of no more than 200 kilometres wide, has always served as a bridge between China and Japan. It was by way of Korea that Japan received its civilisation from China; it was there that China and Japan, in turn or simultaneously, exercised their political influence. As we have seen, Japan had garrisons stationed in Korea before the war of 1894, and it was only after landing in Korea that it attacked China, starting off from there.
It should be remembered that Korea is separated from China proper by the whole of southern Manchuria. The establishment of the Russians in Manchuria therefore meant a curtain falling between Japan and China. From now on, if it were to conquer China, Japan would have to pass over the bodies of the Russians.
The War in Manchuria and the Japanese Attempt on Shandong
In order to conquer China, Japan had therefore to carry out a preliminary operation  –  to eject the Russians from Manchuria, or at least from southern Manchuria. This is just what they did in 1904-05 in the course of the Manchurian War.
As we know, the Russians were beaten to their knees. They were beaten on land in great battles fought on the Manchurian plains, and they were beaten at sea when the rescue fleet that they had sent from Russia to reinforce the Siberian port of Vladivostok was sunk by the Japanese as it passed between Korea and Japan. [37]
Under the Treaty of Portsmouth, [38] the Russians were forced to cede to Japan all their rights in southern Manchuria and in the Liaodong Peninsula, retaining only the railway concession running from east to west in northern Manchuria and a 100-kilometre section between Harbin and Changchun on the north to south railway. All the rest of this line with all its supplementary concessions passed into the hands of the Japanese. Shortly afterwards, Japan secured its access to Manchuria by establishing a protectorate over Korea, which it annexed later on, in 1910.
Russia had thus lost the first round. Some years later, the war of 1914 was to give Japan the opportunity of venturing on a new step in the conquest of China.
It should be remembered that following the Sino-Japanese War of 1894, the Germans acquired on lease from China the magnificent bay of Jiaozhou at the base of the Shandong Peninsula, as well as rights and privileges in the interior of the peninsula that were just as extensive as those granted to the Russians in Manchuria.
Now since Japan had placed itself on the side of the ‘Allies’ during the First World War, it found itself on this account at war with Germany. It therefore took the opportunity of attacking Qingdao, of capturing it, and very soon of replacing the Germans in all their rights. [39]
Holding at the same time Manchuria, which closed the Gulf of Jilin in the north, and Shandong, which closed it on the south, the Japanese now held the keys to Beijing, for they could now deprive Beijing and the north of all access to the sea. And having the keys to Beijing, they could soon hope eventually to control the whole of China.
But it was then that another non-European great power, a new one, the United States of America, came on the scene. In 1921, the USA convened an international conference in Washington for the purpose of regulating Chinese affairs. At that conference, the United States pressed vigorously for the principle of the ‘Open Door’. According to them, all states should abandon the special rights that they had wrested from China  –  ‘concessions’, leased territory, and so on  –  and so restore to China its full sovereignty; that they should cease exacting anything more from it, and that in turn China would deal with all states in the same manner, on a footing of complete equality.
As may well be imagined, America did not succeed in its argument, for none of its partners cared to abandon their ‘rights’. However, as the whole of Europe was allied with it against Japan, which had helped itself whilst Europe was preoccupied with its own affairs, it was decided that Japan must return to China what it had conquered from the Germans  –  the whole of Shandong  –  to which Japan finally had to agree. [40]
As for Russia, it was first preoccupied with the war of 1914 and afterwards with its revolutions of 1917, and it remained almost inactive ever since its war with Japan. But this inactivity was soon to come to an end. Blocked in the West for the time being, it rapidly resumed its expansion in the East.
Russian Activity in Mongolia and Manchuria
Russia’s first attack took place in Mongolia. It is well known that although the Mongolian steppes are usually regarded as part of the Chinese empire, they have never been inhabited by the Chinese themselves, but only by the Mongols, who were nomadic shepherds.
When the last emperor of the Manchu Dynasty had to abdicate in 1912, the chiefs of the Mongol clans, who regarded the bond that united them to China as a bond of personal vassalage between themselves and the emperor, declared their independence. In spite of its weakness, the young Chinese republic might quite easily have forced them to return to the bosom of the empire, had not the Tsar of Russia immediately declared himself their protector and warned the Chinese against any interference, at least in that part of Mongolia most distant from China proper, which on that account became known as Outer Mongolia. Outer Mongolia had therefore become a Russian protectorate from the beginning of the First World War.
The revolution of 1917 of course put an end to the Tsarist domination over Mongolia, as it did everywhere else in Russia. China thereupon hastened to despatch a small garrison to Urga, the capital of Outer Mongolia, which installed itself there without difficulty. Shortly afterwards, however, one of the better-known chiefs of the reactionary bands that were fighting the power of the Soviets, Ungern, [41] took refuge in Mongolia after having been pursued out of Siberia by Red troops. He expelled the Chinese garrison from Urga, and proclaimed himself the Grand Master of Mongolia. However, the Red troops soon caught up with him, defeated him, and on 21 July installed themselves in Mongolia as the Tsar’s successors. A ‘People’s Republic of Outer Mongolia’, the prototype of the ‘people’s republics’ of the same name and same type that were to flourish 25 years later in Eastern and Central Europe, was then set up. This republic was theoretically independent of Moscow, but in actual fact it was as completely dependent on it as any of the other so-called ‘republics’ of the Soviet Union.
This was the first negation of Lenin’s principle, according to which Soviet Russia in repudiating all imperialism was to abandon everything that Tsarist Russia had conquered or acquired abroad in the nature of territories, concessions, and so on. [42] For the first time the USSR put on the imperialist boots of the Tsar. It was not to be the last!
However, in 1921 no less than in 1912, China, being completely in the grip of military anarchy, was incapable of any armed resistance to Russia, and no other power, not even Japan, cared to intervene in a country so far away. Beijing therefore left it alone. Some years later, the imperialism of the new Russian regime was to manifest itself in a still more striking manner. In Manchuria, just as in Outer Mongolia, the revolution of 1917 had the effect of eliminating Russian domination. The Chinese authorities accordingly recovered control of the northern railway that the Treaty of Portsmouth had awarded to the Russians.
The application of the principles of the October Revolution, as solemnly proclaimed, would have made it necessary for Soviet Russia to disclaim any right to this concession made to the Tsar, and on the contrary should plainly give it back to China, just as had been done with the Tsarist concessions in Iran at the beginning of the revolution. [43]
But it did no such thing. In 1924  –  that is to say, at a time when the Russian Revolution, already seven years old, was gradually giving way to the Stalinist counter-revolution  –  the Russian government negotiated an agreement with China, which was still largely in military anarchy, under which the east-to-west railway of northern Manchuria, called ‘The Chinese Eastern Railway’, was again to be transferred to Russia, with the sole reservation that there was to be no political right added to this purely ‘commercial’ concession. [44]
Five years later, when the Guomindang had put an end to military anarchy and had reconstructed the Chinese state, one of its first acts, in July 1929, was naturally to refuse to recognise the agreements made by Russia with the dujun, to throw out the Russian railway officials, and to install Chinese in their place.
Then Russia, even though it was still declaring itself to be anti-imperialist, employed the classic methods of all the imperialist states to ensure that its ‘rights’ should be respected, and with the applause of the bourgeois and colonialist press of the entire world, it sent its troops over the Chinese frontier and cut to pieces two Chinese divisions, which enabled it to secure the restitution of its ‘concession’ from Nanjing, which was still incapable of sustaining a war against Russia.
For the second time, and in far more serious circumstances than in Mongolia, because this time it was a question of a country inhabited by Chinese against which armed force had been used, so-called Soviet Russia put on the imperialist boots of the Tsar. [45]
New Japanese Intervention in Manchuria
Two years after this serious conflict with Russia, another more serious one was to break out between China and this time Japan.
Japan was just as sensitive to Russia’s penetration into Manchuria in 1930 as it had been in 1905. Japan therefore decided to intervene once more. Its intervention took place in two stages. In the first stage, it was confined to Manchuria; in the second, it spread throughout the whole of China. In both cases, it was carefully calculated to happen at the very moment when those who might be able to oppose it, Europe and America, found themselves in a difficult situation that forbade any faraway adventures.
In 1931, the whole West was grappling with a grave economic crisis. This crisis had broken out two years earlier in America, since when it had steadily worsened and eventually spread to Europe; [46] France, which was the last to be affected, had now also entered into crisis. Since from then on every state was exclusively preoccupied with its own problems, Japan felt that it could go its own way. And this is what it did.
On 18 September 1931, almost without any resistance, Japanese troops expelled the Chinese troops from their garrisons in Manchuria, and installed themselves in their place. [47] Within a month, the Japanese were in occupation of the whole of Manchuria, both north and south. They might easily have annexed the province. However, as they regarded the occupation not as an end in itself, but as a step in the direction of conquering the whole of China, they decided, after adding to it the adjacent province of Rehe, to set it up as the so-called independent state of Manchukuo under the sovereignty of the former Emperor of China, who had hitherto lived in retirement in Beijing in accordance with the conditions of his abdication. [48]
Just as the Guomindang authorities had left the Russians with a free hand previously, so now they left the Japanese to do as they pleased, and for the same reason, that they were as little able to oppose the Japanese with armed force now as they had formerly been unable to oppose the Russians. They contented themselves with an appeal to the League of Nations, which in its turn limited itself to ‘condemning’ the Japanese action. Gone with the wind... [49]
It was fairly clear, however, that the Nanjing government was not altogether displeased with the action of Japan. There were two reasons for this, one general and one particular.
The general reason was that a great many members of the Guomindang, headed by Sun Yat-sen’s most faithful disciple, Wang Jingwei, [50] had always been advocates of a close union with Japan, which according to them, as it was for Sun Yat-sen, was the only means of struggling successfully against white domination.
This general reason was supplemented by a particular motive of internal policy. Chiang Kai-shek was in his third campaign against the ‘Communists’ of Jiangxi; he could hardly disguise the fact that in spite of the massacres of Shanghai and Canton, Communism remained a force in China, the more so because Jiangxi had its imitators all over, and that at several points they were attempting to set up similar soviet republics. Now since there was the risk at any time that the Chinese Communists might be supported by the Russians, the Communist danger and the Russian danger were closely inter-related in the eyes of the men of Nanjing. In order to protect themselves internally against ‘Communism’, that is to say, against a division of the land, it was necessary to protect themselves externally against the Russians as well. What better protection could they find against the Russians than that of the Japanese army? By occupying Manchuria and Rehe, the Japanese were covering China’s northern frontier; henceforth the Russians could only approach Beijing after crushing the Japanese army.
From this originated the Guomindang’s policy of tacit acquiescence in the Japanese aggression and in their detaching of Manchuria from China and setting it up as a Japanese protectorate.
We have now reached the time when we interrupted our narrative of China’s internal affairs, round about 1935 when Mao Zedong’s army had installed itself in Shaanxi. Beginning from then, we will have to deal with China’s internal affairs in parallel with foreign affairs, for these now become intimately and indissolubly bound together.
The End of the Soviets
The reaction of the Jiangxi soviets to the Japanese aggression of 1931 had naturally been the opposite to that of the Nanjing government. In the face of the new occupation of Manchuria by the Japanese, the government of Mao Zedong became fiercely threatening, and had even gone so far as officially declaring war against Japan. It was, however, a platonic declaration, for Jiangxi was almost 2000 kilometres distant from Manchuria, and was separated from it by the entire forces of the Guomindang. But as soon as the ‘Long March’ had led the Jiangxi troops into Shaanxi, the menace from Japan became less platonic, for there were now no more than 1000 kilometres between the two ‘belligerents’, which were basically located in the same peripheral region.
But Chiang Kai-shek had not given up hope of exterminating the ‘Reds’. What he had not succeeded in doing in Jiangxi, he might well do in Shaanxi. He therefore began preparations for a new campaign of extermination, his sixth, and despatched a fresh army against the troops of Mao Zedong. The man he placed in charge was the son of Zhang Zuolin, [51] the former dujun of Manchuria; he had succeeded his father as governor of the province, and had been forced to flee on the arrival of the Japanese. He was generally called ‘The Young Marshal’ in memory of his father, and to distinguish him from the latter.
Now some time after their arrival in Shaanxi, and when direct communication had been re-established with Moscow, Mao Zedong and his companions, no doubt under pressure from the Kremlin, completely changed their policy.
It was now no longer a matter, or hardly the case, of agrarian reform and of a struggle against the landowners on the part of the ‘Republic of Yan'an’, and even less of a struggle against the Guomindang, it was now only a question of struggling against Japan. The ‘Communists’ became the protagonists of a ‘national union’: all Chinese, irrespective of their class or political affiliations, must unite in a life and death struggle against the Japanese. The revolution was to be shelved once more, in order to advance the interests of Russian foreign policy.
So the Kremlin had finally triumphed. It forced Mao Zedong from then on to carry out the policy against which he had rebelled before 1927, and the exact opposite of which he had since done.
By drawing close to the Russian frontier, the Chinese revolutionary army had secured its supplies of arms and munitions, but he who pays the piper calls the tune. It now had to obey the orders of the Moscow Political Bureau.
The propaganda of the Shaanxi men in favour of this new national front was naturally directed above all at those whom it was most urgent to convince: the soldiers facing them, the soldiers of the ‘Young Marshal’. This patriotic propaganda, carried on by leaflets and by sending back brainwashed prisoners, etc, was not slow in bearing fruit. A year after the troops of Mao Zedong had arrived in Shaanxi, almost the whole of the army of the Young Marshal, and especially the officers, had been won over to the idea of a common front with the Communists against Japan. So much so that, on a December day in 1936 when Chiang Kai-shek arrived at the headquarters of the Young Marshal to discuss the final preparations to be made for his final extermination campaign, the Young Marshal had Chiang Kai-shek purely and simply arrested! This was a stroke that no-one in Europe could understand at the time, for nothing was known of the propaganda of the Communists in Shaanxi, or even of their existence there.
What followed was still more extraordinary. The Young Marshal, along with his officer corps, had arrested Chiang with the intention of executing him for treason, because of his non-resistance to the Japanese aggression; they were about to proceed with the execution in the most expeditious manner when officers of the Red Army arrived on the scene. They came to demand that far from executing Chiang Kai-shek, he should be freed and sent back with apologies to Nanjing. [52]
And that is what happened. Moscow had saved the killer of Shanghai! The reason for this strange gesture lay in the fact that if Chiang Kai-shek had been executed, there would no longer be any possibility of any ‘national unity’. Far from seeking to destroy the Guomindang, it should be carefully preserved so that the policy of alliance and collaboration with the bourgeoisie, such as had existed before 1927, might be restored, and this time directed, not against the dujun and Britain, but against Japan, which since Russia had taken over the Tsarist project in Manchuria had again become Russia’s Enemy Number One.
Furthermore, in order to save the face of the head of the government, Chiang Kai-shek was released, officially without conditions; in fact the following trade-off had been concluded: Chiang promised to adopt a policy of active resistance towards Japan, and to stop the war against the Communists; on the other hand, Mao Zedong was to stop carrying out the expropriation of the landowners.
The agreement was kept on both sides. In addition to its pro-Japanese faction, the Guomindang had always included a group of men favourable to Europe and America. Chiang Kai-shek could therefore change his policy completely without leaving the Guomindang; all he had to do was to make a change of personnel. In particular, the key post of Minister of Foreign Affairs, which until then had been held by a notoriously pro-Japanese, was quite simply given to an adherent of the opposing group. [53] On the other side, there was no longer any question of ‘soviets’ in the territories occupied by the troops of Mao Zedong, nor any more talk of giving the land to those who worked it, and the Communist army was officially no more than the Eighth Chinese Army.
Beginning from that time, the Chinese Revolution lost its social character in order to assume an exclusively national character. The peasant revolution was at an end, and was starting to change into another type of revolution, a revolution of the Russian type.
The Japanese Response
This naturally changed everything for Japan. That is why, from the moment it became clear that Chiang Kai-shek’s turn had become definitive, Japan opened up the second phase of its offensive.
Moreover, it was a propitious moment. The war in Spain was in full swing, and all eyes in Europe were on Hitler’s actions. The economic crisis that had favoured the first Japanese intervention was over, but it was replaced with a still graver political crisis whose only outcome could be the war of 1939. Japan could therefore play with confidence. Even more than in 1931, it could be sure that Europe, and consequently also America, would not intervene.
On 15 July 1937, Japan therefore sent an ultimatum to China demanding independence for the Tsetsehar province of Inner Mongolia and for Hebei, the province of Beijing itself. Japan thus intended to set itself up as master in China’s old capital, from where it would be easy to spread its dominion over the whole of the basin of the Yellow River. This would be a return to the time of the Middle Ages, when China had been divided between two states  –  one or several barbarian states in the north, and a Chinese state in the south, confined to only the basin of the Blue River. It is hardly likely that even before Chiang Kai-shek’s arrest the Guomindang would have agreed to such a forfeiture of its rights, and in any case, since the volte-face of December 1936, there could be no further question of it. This time China would fight. Nanjing therefore rejected the ultimatum, and Japan attacked for the second time. [54]
Japan’s military successes were at first rapid and considerable. The ultimatum was dated 15 July; the Japanese entered Beijing on the 29th; descending southwards, they occupied Shandong, and by November had become masters of the basin of the Blue River; there they occupied Shanghai and Nanjing, from which the Chinese government was forced to flee; and finally, in the following year, they captured Canton.
But here their progress ended. Beijing, Nanjing and Canton are all in the coastal area; the Japanese were incapable of deeply penetrating the interior, much less of establishing themselves there. The Communists held Shaanxi all the time, and even Shanxi further east; and if the Japanese succeeded in getting as far as Hangzhou on the Blue River, all their efforts to push further inland, to Chongqing, for example, which was Chiang Kai-shek’s new capital, proved in vain right to the end. The great mass of mainland China, north, south and centre alike, remained outside their control.
And as early as the middle of 1938, it became clear that Japan had embarked upon an adventure that was beyond its means. It had become entangled in China, and was becoming more entangled every day. The moment was therefore very propitious for Russia, its imperialist rival, to press its claims. Without involving itself too deeply, as was Stalin’s wont, Russia began to explore the terrain, and if fighting broke out, it would be without a declaration of war.
That is why during one fine day in the summer of 1938, Russian troops from Siberia quietly and unostentatiously occupied a small hill on the Russo-Manchurian border which until then had always been considered as Manchurian. The Japanese troops counter-attacked, reoccupied the hill, and set a guard over it, but during the following year similar incidents occurred further west, on the Mongol-Siberian frontier, which led to pitched air and land battles between the two armies. [55]
It was in fact a war between the two empires, but on a limited scale, and unofficial. Whilst the soldiers of the two respective countries were fighting it out, the ambassadors of Moscow and Tokyo continued with their normal relations with the government, in fact an enemy government, to which they were accredited. It needed a world war and its prelude, the Hitler-Stalin Pact, to put an end to these conflicts, for it was obvious that Russia, now Hitler’s ally, could not continue to fight with Japan, Hitler’s friend. [56]
During the world war, the situation in China remained generally slack. Japan was only able to hold its positions with great difficulty, not only because from the end of 1941 it had to fight against America in the Pacific, [57] but also because America was bringing to Chiang Kai-shek’s troops, firstly by airlifts, and then by the Burma Road expressly built for that purpose, a flood of munitions, materials and supplies of all sorts. Japan, however, succeeded in holding on, and it was only after collapsing on its own territory, after Hiroshima and Nagasaki, [58] that it finally let go of China. In the course of the last few days of the war, Russia officially declared war on Japan, and its forces were sent into Manchuria to make a dance of triumph. [59]
The Second Break with the Guomindang
The utter disappearance of a common enemy against whom an alliance has been concluded breaks the alliance. Japan’s defeat in China therefore led to the end of the ‘national union’. The ‘Reds’ and the Guomindang from that moment reverted to their well-known game of ‘who could eliminate the other’. America, which is often unrealistic, attempted to reconcile the two antagonists, and with this end in view sent its great wartime leader Marshall, the Chief of the General Staff, but it was only too predictable that his efforts would prove unavailing. [60] Only the hazard of arms could determine who was the stronger.
The war between the two parties, at first sporadic, little by little became general. Starting from their base in Shaanxi, where they had fixed their capital, Yan'an, the Communists rapidly spread like wildfire over the whole of the extreme north-east of China, soon occupying Kalgan on Beijing’s north-west, along with a great part of Manchuria. Finally, at the end of May 1948, they launched their great offensive: to begin with, they completed the conquest of Manchuria by the capture of Mukden on 1 November 1948, and then, descending southwards, they defeated in succession all the armies that the Guomindang sent against them; they entered Beijing without a shot being fired on 1 February 1949, and successfully negotiated the crossing of the Blue River at the end of April 1949; the occupation of the rest of China was no more to them than a military parade. The only choice left for the Guomindang government was to take refuge on Formosa, the island Japan had seized from China in 1895, which had been placed under Chinese administration in 1945, pending the conclusion of a peace treaty with Japan.
Here the latest of China’s revolutionary periods comes to an end, the one that began with the opening of the present century. A new epoch now begins, which will doubtless not only be a chapter in China’s history, but rather a chapter in world history, for the fate of China, linked with Russia’s, has now become inseparable from the fate of the world.
A (Provisional) Conclusion
About 50 years ago, the Chinese, for what reason I do not know, had bombarded the little Russian town of Blagovestchensk over the border. Réclus wrote: ‘The Chinese will be all the more respected in the future now that they are better able to defend themselves.’ [61] Prophetic words!
When Réclus expressed himself in this way, at the time of the Boxer Rising, the Chinese had only just begun to defend themselves. It may be said that since then they have not stopped defending themselves in a thousand different ways, but always with more potent means and always on a greater scale. Every transformation of their internal regime in the course of this last half-century has had as its aim and result the growth in the power of their military forces. From the handful of Boxers assassinating an ambassador in the streets of Beijing to the millions of men in the present Chinese army who came to fight in Korea against the United Nations coalition, [62] it has been an immense road that they have traversed. When on the morrow of the Second World War, the United States allowed China to enter the Council of the Five Great Powers with a permanent seat and the right of veto on the Security Council, the Europeans could still smile and only see there a gesture of flattery in Asia’s direction; but it would be difficult for them to do it now. China has really become a Great Power, and it is far more capable of defending its independence today than other so-called great powers like France and Britain; it is now China that can smile when it sees the representatives of these two states sitting side by side with it in equality.
Thus, in conquering Asia, the West has Europeanised it; and once Europeanised, Asia has dispensed with Europe and become its rival.
The period of history that opened in the sixteenth century when the Europeans discovered a sea route to the Middle and Far East which aroused their covetousness, a phase marked by the increasing subjection of Asia to Europe, is thus definitely at an end. It has come to an end, and a new phase is beginning.
But what will this mean as far as China is concerned? Is that highly dialectical aspect represented by the phase that has now ended also going to mark the phase that is now opening up?
The origin of Mao Zedong’s movement was incontestably a popular revolution, and even more particularly a popular revolution of the classic Chinese type  –  a revolution of ‘vagabonds’. But how many successful revolutions have not been able to keep the character they had at the beginning after their victory!
The October Revolution in Russia was a workers’ revolution; it was made by the workers who wanted to exercise power directly by means of the soviets that they had created, and to be the masters of production in the factories they had seized. It was also, in a subsidiary sense, a revolt of the peasants, who no longer wanted to fight for imperialist aims, and who wanted to become owners of the land they cultivated. We know what transpired: the regime that emerged from the revolution is the most anti-working class and anti-peasant regime there has ever been, a dictatorship of imperialist managers.
Broadly speaking, it can be said that all Russian revolutionary activity for a century, from the Decembrists [63] to 1917, had two objectives: the abolition of despotism and the emancipation of the workers; this activity has now finally ended up with the installation of a yet more absolute despotism than that of the Tsar, and with the establishment of servitude for the peasants and workers.
It can therefore be asked if a like fate is not in store for the Chinese Revolution of 1927, or even if it has not already come about.
None of the peasant revolutions which we have seen take place in the long course of Chinese history has ever ended in the installation of a peasant regime. Their only result has been that after they had overturned the established power, the gate was found opened for a barbarian invasion.
Isn’t it going to be the same this time as well? Will not the sole result of the 1927 peasant movement be simply to open up China to the intrusion of a new barbarian, coming again to it from the north, Russia? But the Russian is not the Mongol, so it cannot be expected that the following events will proceed on parallel lines.
China, which has always very rapidly sinicised its barbarian masters, has often provoked admiration at its powers of ‘assimilation’, but there is no reason for this astonishment. If the Chinese have always easily assimilated their invaders, it is not because of a capacity for assimilation that is peculiar to the Chinese people, but is due only to the fact that the invader was the bearer of a civilisation inferior to the Chinese civilisation, since it is always the superior civilisation that assimilates the inferior.
But if it is true today that the Russian is a barbarian just as the Mongol was as far as the Chinese is concerned, because he possesses a different civilisation, this civilisation is no longer inferior, but superior to Chinese civilisation; industrial civilisation is superior to irrigational civilisation. Therein lies the difference; the assimilation of the Russian by the Chinese cannot be expected.
The fact is that two civilisations now find themselves side by side in China: the civilisation of irrigated cultivation, closely bound to the soil, which is a great civilisation, which as long as the Yellow and the Blue Rivers continue to exist, cannot fail to play an essential rôle in the life of the Chinese people; and on the other hand, industrial civilisation, for which China’s underground mineral resources will no doubt hold out a brilliant future, but a quite different one.
What is to be the outcome? A synthesis? The fusion of these two opposing civilisations into a new civilisation of a superior type? Perhaps. But that is not certain. Both these civilisations have one thing in common: they are both of them ‘mature’ civilisations. In fact, Chinese civilisation exhausted its potential long ago; it lives, but it no longer develops; it remains strongly rooted, but it no longer creates. As for industrial civilisation, the Russians are going to implant it in China in the same form in which they themselves practice it  –  in other words, in its degenerate form, that of state capitalism.
Can syntheses be born from the contact of civilisations that are already on the descending line of their curve? This hardly seems probable to me. The new China will therefore undoubtedly merely become submerged in the general process which is leading the world towards its decline.
In any case, for the moment, we can only say that the immense revolutionary movement that has shaken China since the beginning of this century, which in its different phases and its diverse groupings has always had as its common denominator the will to shake off the foreigner, and the white foreigner in particular, looks as if it will result in placing the Chinese people under a foreign white domination that is infinitely stricter, more imperious and more ferocious than those from which it has been China’s preoccupation to free itself in the past.
Just as all countries which have had to suffer foreign exploitation by means of private capitalism, and in this respect very unlike Japan, which was never subjected to colonisation by private European capitalism, as a means of industrialising itself China has opted for state capitalism, which since it is of the state, seems better able to protect it from foreign capitalism. But in opting for state capitalism, it is thereby linked to Russian state capitalism, and hence to the Russian state, infinitely closer than it would have been to the Western states, in spite of the ‘concessions’ which it would have been constrained to grant to their nationals.
Such is the second dialectical feature of the Chinese Revolution. A revolution made to extricate itself from the grip of the foreigner has resulted in its very development in a stronger foreign embrace.
We may well ask if the future does not hold in store for us the spectacle of a third, equally dialectical, phase.
In order to industrialise itself, China has today gone to school in dependence on Russia, but on the day when it becomes fully industrialised, will it not rid itself of those who have industrialised it, just as, thanks to its Europeanisation, it rid itself of those who Europeanised it?
The result of the Westernisation of China has been to free China from the West; will not the result of its Russification be to free it from Russia?
Just as China’s Heraclitus, [64] the great Lao Zi, proclaimed: ‘Because of its own condition, each thing is in danger of becoming its opposite.’ [65]
Notes
1. A hereditary Prime Minister who disposed of all power. [Author’s note] The overthrow of the shogun and the installation of a constitutional regime restoring some of the emperor’s powers is generally known as ‘the Meiji Restoration’. See note 10, Part II, Chapter II. [Editor’s note]
2. Shintoism originated in the traditional beliefs of the Japanese people. When Confucianism reached Japan in the fifth century AD, it influenced its development in the direction of a national cult.
3. Buddhism is alleged to have first reached Japan in the seventh century AD, brought by a priest called Dosho who had been a disciple of the famous Chinese pilgrim Xuan Zhuang (602-664).
4. Chinese influence penetrated into Japan during the first four centuries AD, and the earliest texts there were written in Chinese. The oldest known Japanese inscription, upon a sword, dates from about 440AD, and shows a modification of the normal Chinese usage in order to make an accurate transcription of Japanese names and expressions.
5. The earliest kasuri silk textiles in the National Museum in Tokyo are Buddhist Temple banners of the sixth-seventh centuries AD, probably imported from China, but the art of weaving must have spread before then.
6. The secret of porcelain first came to Japan from potters brought back from the campaigns of Hideyoshi in Korea (see note 16, Part I, Chapter VI). The first Japanese porcelain, karatsu ware, dates from the seventeenth century.
7. Mikhail Markovich Borodin (Grusenberg, 1890-1954) was a member of the Bund who returned from the USA to join the Bolsheviks in 1918. He was then attached to the apparatus of the Communist International, which sent him to serve as political advisor to the Guomindang between 1924 and 1927.
8. Vassili Konstantinovich Blücher (1889-1938) was a junior officer in the Russian army during the First World War who joined the Bolsheviks in 1917, and was one of the first leaders of the Red Army. He was sent under the pseudonym of Galen to act as a military advisor to the Guomindang. After his return to the USSR, he presided over the secret military tribunal that condemned Tukhachevsky to death in June 1937, but was himself shot shortly afterwards.
9. The Chinese Communist Party was founded by 13 delegates meeting under the supervision of two Comintern officials in a girl’s school in Shanghai in July 1921. Mao Zedong represented Changsha.
10. As the armies of the Guomindang approached the city, an insurrection of the working class took control of Shanghai from its local warlord on 21-22 March 1927. Chiang Kai-shek only arrived there four days later. See Victor Serge, ‘The Class Struggle in the Chinese Revolution’, Revolutionary History, Volume 5, no 3, Autumn 1994, p70.
11. The Stalinists in Czechoslovakia only occupied three government posts in 1945, those of the Interior, Information and Agriculture. But by 1948, they had ousted the bourgeois politicians and taken total power.
12. In November 1945, Maurice Thorez and three other Communists became ministers in General De Gaulle’s government. They were expelled from the Ramadier government two years later as a result of the Renault strike. Palmiro Togliatti, the leader of the Italian Communist Party, entered the government of Marshal Badoglio in Italy in May 1944, and the Communists remained in various postwar governments until ejected by De Gasperi in May 1947. See Revolutionary History, Volume 2, no 1; Volume 5, no 4.
13. On 5 April 1927, Chiang Kai-shek declared martial law in Shanghai, and on 12 April began the suppression of the working class and the Communist Party in the city with a series of frightful and barbaric massacres. See Serge, op cit, p71.
14. Badly in need of a victory to restore his reputation after the Shanghai debâcle, Stalin ordered the forces of the Chinese Communist Party to march on the cities. On 11 December 1927, the Red Army of Ye Ting and He Long captured Canton, assisted by a workers’ insurrection. Two days later, the Guomindang generals Zhang Fakui and Li Fulin retook it, and instituted yet another frightful massacre. See Victor Serge, op cit, pp118-21.
15. In February 1848, an insurrection overthrew the monarchical government of Louis Philippe in France, and brought to power a provisional government, which proclaimed a republic. When the new regime turned upon its working-class supporters on 22 June, they answered with another insurrection, which was put down with great brutality.
16. Chen Duxiu (1879-1942) was the founder of the Chinese Communist Party, and after his expulsion from his post as General Secretary became a supporter of the Left Opposition. Louzon is mistaken in making him a loyal supporter of the Russian political line, for he opposed the Chinese Communist Party’s subordination to the Guomindang on several occasions.
17. It would be wrong, however, to say that the Russian myth was altogether without effect on the new movement. It had the same type of influence over it as it had over the proletariat of the West: it tended to compensate for the inferiority complex common at the same time to oppressed peoples and oppressed classes. Just as the Western proletariat is afraid of the power of the bourgeoisie, and feels to some extent reassured by the support which it thinks it can count on from so large and so powerful a state as Russia, so the Chinese, afraid of the power of the West and of the imperialist threats pressing them from all directions, feel reassured by the dream that they have Russia behind them. And that gives them the courage to fight back. [Author’s note]
18. ‘... as for the Taipings of China, who about the same time were overthrowing the Middle Empire, we should certainly see in their forceful thrust proof that the East and the West were beginning to vibrate in parallel under the influence of the same deep causes...’ (Élisée Réclus, L'homme et le terre, Volume 5, L'histoire moderne, Paris, 1905, pp136-7) [Author’s note]
19. Hong Xiuquan (1814-1864) was a schoolteacher from Guangdong who advocated a sort of Christian Communism. As a result of a great famine, he began an uprising in Guangxi and proclaimed the Taiping (Heavenly Kingdom) in the place of the Manchu dynasty. The revolt was not put down until 1868.
20. Phalansteries were producers’ associations of capitalists, workers and specialists living communally as envisaged by the French utopian thinker Charles Fourier (1772-1837).
21. We should recall that at this same period a considerable part of the European Socialist movement, especially in France, also laid claim to Christianity: Lamennais, Cabet, Buchez, Pecquer, etc. [Author’s note] Hugues Félicité Robert de Lamennais (1782-1854) was an abbot, writer and Socialist; Étienne Cabet (1788-1856) was a utopian Communist writer; Philippe Joseph Buchez (1796-1865) was a politician, historian and Christian Socialist; Constantin Pecqueur (1801-1887) was a social theorist who criticised capitalism as contrary to religion and morality. [Editor’s note]
22. The Taiping rebellion was followed by one by the Muslims in the two Chinese provinces where they are quite numerous, in Gansu in the north-west and Yunnan in the south-west, but the Muslim question has never played an important rôle in the history of China, and we are only taking note of these two movements for the record, even though they were the occasion of atrocious wars for some 15 years. [Author’s note]
23. On 15 July 1927, the ‘Left’ Guomindang government in Wuhan broke with the Communists, whose ministers then left the cabinet. By then, the troops of General He Jian were already occupying the offices of the working-class organisations and starting to massacre their militants. In August 1927, the Wuhan government reunited with that of Chiang Kai-shek. See Victor Serge, op cit, pp97-9, 135-6.
24. Mao Zedong (1893-1976) was the son of a Hunan peasant who became prosperous through hoarding rice. He first made contact with Marxist ideas whilst working as a librarian in Beijing University. A founder member of the Chinese Communist Party, after many vicissitudes he was finally appointed its Chairman in 1935.
25. There is no evidence for Louzon’s assertion that Mao Zedong disagreed from the very beginning with the policy of an alliance between the Chinese Communist Party and the Guomindang. Quite the contrary; he became an alternate member of the Central Committee of the Guomindang in 1924, and was head of its propaganda department.
26. Li Lisan (1889-1967) was the main protagonist of the ‘Third Period’ politics of the Comintern, which in China took the form of putschist insurrections. He was scapegoated for their failure, removed from the leadership of the Chinese Communist Party, and recalled to Moscow in 1931. After his return to China, he committed suicide after being purged during the Cultural Revolution.
27. Li Lisan returned to China with the Russian troops that invaded Manchuria after the USSR had declared war on Japan in August 1945. See note 59, this chapter.
28. Zhu De (1886-1976) was a republican soldier who joined the Chinese Communist Party in 1922. After the failure of the Nanchang uprising in 1927, he led his forces to join those of Mao in Jinggangshan, where he became commander of the Fourth Red Army and principal military leader of the Jiangxi-Hunan Soviet. He was the main strategist of the Red Armies during the Long March, the Sino-Japanese War, and the civil war up to the final seizure of power by the Chinese Communist Party in 1949.
29. This is basically the whole secret of the tactics of the great captains: it was that of Caesar as well as Napoleon. [Author’s note]
30. The story of the duel of the Horatii and the Curatii is supposed to have taken place during the war between the Romans and the people of Alba Longa during the reign of Tullus Hostilius (traditional dates, 672-642BC). Three Horatii and three Curatii fought a contest, and two of the Horatii were killed, wounding two of the Curatii. Horatius ran away, and then killed the other Curatii as they followed him singly at intervals.
31. Edgar Snow, Red Star over China, Harmondsworth, 1978, p206. Mao also told Snow that his army had four slogans that it scrupulously followed: ‘1. When the enemy advances, we retreat! 2. When the enemy halts and encamps, we trouble them! 3. When the enemy seeks to avoid a battle, we attack! 4. When the enemy retreats, we pursue!’ These are precisely the same principles applied by the Vietminh in Indo-China (op cit, p202). [Author’s note]
32. Adolf Hitler came to power in Germany on 30 January 1933. He was only too happy to send military advisors and aircraft to assist the Guomindang’s attack upon the Chinese Communists.
33. One point needs to be explained: Did Mao Zedong and his companions take this decision themselves, or did they take it on Stalin’s orders? In the account he gave to Snow, Mao made no allusion whatsoever to any intervention from Moscow in the affair. On the other hand, in a book on the ‘Stalintern’ by ‘Ypsilon’, whose documentation is generally quite accurate, we read that Mao applied to Moscow in the summer of 1934, and that it was Stalin who then ordered the transfer of his troops to Shaanxi. This seems very unlikely. It seems much more probable to me that in the summer of 1934, six months after the beginning of the fifth campaign, and when the Red Army was beginning to suffer terrible effects from it, that it was the Chinese leaders who themselves decided on their departure. But it would be only natural if before going Mao sent to Moscow to see what sort of help he could count on the part of Russia, once the Red Army would be within range of the country via the Mongolian routes. [Author’s note]
34. Liu Zhidan was a member of a secret society who attended the Huangpu Military academy, where he became a Communist and an officer in the Guomindang army. After the Shanghai massacre, he returned to Bao'an in Shaanxi, where he set up a provincial soviet government in 1933. He died of wounds fighting the Guomindang in March 1936.
35. The march of the Ten Thousand was a retreat of the Greek mercenaries of Cyrus the Younger after his death in battle at Cunaxa in 401BC under the command of Xenophon. After a long march through hostile territory, they reached the Greek city of Trapezus on the Black Sea six months later. Napoleon invaded Russia in June 1812 with 453 000 men and took Moscow, which the Tsar had evacuated and burned. The retreat took place in such frightful weather conditions that when his army crossed the Beresina in November, only 10 000 were left.
36. In the appalling collection of ‘Great Historical Studies’ (sic) in the style of Jacques Bainville (1879-1936) published by Fayard, a ‘specialist’ in Asian affairs, René Grousset, published in 1942 a History of China in which he quite coolly declared that the Jiangxi Communist republic had been ‘destroyed’ by Chiang Kai-shek in 1933-34 (p392)! [The statement appears in the later edition on p286  –  Editor] In another place, the same author calls the Hankou government set up by the Guomindang Left, one of the first of whose decisions was to expel the Communists, a ‘Communist’ government (p391)! These Action Française historians... and of the Académie Française! [Author’s note]
37. In January 1904, the Japanese fleet began the war with an attack upon the Russian Far Seas Fleet in its base at Port Arthur. During the following year, they captured it, inflicted a crushing defeat upon the Russian army at Mukden, and destroyed the Russian Baltic Fleet that had sailed all the way round the world at the Battle of Tsu-shima.
38. On 5 September 1905, a treaty was signed between Japan and the Russian Empire at Portsmouth (USA), handing over to Japan Port Arthur and the Liaodong peninsula, and control over the South Manchurian railway.
39. In 1914, Japan entered the First World War on the side of the Entente powers, and attacked and captured the German treaty port of Qingdao. Taking advantage of the preoccupation of its allies in the European war, it seized the whole of the German concession in Shandong, and in January 1915 presented the famous ‘Twenty One Demands’ to Yuan Shikai amounting to a Japanese protectorate over the whole of China.
40. The Washington Naval Conference of 1921-22 forced Japan to drop the ‘Twenty-One Demands’, and to relinquish the Chinese territory it had gained from Germany during the First World War.
41. Roman Feodorovich, Count von Ungern-Sternberg (1886-1921), captured Urga (now Ulan Bator) in February 1921, and shot all the local government officials. After he fell into the hands of the Red Army in August, his trial revealed his connections with the northern warlord Zhang Zuolin and the Japanese.
42. On 25 July 1919, Karakhan, the Deputy Commissar for Foreign Affairs, issued a declaration renouncing all the territorial and other acquisitions made by the Tsarist government on Chinese soil, including Manchuria, all the concessions, and the Chinese Eastern railway.
43. The Soviet-Persian Treaty of 26 February 1921 renounced all the privileges, concessions and property of the Tsarist government on Persian soil.
44. In May 1924, the Soviet government signed a treaty with the Chinese government providing for Russian control over that part of the Chinese Eastern Railway that ran across Manchuria to the Russian port of Vladivostok. Since Manchuria was ruled by the warlord Zhang Zuolin, Russia agreed to return control of the railway to China as soon as a unified and democratic Chinese government existed that could guarantee that it would not fall into the hands of any other power, particularly Japan.
45. See Révolution Prolétarienne, 1 August 1929, 1 September 1929, 1 October 1929, 1 December 1929 and 15 January 1930, as well as Trotsky’s reply in his pamphlet Defense of the Soviet Republic and the Opposition, 7 September 1929 [Writings of Leon Trotsky 1929, New York, 1975, pp262-303]. [Author’s note]
46. The Great Depression began with the crash of the American stock exchange on Wall Street on Black Thursday, 24 October 1929. Soon 12 million were unemployed in the USA, nearly three million in Britain, and six million in Germany. It spread to France in 1934.
47. On 18 September 1931, officers of the Japanese army, acting in defiance of their government, blew up the south Manchurian railway line near Mukden. Claiming that it was the work of Chinese bandits, they then conquered the whole of Manchuria.
48. After declaring the ‘independence’ of Manchuria in March 1932, the Japanese set up the deposed Manchu emperor, Pu Yi, as ‘Emperor of Manchukuo’ in April 1934.
49. The sole intervention of the League of Nations into the dispute was to send a commission headed by Lord Lytton, which published a report in December 1932 advocating non-recognition of the puppet state set up by the Japanese in Manchuria.
50. Wang Jingwei (1883-1944) was a leader of the Guomindang Left, and Chairman of its government in Guangzhou in 1925. He was subsequently leader of the short-lived Wuhan government set up in opposition to Chiang Kai-shek in 1927.
51. Zhang Xueliang (1898- ), the ‘Young Marshal’, the son of Zhang Zuolin (see note 28, Part II, Chapter II), was the warlord driven out of Manchuria by the Japanese. His headquarters in north China were at Xi'an.
52. When Zhang Xueliang arrested Chiang Kai-shek on a visit to Xi'an on 12 December 1936, the Chinese Communist Party intervened to secure his release. To save Chiang’s face, Zhang went back with him, and was kept a prisoner for many years, first of all in China, and after 1949 in Taiwan.
53. In December 1938, Wang Jingwei fled to Indo-China and then on to Japan, where he set up a puppet ‘National Government of the Republic of China’.
54. The final war between Japan and China began with a shooting incident manufactured by Japanese soldiers at the Marco Polo Bridge north of Beijing on 7 July 1937.
55. Large-scale battles took place between Japanese and Russian troops around Khalkin Gol in Mongolia between May and July 1939. The Japanese army was severely handled by a rising Russian officer, the future Marshal Zhukov.
56. By the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact of 23 August 1939, Nazi Germany and Stalinist Russia became allies in the partition of Poland and apportioning the Baltic states into spheres of influence. They remained allied until Hitler launched his attack upon the Soviet Union in June 1941.
57. The USA declared war on Japan following the attack upon Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941.
58. With the dropping of atomic bombs on Hiroshima on 6 August 1945, and Nagasaki on 9 August, Japan dropped out of the war.
59. In accordance with the Yalta agreements, the USSR declared war on Japan on 8 August 1945, and occupied Manchuria after a one-week campaign.
60. US General George C Marshall (1880-1959) went to China in December 1945, and a month later patched up a temporary truce between the Communists and the Guomindang. The truce ran out in June 1946, when the civil war was resumed in earnest. The Marshall Mission was withdrawn in January 1947.
61. The Chinese army had shelled Blagovestchensk on the side of the Amur River, smashing communications by blowing up bridges and damaging railway lines (Élisée Réclus, La chine et la diplomatie européenne, Paris, 1900, pp15-6).
62. By November 1950, Red China was threatened across the Yalu River border that it shared with North Korea by the UNO troops commanded by General MacArthur. It poured in thousands of ‘volunteers’ (China did not formally introduce conscription until 1955), and by December 1950 had driven them back to the thirty-eighth parallel of latitude, not far from the original border between North and South Korea.
63. The Decembrists were a group of 30 Russian army officers led by Pavel Pestel who attempted to institute a constitutional regime by persuading the senate not to take the oath of allegiance to Tsar Nicholas I at the time of his accession in December 1825. All of their leaders were hanged.
64. Heraclitus of Ephesus (c530-470BC), one of the earliest dialectical philosophers, considered that the only constant was flux, but that unity persists through the revolution of changes, so that the world is a continuum of opposites.
65. For Lao Zi, see note 8, Introduction.
 


Table of Contents




 Three Thousand Years of History, Fifty Years of Revolution by Robert Louzon 1998


China: 3000 Years of History, 50 Years of Revolution. Robert Louzon 1998
Part II: The Grafting of a New Civilisation: Fifty Years of Revolution
Chapter I: From the Opium War (1840) to the Boxer Movement (1900)
China was provided with and was forced to accept all that the rapid development of Europe was able, thanks to its superior individuals, to produce sooner than China. All this, above and beyond philosophical speculations, can be adapted to the Chinese spirit, and all this, once assimilated, will give to China new means of assimilation, which nothing, neither Europe nor America, will be able to resist.  –  Alex Ular, 1901 [1]
Two twin dates herald the approach of modern times: the year 1492, when Columbus set foot on the American continent, and the year 1498, when Vasco da Gama, after rounding the Cape of Good Hope, landed in India. [2] Two continents thereby found themselves at the disposal of the Europeans  –  one whose existence had hitherto been unknown, and the other of which they had often heard, but which had been cut off from them by the Arabs, whose precise function had until then been to act as the necessary intermediary between this continent and them.
The enormous extension which the knowledge of this fact made to the intellectual horizon and field of activity of Europe produced a ‘renaissance’ amongst them, or rather a birth, that of a new civilisation, of which the whole of European history to this day is but a development.
The different ethnic situation of these two continents was bound to influence the different forms of the interventions of the Europeans. Whilst the European found in America only sparsely scattered populations, for the most part uncivilised, irrigation there being practised only in certain parts of certain regions, in Asia, on the other hand, Europe encountered ancient irrigational civilisations covering immense spaces and nourishing dense populations.
The result was that whilst the continent discovered by Columbus became a land where the European, after having exterminated the natives of the temperate zone and enslaved those of the tropical zone, settled down to live, the continent linked by da Gama to Europe could only provide land for domination and exploitation, any possibility of eliminating the hundreds of millions of civilised beings who peopled it being manifestly out of the question.
These two tasks, the peopling of the one and the subjugation of the other, proceeded simultaneously. Their pursuit covers the entire history of the sixteenth, seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.
As far as Asia was concerned, European penetration went through two phases. In the first, which can be called the period of ‘trading stations’, the Europeans contented themselves with the acquisition of certain places along the coastline which they usually fortified, and which served them as centres of transport and trade with their own metropolis on the one hand and the interior on the other. Colonisation during this period thus bore an almost exclusively commercial aspect.
It preserved this character all through the sixteenth century when it was most of all carried on by the Portuguese, who, profiting from the knowledge they had gained of the new route by the fact that Vasco da Gama was their compatriot, founded nearly all the early trading stations.
But this first phase was soon to be succeeded by a second, during which colonisation no longer only bore a commercial aspect, but also a political character. This is the phase of ‘colonisation’ properly so-called. Starting from the trading posts, the interior was slowly conquered and annexed, although it was the general practice, at first anyway, to leave it to be administered by local chiefs under the direction and control of the European institution, usually a chartered company, that had effected the conquest.
Portugal, being too small to be able to indulge itself in the luxury of large territorial conquests, had to remain in the phase of ‘trading stations’. It was the more powerful northern states that were destined to become the protagonists of the second stage.
From the beginning of the seventeenth century, the Dutch, who during the previous decades had set up their own trading stations in Indonesia, gradually got rid of the Portuguese trading stations already there and established their domination over the whole of the islands of the archipelago and over a great part of Java. By the end of the century, the whole of Indonesia belonged to the Dutch. [3]
The following century, which was to be Britain’s century, just as the sixteenth century had been Portugal’s and the seventeenth century Holland’s, was marked by the British getting a foothold in the interior of India, after it had first got rid of the French in the same way as the Dutch had got rid of the Portuguese. [4] It took it, however, a whole century to achieve the complete conquest of this vast subcontinent, and it was only in the middle of the nineteenth century, in 1856, that Britain annexed the last independent Indian state, and the whole of India became part of its empire. [5]
To become master of the entire Far East, Europe had now only to conquer China. This should have been the work of the nineteenth century. And it was in fact to this task that Europe addressed itself towards the middle of the century  –  a task in which, after a hundred years of effort, it failed, and had to acknowledge itself defeated. It was Europe’s first defeat since the time of Columbus and Vasco da Gama, a defeat on a colossal scale, betokening the twilight of European civilisation.
Before retracing the main lines of this failed effort, let us point out at once the principal reason why it did not succeed. The reason is to be found in the division of Europe. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, there were practically only two rival European states in India and Indonesia. Once one of them was eliminated  –  the Portuguese in Indonesia and the French in India  –  the Dutch and English found themselves face to face with the natives alone, and because of their superior technique they were easily able to gain the upper hand.
But in the second half of the nineteenth century, the situation was altogether different. By this time, all the great European powers had become colonialists, all of them wanted colonies, and consequently they all turned their eyes towards China, the only great non-European country that had not yet been colonised. Now all these European states  –  Britain, France, Germany and Russia  –  were more or less equal in power. It was therefore impossible for any one of them to beat a coalition of the others and so confront the native alone. The result was that China had never to face a European country so independent of the others that by virtue of its superior technology it could, by taking enough time, reduce it to the status of India. Instead, it always found itself face to face with Europe as a whole  –  in other words, confronting an array of states, each of which wanted to reserve for itself the entire cake, or at any rate the greater part of it, and which with this end in view sought to paralyse the activity of the others. It was above all this that saved China.
Let us now review the succession of events.
The First Stage: Shanghai
The first European trading stations in China came into operation only a few years after those set up in India. By means of a small yearly payment, from as early as 1557 the Portuguese had secured as a concession the island of Macao in China’s extreme south, very close to continental China and its great port of Canton. During the following three centuries, the other powers had to content themselves with uncertain and insecure settlements within Canton itself, which was the only Chinese port then open to foreigners, where the trading stations of the various ‘India companies’ had to install themselves side by side.
It was only a few years before the middle of the nineteenth century that, starting from its trading posts in Canton, Europe began its great offensive. This was to operate in three phases.
It was natural that Britain, having just succeeded in its conquest of India, should be the first to venture upon the conquest of China.
The pretexts put forth by plunderers as an excuse for seizing their prey are always both ridiculous and odious. The one put forward by Britain to start hostilities with China must count amongst the most infamous of those that make up the history of colonial conquest. And there’s plenty of competition! It was because the then Chinese emperor, Dao Guang, refused to allow his subjects to be poisoned by opium that Albion’s puritanical and ultra-Christian rulers, Lord John Russell’s ‘Liberal’ Albion, despatched their ships and soldiers against him. [6]
When the Chinese authorities in the port of Canton seized and destroyed a cargo of opium illegally imported by British merchants in 1839, British forces blockaded Canton and then seized Shanghai, 1000 kilometres to the north. In 1842, China capitulated. [7]
The result of this ‘Opium War’ was twofold. On the one hand, the British forced the Chinese to cede to them the port of Hong Kong opposite Macao at the mouth of the Canton river, thus enabling them to enter into successful competition with the latter port, which until then had been the only European trading station in that part of the world. On the other hand (and this was of far greater importance from a general point of view), China agreed to open to British commerce four other ports apart from Canton, the most northerly being Shanghai at the mouth of the Blue River. Thus Europe was no longer confined to the extreme south of China: it had penetrated the Blue River. That was the first stage.
Opening up Shanghai did not only mean, as in the case of Canton, that the British would have the right to trade there; it also meant that they were able to set up a great trading establishment, a ‘settlement’, which they themselves directly administered without any interference from the Chinese authorities. This territory remained theoretically an integral part of the Chinese state, but all its inhabitants, of whatever nationality, enjoyed the privileges of extra-territoriality analogous to those possessed by embassy personnel.
However, the British had barely signed this treaty at Nanking before the other Western powers called upon China to grant them privileges identical with those they had been obliged to extend to Britain. Within less than five years after the treaty with Britain, the United States, France, Belgium and Sweden were placed on the same footing as Great Britain. So the origin of the famous ‘concessions’ ('concession’ here being the French translation of the English word ‘settlement’) was a war for the freedom to import opium into China.
The Second Stage: Access to Beijing
This first war had therefore given Europe access to the Blue River. Twenty years later, a second war was to give it access to the Great Plain of the Yellow River. But to achieve this objective they no longer dared allow Britain to act alone: France was to accompany it.
It was the murder of a French missionary and the seizure of a small boat flying the British flag in 1856 that provided the sought-for opportunity. This second war lasted until 1860.
This time, Canton was not merely to be blockaded; it was to be seized and occupied; and afterwards, just as an advance had been made northwards to the coveted regions of the Blue River in 1840, now an advance was to be made into a newly-coveted region  –  that of China’s extreme north, in order from now on to have access to the whole length of the Chinese coast.
Consequently, just as Shanghai had been seized in 1840, so in 1860 Beijing was also to be seized. On the express order of the Lord General commanding Her Britannic Majesty’s troops, the emperor’s palace, after being pillaged, was to be set on fire, and then (for the Europeans were no barbarians) there would be negotiations. [8]
The principal point in these treaties of Tianjin is that Tianjin, the port of Beijing, was to be opened to foreign commerce, and it was also to be subjected to the regime of ‘concessions’.
Canton, Shanghai, Tianjin, the outlets from southern China, the way out from central China, and the outlet from northern China; with these three ports Europe was able to control the whole of China’s foreign trade.
Moreover, at the same time as they were getting themselves granted the ‘concessions’ at Hangzhou, no longer on the coast, like the preceding concessions, but right in the heart of China, France and Britain were obtaining the right to have ambassadors in Beijing, a most important right, since until then it had been impossible for them to have any sort of permanent access to the central power.
But just as 20 years earlier, the other powers were not slow in demanding and obtaining from China the same privileges it had been forced to cede to those who had used armed force against it. Another symptomatic fact is that to be sure of being able to intervene in the same way within a reasonable period of time, the official representatives of Russia and the United States were watching from their own ships the disembarkation of the Franco-British troops destined to march on Beijing.
So the treaties with France and Britain had barely been concluded before Russia caused another to be signed in its own favour, by which China ceded to it all its territories north of the Amur, and what was of still greater importance, opened up Mongolia to its commerce, which assured it the great caravan route leading from Lake Baikal to Beijing via Urga and Kalgan. [9]
In their turn, in the course of the following years, the United States, Prussia, Denmark, Spain, Holland, Belgium, Italy and Austria signed treaties with China, granting fresh advantages to them.
The Third Stage: Widespread Dismemberment
An event of major importance was that in contrast with the preceding two stages, the third move in the subjugation of China was not taken by a European power, one of the old stagers of colonialism like France or Britain, but by a newcomer: the Europeanised Asiatic state of Japan.
Twelve years after the European-American fleets had demolished the old Japan by forcing the Shimonoseki Strait, and eight years after a palace revolution had inaugurated modern Japan, this country also wanted its share of China. [10]
It naturally turned first to that part of the Chinese empire that lay nearest to it, Korea, in other words, a country with which it had formerly been at war, and which was then under China’s suzerainty. It had already possessed rights there for a long time in the port of Pusan which was situated in the strait separating the peninsula of Korea from Japan. Ever since 1876, Japan had felt itself sufficiently strong, without fear of Chinese intervention, to be able to obtain from Korea the right of access to three other Korean ports, where it also arrogated to itself the right to maintain garrisons. Since the Chinese also sent garrisons to these ports, this was obviously going to be the cause of innumerable conflicts.
So when some 20 years or so later, Japan decided that it was sufficiently modernised to risk an open war with China, it was not difficult for it to create an ‘incident’. On 25 July 1894, the Japanese sunk a ship carrying Chinese troops off the coast of Korea, and then immediately themselves disembarked large numbers of troops in Korea, and set about preparations for a march on Beijing through Manchuria.
Against the Europeanised army of Japan, the Asiatic army of China was powerless. Reverse followed reverse. Port Arthur on the southern promontory of Manchuria, Weihaiwei on the northern coast of the Shandong peninsula, along with faraway Formosa which extended to the south of the chain of Japanese islands, all fell into the hands of Japan. China was forced to capitulate, and Japan dictated a peace that offered it considerably more than the European states had hitherto obtained as a result of their own victories. [11]
This was not fair at all! It set all Europe in an uproar. The treaty had to be annulled, and Japan, which had easily been able to vanquish China, but was in no position yet to defy Europe, had to be content with the huge island of Formosa, which however was not so bad.
The European states, however, were not satisfied with this negative result. Since China had agreed to make such substantial surrenders in favour of Japan, it became easy for Europe to extract from it something at least equivalent. Russia, Great Britain and France therefore demanded from China as the price of their ‘good offices’ to hand over to them what they had enabled it to avoid having to give to Japan! Thus it was that Port Arthur, which was to have gone to Japan in the first treaty, was given on lease to Russia for 25 years, and the Russians were also given the right to build railway lines across Manchuria to link up the Trans-Siberian Railway to Mukden and Port Arthur. Thus it was that Weihaiwei, which had been taken by the Japanese, was given on a 99-year lease to Britain, which in addition appropriated the Kowloon peninsula on the Chinese mainland opposite Hong Kong. Finally France, determined not to be left out of it, secured for itself a 99-year lease over the port of Guangzhou, not far from Tonkin in the extreme south of China, as well as the concession for a railway line linking Tonkin with the capital of the Chinese province of Yunnan.
All this happened all the easier because a newcomer, Germany, came to show how it should be done.
Now united, well placed in Europe and having completed its industrial revolution, Germany was resolved that henceforth it too would try its chances in the race for the partition of China. Accordingly, in the year that followed the treaty with Japan, at the end of 1897, taking the murder of two missionaries who happened to be their compatriots as a pretext, Germany disembarked troops in the magnificent Bay of Jiaozhou on the south coast of the Shandong peninsula. Here, as well as obtaining a 99-year lease on Qingdao, it also secured the concession of two long railway lines across Shandong with the sole right of research and exploitation of the mineral wealth along the entire stretch of these two lines. It looked as though the whole of Shandong was on the way to becoming a German possession.
Instead of merely having as a concession a quarter of a city still nominally under Chinese sovereignty, the European states now obtained the exclusive use of a whole port with a great strip of territory around it, over which China retained not even nominal rights for the duration of the lease. Moreover, by the railway line concessions, Europe was no longer confined to the coasts, but could now penetrate the interior.
This time it was well and truly a rush for the spoils. The dismemberment of China had begun.
The Boxer Reaction
A reaction could not fail to take place. It was the reaction of the only China, or almost the only China, that then existed, that of the old China, whose history we have already outlined.
There was one good side to the war with Japan: it had taught China a useful lesson. It had shown that even an Asiatic state, provided it was modernised, could acquire a military power comparable to that of the European states. Accordingly, three years after the treaty with Japan and immediately after the signing of the treaty giving a lease on Chinese territory, the young emperor Guang Xu decided to undertake a series of reforms destined to transform China into a ‘modern’ state. [12]
But if the emperor and some of the intellectuals had understood the lesson from Japan, it was not the case for the whole of the court, or of the majority of the population. Accordingly, the batch of decrees issued in June 1898, which was a first step on the road of reform, aroused such a storm that in a few hours the dowager empress Ci Xi, the leader of the conservative party, was able to put an end to the power of her nephew, to have his advisors executed, and to take upon herself the regency of the empire. [13]
Moreover, a secret society, the traditional weapon of the Chinese people, the Boxers, provided the empress with the popular support that was indispensable for pursuing her anti-modernist policy by eliminating the source of the modernisation. At her instigation on 20 January 1900, the Boxers assassinated the German ambassador in Beijing, and lay siege to all the embassies. Just over two months later, an international force under the command of a German general arrived in Beijing without a shot being fired, and relieved the ambassadors.
Like the Sepoy rebellion in India some 40 years previously, [14] the activity of the Boxers was the last fling of a society that did not want to die. Its reactionary character is perhaps even more clear than that of the revolt of the Sepoys, who only demanded the restoration of the Moghul emperor, since its first action was the suppression of the reforms and the execution of the reformers. Its failure marked the end of the old China, just as 40 years earlier that of the Sepoys marked the end of the old India.
But whilst the Boxer movement marked the end of the old China, it also marked the end of the European attempts against China. In spite of the seriousness of the outrage suffered in Beijing, on this occasion Europe made virtually no claim on China apart from an indemnity, for, less than 15 years before 1914, the relations between the European states were already so strained that none of them could risk unleashing a quarrel over the share of China that belonged to them.
This did not, however, mean that China no longer had to struggle for its independence: quite the contrary! It was, in fact, during the half century that was to follow, that the most determined effort was to be made to subject it, but this effort was no longer to be made by Europe, but by Japan. And for the first time, China was to resist this latest attempt victoriously. Starting from 1900, it agreed to no further concessions; on the contrary, little by little, it was to take back from Europe all that it had formerly been obliged to concede.
The turn of the century was thus also a change in the history of China. The nineteenth century, that marked China’s contact with Europe, with industrial civilisation, in other words, was the era of the development of the thesis: Europe is penetrating China; with the twentieth century begins the antithesis: from its penetration by Europe, China acquired the means of resisting Europe.
Notes
1. There is no word-for-word equivalent of these remarks in the English version, A Russo-Chinese Empire, London, 1904, though similar phraseology appears on pp312-3.
2. When Cristoforo Colombo, Latinised as Columbus (1451-1506), sailing in the ships of Queen Isabella of Castille, discovered San Salvador in October 1492, he was the first European to set foot in the new world. He followed this up with journeys to Cuba, Hispaniola, and the mainland. Vasco da Gama, Condé da Vidigueira (1460-1524) was the first European to round Africa and reach Calicut in India in May 1498. He pioneered the creation of the Portuguese trading empire in India, and was its first viceroy.
3. The Portuguese arrived in the Spice Islands (the Moluccas) in 1510. The Dutch followed them in 1599, and by 1667 had completed their conquest, successfully dislodging the Portuguese from their control of the rest of Indonesia.
4. French influence in India came to an end with the British capture of the fort of Pondicherry in 1761.
5. The state of Oudh was annexed by Britain in 1856 using maladministration as a pretext.
6. Dao Guang (Emperor Xuan Zong, 1820-1850) attempted to resist the British importation of opium into China. He was opposed by the British Liberal government of Lord John Russell ('Radical Jack’, 1792-1878).
7. The First Opium War (1840-42) came to an end with the Treaty of Nanking on 29 August 1842.
8. In October 1860, British troops led by General Gordon looted and set fire to the Summer Palace in Beijing, destroying many irreplaceable works of art.
9. The Sino-Russian Additional Treaty of Peking of November 1860 gave Russia extensive trading rights on Chinese territory in central Asia.
10. Japan was first opened up to the West by the breaking of Japan’s isolation by the US Commodore Perry in 1853. This was followed by the bombardment of Fort Shimonoseki by the joint allied fleet in 1864. The ‘Meiji Restoration’ of 1868 destroyed the power of the Tokugawa Shogunate, and launched Japan upon a rapid course of capitalist modernisation.
11. The Sino-Japanese War ended with the Treaty of Shimonoseki in 1895.
12. The Qing Emperor Guang Xu (1875-1908) attempted his ‘Hundred Day Reform’ between 11 June and 21 September 1898.
13. Nala, the wife of Emperor Xian Feng, first acted as regent for the Emperor Zai Chun (Mu Zhong, 1861-1875), and then, as Dowager Empress Cao Xi, ruled China from 1898 to 1908.
14. The Indian Mutiny began in 1857 with the revolt of the Sepoys (Indian levies) at being issued with cartridges greased with beef and pork fat, which would have involved a loss of caste if they handled them.
 


Table of Contents




 Three Thousand Years of History, Fifty Years of Revolution by Robert Louzon 1998


China: 3000 Years of History, 50 Years of Revolution. Robert Louzon 1998
Appendix: Transliteration of Chinese Names (Wade Giles in Parentheses)
Aisin-Gioro Fu Lin (Emperor Shi Zu [Shun-chih])
Aisin-Gioro Xuan Ye (Emperor Kang Xi [K'ang-hsi])
Anhui (Anwei), province
Bao'an (Pao'an), town
Beijing (Peking)
Caizhou (Kaifeng)
Cao Cao (Ts'ao Ts'ao), general
Cao Pi (Ts'ao Pei, Emperor Wen Di)
Dunhuang (Tun-huang)
Chen Duxiu (Chen Tu-Hsiu), Communist leader
Chen Jiongming (Chiung-ming), warlord
Chengdu (Chengtu), Sichuan
Chong Zhen (Ch'ung-cheng, Emperor Zhu Youjian)
Chongqing (Chunking), Sichuan
Chu (Ch'u), state
Ci Xi (Tz'u-hsi, Nala), Dowager Empress
Dadu (Tatu), river
Dalian (Dairen), port
Dao, Daoism (Taoism)
Dao Guang (Ta'o Kuang, Emperor Xuan Zong)
Dayuezhi (Yüeh-chih, Kushanas)
Dongjing (Kaifeng)
Du Fu (Tu Fu), poet
Dujun (tukiun), warlords
Fen He (Foen), river
Feng Yuxian (Feng Yü-hsiang), warlord
Former Qin (Ts'in), dynasty 
Former Song (Sung), dynasty 
Former Yan (Yen), dynasty 
Former Zhao (Chao, Northern Han), dynasty 
Fujian (Fukien), province 
Fuzhou (Foochow), port
Gonghe, era (Western Zhou Dynasty)
Guang Xu (Kuang-hsü), emperor
Guangdong (Kwantung), province 
Guangxi (Kwangsi), province 
Guangzhou (Changchow), city 
Guizhou (Kweichou), province 
Guomindang (Kuomintang)
Hangzhou (Hangchow), city
Hankou (Hankow), city
He Jian (Ho Chien), general 
He Long (Ho Lung), Communist general 
Hebei (Hopei), province
Henan (Honan), province
Huang Xing (Huang Hsing), rebel
Huangpu (Whampoa, Canton)
Hubei (Hupeh), province 
Hui Zong (Hui-tsung, Emperor Zhao Ji)
Jiangsu (Kiangshu), province 
Jiangxi (Kiangsi), province 
Jilin (Chihli), province 
Jin (Kin, Nüzhen) Dynasty 
Jin (Tsin), state
Jinggangshan (Chinghanshan), mountains
Kang Xi (K'ang-hsi), emperor 
Kang Yuwei (K'ang Yu-wei), reformer
Khitan (Qidan, Liao) Dynasty
Koko Nor (Qinghai), lake
Lao Zi (Lao Tzü), philosopher
Later Yan (Yen), dynasty
Li Heng (Emperor Su Zong [Su Tsung])
Li Lisan (Li Li-san), Communist leader
Li Longji (Li Lung-chi, Emperor Xuan Zong [Hsüan-tsung])
Li Yan (Emperor Xi Zong [Hsi-tsung])
Li Yuan (Emperor Gao Zu [Kao-tsu])
Li Zhu (Emperor Ai Zong, Wanyan Shouzhu)
Li Zong (Li Tsung, Emperor Zhao Tian)
Liu Bang (Liu Pang, Emperor Gao Zu) 
Liu Bei (Liu Pei, Emperor Zhao Lie) 
Liu Cong (Liu Ch'ang), emperor 
Liu Xiu (Emperor Guang Wu [Kuang Wu) 
Liu Zhidan (Liu Chih-tan), Communist general
Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-Tung)
Mo Zi (Mo Ti), philosopher
Nanjing (Nanking), city
Nanzhao (Nan-chao), kingdom
Northern Yan (Yen), dynasty
Nüzhen (Jurchend), barbarian tribe
Pechenegs (Patzinaks), Turks
Ping Di (P'ing Ti), emperor
Qi (Ts'i), state
Qian Long (Ch'ien-lung), emperor
Qin (Ts'in), dynasty 
Qin (Ts'in), state
Qing (Ch'ing, Manchu) Dynasty 
Qingdao (Tsingtao), port
Rehe (Jehol), province
Shaanxi (Shansi), province 
Shandong (Shantung), province and peninsula
Shangdu (Xanadu), city
Shanxi (Shensi), province
Shi Huang Di (Shih Huang Ti), emperor
Sichuan (Szechuan), province
Sima (Sze-ma) Rui (Emperor Yuan Di) 
Sima (Sze-ma) Ye (Emperor Min Di) 
Sima Guang (Ssü-ma Kuang), politician 
Sima Qian (Ssü-ma Ch'ien), historian 
Sima Yan (Sze-ma Yen, Emperor Wu Di) 
Song (Sung) Dynasty
Song (Sung) state
Southern Yan (Yen), dynasty
Sun Quan (Sun K'uan, Emperor Da Di)
Tai Zong (T'ai Tsung, Li Shi-min), emperor
Temujin (Genghis Khan)
Tianjin (Tientsin), port
Tsetsehar (Chahar), province
Tuoba (T'o-pa), Turks
Wang Jingwei (Wang Ching-Wei), nationalist politician
Wang Yangming (Wang Shouren, Oyomei)
Western Yan (Yen), dynasty
Wu Di (Ti), emperor
Xi'an (Sian), city
Xi Zong (Hsi-tsung), emperor
Xian Di (Hien Ti, Liu Xie), emperor 
Xian Feng (Hien Fung), emperor 
Xiang (Siang), Duke of Song (Hegemon) 
Xin Dynasty (Hsin, Wang Mang) 
Xiongnu (Hsiung-nu, Huns?) 
Xuan Zhuang (Hsüan-tsang), Buddhist pilgrim 
Xun Zi (Sün K'uang), philosopher
Yan'an (Yenan), town 
Yan (Yen), state
Yang Guang (Yang Kuang, Emperor Yang Di) 
Yang Jian (Yang Chien, Emperor Wen Di)
Yanjing (Beijing)
Yelu Aboaji (Yeh-lü A-pao-chi, Emperor Tai Zu) 
Yelü Chucai (Yeh-lü Ch'u-ts'ai), minister 
Ying Zheng (Cheng), King of Qin (Emperor Shi Huang Di) 
Ying Zong (Cheng-t'ung, Emperor Zhu Qizhen) 
Yong Le (Yung-lo, Emperor Cheng Zu) 
Zai Chun (T'ung Chi, Emperor Mu Zhong)
Zhang Xueliang (Chang Hsüeh-liang), warlord
Zhao (Chao), state (Warring States Period) 
Zhao Gao (Chao Kao), eunuch 
Zhao Gou (Emperor Gao Zong [Kao-tsung]) 
Zhao Kuangyi (Emperor Tai Zong [Ta'i-tsung]) 
Zhao Kuangyin (Chao K'uang-yin, Emperor Tai Zu) 
Zhao Zong (Chao-tsung, emperor) 
Zhejiang (Chekiang), province 
Zheng He (Cheng Ho), admiral 
Zhengzhou (Chengchow), city 
Zhong Zong (Chung-tsung), emperor 
Zhou (Chou) Dynasty 
Zhou (Chou) Dynasty, Eastern 
Zhou (Chou) Dynasty, Western 
Zhu De (Chu Teh), Communist general 
Zhu Wen (Chu Wen, Emperor Tai Zu) 
Zhu Yuanzhang (Chu Yüan-chang), Emperor Tai Zu) 
Zhuang (Chuang), Duke of Chu (Hegemon) 
Zi Ying (Tze-ying), emperor 
 


Table of Contents




 Three Thousand Years of History, Fifty Years of Revolution by Robert Louzon 1998


China: 3000 Years of History, 50 Years of Revolution. Robert Louzon 1998
Chapter IV: The Sui (588-618) and the Tang (618-907)
The capture of Nanjing by the Sui [1] restored the unity of China; it now remained to recreate the empire. This was to be the work of the two succeeding dynasties  –  the Sui and the Tang. If the first of these dynasties was thus of barbarian origin, the second was authentically Chinese. It is not, however, out of place to deal with them in the same chapter, because the race from which the imperial family springs is not really a factor of much importance in the history of China. On the one hand, by the time they succeeded in ruling over the whole of China, the barbarian chieftains were already almost three-quarters Chinese, whilst their successors very rapidly became even more so; and on the other hand, because the only thing of real importance to China was its unity, whoever it might be who achieved or maintained it, because its unity means its ability to resist a nomad invasion, whereas the loss of this unity makes invasion certain. For the only thing that really matters to this peasant people is to see to it that nobody settles on its soil, or destroys its dykes or blocks up its canals. All life, and consequently its entire civilisation, depends upon it. The Sui ruled for only 30 years, whereas the Tang, on the other hand, lasted for nearly three centuries, almost as long as the Han.
Reconquest of the Empire
Under these dynasties, the seventh, eighth and ninth centuries were to be for China, from the point of view of foreign affairs, a simple repeat of the Han era; grandeur and imperialism.
With regard to the nomads, the Sui confined themselves to a policy of indirect influence, which consisted of setting the various Mongol tribes against each other. On the other hand, they sought to extend their domination over such territories as were suitable for colonisation by Chinese peasants. It was thus that in the far south they annexed the basin of the Red River, whilst in the north-east they attempted to do the same with Korea, only to be defeated. [2]
This reverse provoked an internal revolt which, combined with a palace revolution in which the emperor was assassinated, culminated in the dictatorship of the military leaders, one of whom in 618 deposed the last of the Sui and installed himself in his place. Yet again it was a ‘soldier of fortune’, the first of the Tang, who became the first ruler of the second great Chinese dynasty. [3] This new dynasty set out to conquer the countries of the northern and western steppes and deserts; Mongolia to begin with, and then Eastern Turkestan, whose dominant tribes at that time were no longer the Huns, but the Turks. [4]
But about this time, however, a new menace appeared  –  this time from the south-west. It came from the lama-shepherds who roamed over the frozen heights of the Tibetan table-lands. India had already sent its missionaries amongst them, Buddhism had provided them with both a religion and a script, and made them establish a monarchy. From these circumstances, it followed that the Tibetans, the poverty of whose soil had for a long time made them troublesome ‘brigands’, now became formidable warriors. The Tang thus found themselves obliged to take the offensive against them, and apply to them the same method they had used against the Mongols of the north and north-west  –  the method of conquest, in other words. [5] The Chinese armies therefore invaded Tibet, and even penetrated into India, where in 647 they defeated the ruler of Delhi. [6] However, they soon left the peninsula, re-crossed the Himalayas and never again made a descent on India, as indeed India on its part never penetrated into China. The two great nations of irrigators did not seek to conquer each other.
The Tang then resumed the campaign in Korea, where their predecessors had failed, and in this they now succeeded, making Korea a Chinese protectorate under a Korean administrator. [7]
Finally, like the Han, the Tang ventured beyond the Pamirs, and brought under their protection the various states of the Syr-Daria and the Amu-Darya, some 4000 kilometres as the crow flies from their capital; their aid was even sought by the rulers of the Punjab. [8] This was at the beginning of the eighth century, when the Tang dynasty was at its height.
At this moment, contact with the India of the Indus valley, broken since the close of the Han Dynasty, seemed to be re-established by the same route and in the same way, and even more closely than under the Han. Instead of one country seeking to conquer the other, were the two great Asian peoples once more about to pursue cultural exchange? No! For an insurmountable obstacle arose at that very moment  –  Islam.
Here were nomads again, but nomads of a type with whom the Chinese were not familiar; nomads who dwelt in far more desert regions than the steppes of central Asia, men hailing from further than the Pamirs and Turkestan. The Arabs were now on the scene, in the full flood of their conquests, expansion and assimilation.
The nomad sea is infinite; it is a reservoir of limitless capacity from which masses of men are constantly being carried away in an outward flow. After having subdued the Tungus, the Huns, the Turks and the Tibetans, the Chinese armies now found themselves in conflict with the nomads of Arabia. It was in 751 on the plains beyond the Amu-Darya that the decisive engagement took place, and in this the Chinese met with defeat. [9]
Thereupon, the Arabs hastened to convert to their own faith all who inhabited the regions west of the Pamirs, whether nomads or the sedentary folk of the oasis. For this reason, all communication between China and India was severed almost as soon as it had become re-established. Islam had placed a barrier between the two great irrigational civilisations of eastern Asia, just as it had at the same time placed one between the two halves of the Mediterranean world.
The expansion of the Empire thus checked, retreat was speedily to follow. The same year that the Arabs defeated the Chinese, the mountaineers of Yunnan, formerly subdued by the Chinese, rose in rebellion and recovered their independence. [10] Shortly afterwards, the Tibetans started a new war against China, ravaging Gansu and even occupying Sichuan, and it was only after the Chinese had invoked the aid of the Turks against them that peace was again imposed on them. [11]
This was, moreover, to be the end of Tibet as a military monarchy. In the ninth century, the king was overthrown by the Buddhist clergy, and from that time onward Tibet was no more than a paradise for monks. [12] The hardiest and poorest of all the inhabited countries chose celibacy and begging in the place of conquest.
But China’s armies were exhausted by this far too prolonged and too vast an effort; the first years of the tenth century saw the dislocation of the empire.
Tang Civilisation
The Tang epoch was China’s golden age. If we care to look for points of comparison with the Roman empire that allow us at least to understand better this faraway world, we can say that the Tang were the equivalent of the Antonines. Whilst it was the Han (call it the Julian dynasty) that founded the empire, the Tang was the dynasty that, having reconstituted it (which the Antonines did not have to do), brought it to its height, consolidated it, and managed it. [13]
During the three centuries of the Tang, Chinese industry and commerce developed with ever-increasing prosperity; during that period the two basic Chinese industries  –  silk and porcelain  –  reached their highest degree of perfection. It was during this period also that printing became highly developed. The first mention of printing using wood block characters relates to the time of the first Sui monarch; [14] the first reference to it using stone relates to the year 837, during the Tang’s last century. [15]
It was also under the Tang, during the seventh century, that the Chinese introduced the stirrup in the harnessing of horse saddles, a considerable improvement, and one that only reached Western Europe through the intermediary of the Arabs some two centuries later.
More important than all that, and what remains as the great work of the time, was the completion of the colonisation of the south. It was, in fact, only starting from the Tang period that the Chinese fully occupied this vast region and brought it completely into use; it is for this reason that the inhabitants of it still today describe themselves as ‘the sons of Tang’, and not as ‘the sons of Han’, as do the northern Chinese.
From the economic point of view, this complete sinicisation of the south had two important consequences, which are reflected in the ethnic character of the Chinese people.
The first consisted of the addition of a new cultivation to China’s traditional crops; that of tea. It was only, in fact, during the eighth century that this began to take on any importance. The tea plant is cultivated on the sinewy hills extending from Hangzhou to Canton at some distance from the coast. In contrast with other Chinese crops, tea is thus not a crop of the plain, but a crop of the slopes; from that comes a new technique, and a new type of man: alongside the cereal grower we now have a cultivator of trees. [16]
The second consequence, an even more important one, is that thanks to the south, the Chinese were to become sailors, and were to add to their commerce on the land the much more far-flung commerce of the sea. Just as the northern coasts of China were unsuitable for navigation, the southern coasts just as much invited it. Take a look at a map of China! To the north, the Great Plain borders on a seacoast (the ‘Yellow Sea’) which the Yellow River, constantly bringing fresh alluvial deposits, provides with deltas; flat, without any inlets, ports, or any sheltered places. On the other hand, to the south of the Yellow River we have a typical ria coast (with numerous inlets). At high tide, the sea enters the valleys, which then become openings in the shore, each of them providing some sort of shelter. Furthermore, the peaks that previously rose on dry land in front of what is now the coast and were later half-submerged and surrounded by sea water, now emerge like a chain of islets forming a real protective curtain, behind which, cut off from the high seas, a whole region of calm water extends.
That is why the effective control of the southern coast by the Chinese provided the signal for their maritime vocation. Very quickly, great centres of navigation and business were established along this coast, and there they prospered. First of all, two great emporia are found there at either end: Hangzhou at its northern extremity, close to the mouth of the Blue River, and Canton at its southern extremity near the outlet of the Zhu Jiang. Between these two giants were ports of lesser but nevertheless of considerable importance  –  such as those of Wenzhou, Fuzhou and Guangzhou, some of which, notably the last-named, at certain times even rivalled the ports of Hangzhou and Canton.
Moreover, the Chinese merchants did not make these ports a closely-guarded preserve. They were in fact freely used by the merchant ships of all the maritime nations. The Arabs notably were assiduous in frequenting them. It was through them that the great centres of world luxury  –  Baghdad, the capital cities of India and the court of China  –  found the means of establishing their mutual commercial relations.
The Tang were also great builders. To them is due the credit for the greater part of China’s public works. Their chief preoccupation appears to have been concerned with lessening the perils to which Chinese ships navigating the northern coasts were exposed, and so by artificial means extending the Chinese maritime commerce of the south as far north as possible.
The most notable of these works, comparable in its magnitude with the Great Wall, was the Grand Canal, which was dug in the seventh century. [17] This canal is over 1000 kilometres in length, and passing from Hangzhou to Tianjin, it enables goods unloaded in the latter port to reach the northern extremity of the country without having to face the dangers of the Yellow Sea.
There can be no doubt that navigation around the peninsula of Shandong must have been extremely perilous at the time, for shortly after the Tang period another canal was constructed, which cut off Shandong at its base, going from Jiaozhou Bay to the Gulf of Jilin.
Finally, amongst the other spectacular works of this period we must mention the great dyke of 144 kilometres which lines the whole sea front south of the Bay of Hangzhou, and which at the same time serves as a towpath for a canal dug alongside the dyke and as a protection for the cultivated lands situated below the sea level. [18]
Side by side with these public utility works, in order to set the tone of the time, we must mention purely luxury constructions, such as the park made by the last of the Sui at Luoyang with a 120 kilometres perimeter, decorated with a lake of nine kilometres circumference. Luoyang thus became a kind of ‘Versailles’. [19]
The administration of the empire on its part had become fixed. The system that made examination the sole means of access to public office was everywhere rigorously applied.
As for the rest, all the arts  –  architecture, sculpture, painting, poetry, etc.  –  now reached their classical period. The Tang style can be summed up by what underlies the classical form; a vigour in simplicity. The artist now enjoyed complete mastery over his means of expression, and was not yet merely searching for complexity.
Mercenaries and Pacifists
It is not difficult to show, however, that despite its outward appearance of splendour, the Tang empire, like that of the Roman Antonines, was steadily approaching its eclipse. In both cases, the cause was the same  –  the same which had also led to the destruction of the Han empire  –  in other words, the pressure of the barbarians, which was becoming increasingly persistent. It was not now pressure from faraway barbarians like the western Turks, whose Islamisation had set up an insuperable barrier to any further expansion of the Chinese empire, but this time it was pressure from barbarians much closer at hand, those who for the most part were themselves already three-quarters Chinese  –  those, in fact, whom China had taken into its service.
The policy that the Han had inaugurated of winning over the Huns to defend China’s frontiers was strongly extended and intensified under the Tang. It was not enough to install several tribes along the interior of the Great Wall merely as auxiliary troops, because it was the eastern Turks who now constituted the main part of the Chinese army; it was they who formed the shock troops who had been used to reconquer the empire. The difference between the Han and the Tang was that whilst the Han created the Chinese empire using Chinese troops, the Tang reconstituted the empire and maintained it using mercenary Turks under the command of Turkish generals.
There were still, of course, Chinese troops in use, but they were nothing more than a militia raised by conscription, and their rôle was mainly that of auxiliary troops. They did the job quite reluctantly, because the Chinese preferred not to be soldiers at all. It seems, indeed, that this was the era when Chinese pacifism first made its appearance. One of the chief poets in the most brilliant period of the Tang era, Du Fu, who lived in the middle of the eighth century under Xuan Zong, [20] one of the two greatest emperors of the dynasty, in fact wrote:
In the border lands blood flows in streams,
Yet still ambition fires the Emperor’s dreams!
In truth, ‘tis but misfortune to have sons,
Only to fall in combat with the Huns!
Surely you see that round the Koko Nor
Only blanched skeletons remain of yore!
Or again:
Our sovereign wields a mighty empire,
To what more can he now aspire?
And again:
Let the Wall guard us from the barbarian band,
And send our men back to their native land.
A military empire and an anti-militarist population  –  such is the paradox that the China of the Tang era presents to us. It was a paradoxical situation that could only last through the presence of these foreign mercenaries, whose rôle increased in importance in proportion as the aversion to war developed amongst the citizens of China.
But those who possess arms possess power. Throughout these three centuries, the mercenary Turks were not slow to intervene in domestic quarrels. Indeed, the emperors themselves approached them when they found themselves in difficulty, and called for their aid to consolidate the throne.
Thus when the dowager empress Wu Zetian dethroned her son at the close of the seventh century in order to proclaim herself empress, it was a Turk who demanded the son’s restoration. [21] Half a century later, it was another mercenary Turk who compelled the great emperor Xuan Zong to abdicate, and it was only by begging the aid of other Turks (the Uighurs) that the latter’s son succeeded in entering the capital and ascending his father’s throne. [22] Finally, it was to the Turks again that the last of the Tang emperors appealed in their struggle against the great internal revolt which was at last to sweep them away.[23]
The Final Revolt
The social process which we have seen on two occasions under the Han Dynasty was once again reproduced under the Tang, periods of progress inevitably engendering the elements of social upheaval.
Up to now, we have seen two quite distinct systems of ownership in operation  –  one consisting of the distribution of land on an egalitarian basis between all the families of the village, each family having the right to cultivate its plot and enjoy the products, but without the right to dispose of the land; the other being the right of ownership pure and simple, including the owner’s right to bequeath and sell the land as he so desired.
It seems likely that following the convulsions of the Middle Ages, the system of tenure that had finally been established under the Tang was a mixed system, a compromise between the two previous systems. In effect, every male inhabitant of a village had a right of usage over a plot of between three and six hectares on the one hand, with the hereditary right to 1.5 hectares as a maximum, but this latter plot, just like the former, was inalienable.
Despite the legal inalienability of all peasant property, the concentration of property into fewer hands continued apace, because, as distinct from the peasants, the higher functionaries had obtained the right to unlimited ownership of land  –  unlimited alike in extent and duration. Then, notwithstanding all the precautions taken, the small peasant proprietor ended up becoming absorbed by the great patrician proprietor. From the end of the eighth century, the families of landowners represented only five per cent of the population, so strong had the forces of concentration become. The laws were just laughed at and were invariably evaded. As long as social peace continues, as long as ‘order’ reigns, as long as economic activity goes on apace, as long as accumulation grows in importance, so shall the process of concentration continue to operate, a concentration that leads to troubles, disorders, revolts and revolutions, and which can only end in having to start all over again.
Thus from the fact of the concentration of property, just as at the end of the Former and Later Han eras, we find at the end of the Tang era a great mass of famished and ravenous landless peasants, who at last felt themselves goaded into revolt.
As before, it was also in Shandong, or, more precisely, on the borders of Shandong and Jilin, that the revolt flared up in 874. It snowballed rapidly, and found a leader in one of the literati, Huang Chao. [24] Soon almost all China had fallen into the hands of the rebels: to begin with the south with Fuzhou and Canton, and then old China with its two capital cities, Chang'an and Luoyang.
To save himself, the emperor, who had taken refuge in Sichuan, appealed to his Senegalese, or I should say, his Turks. One of their groups based in Luoyang succeeded in defeating the Chinese peasants and reinstating the emperor in Chang'an, whilst Huang Chao was slain in Shandong.
Nonetheless, the days of the Tang were numbered, for one of the chiefs of the peasant revolt who had betrayed his brothers and had thereby received the governorship of a province as a reward contrived to have the emperor assassinated in 904, and shortly afterwards proclaimed himself emperor. [25]
He was an emperor without an empire, because during the turbulent 30 years that followed, those centrifugal forces that always take a free course whenever they are not firmly controlled had already broken China up into a number of independent states, so that we are now about to re-enter a new period of Middle Ages.
Notes
1. In 589, the Sui empire captured Nanjing and brought the Chen Dynasty to an end, thereby uniting the whole of China once more.
2. In 603, Yang Jian conquered Annam, and went on to pillage its capital, Champa, in 604. His successor, Yang Guang (Emperor Yang Di, 604-618), launched three successive attacks upon the kingdom of Koguryo in Korea in 612-14, all of them unsuccessful and attended by heavy losses.
3. In 617, Li Yuan, an official in the north, led a revolt against the second Sui emperor, and captured Chang'an. When the emperor was assassinated in the following year, Li Yuan proclaimed himself emperor (posthumous throne name, Emperor Gao Zu, 618-626), and founded the Tang Dynasty (618-907).
4. In 629, the Tang launched an attack upon the khan of the Eastern Turks, and conquered the whole of Inner Mongolia up to the edge of the Gobi Desert. In 639, war broke out with the Kingdom of Turfan in Turkestan, which was soon added to the Tang Empire, and in 657, the Western Turks were also conquered. States even beyond the Pamirs offered their submission to the Tang emperor.
5. Tibet first became a unified state in 607, and when its first king, Songzan Gambo (c630-650) was refused a request for a Chinese princess as his wife, he was defeated when he sent his army to attack Sichuan. After a further period of peace, the Tibetans attempted to block the passes over the Pamirs, and were again routed by the Chinese in 747.
6. The emperor Tai Zong enjoyed friendly relations with Harshavardhana (606-647), the Buddhist ruler of Thanesar and Kanauj, who had created an empire across the north of India. When his throne was usurped after his death by Arunashva, the Chinese ambassador gathered a force from Tibet, Nepal and Assam, dethroned him, and took him back as a prisoner to China.
7. In 660, the Tang conquered the Kingdom of Paikche, and in 668 the Kingdom of Koguryo. This left Silla, the remaining Korean kingdom, as a vassal state of the Tang Empire.
8. In the middle of the seventh century, Chinese influence even spread into the Oxus valley, and the king of Khotan submitted to the Chinese.
9. When a Tang army moved against the prince of Tashkent, he appealed for help to the Arabs, who came to his aid and under the command of Ziyad ibn Salih defeated the Chinese at the Battle of the Talas River in 751. They lost control of Turkestan soon after.
10. In 750, a dispute broke out between the Tang court and the dependent kingdom of Nanzhao in Yunnan. The kingdom gained its dependence after inflicting two heavy defeats upon the Tang forces in 751 and 754.
11. During the rebellion of An Lushan, the Tibetans invaded China almost as far as Chang'an, and established themselves in Gansu and Sichuan. In 808, they were expelled by Uighur mercenaries in the service of the Tang court.
12. By 889, Tibet was a mere congery of separate lordships, each dominated by a different Buddhist sect. In 1578, the Dalai Lama, head abbot of the Dge Lugspa sect, was granted overall control of the country by the khan of the Mongols.
13. The Julian house, founded by Augustus (27BC-14AD), ruled the Roman Empire from 27BC to 68AD. It was followed after an interval by the prosperous rule of the Antonines (98-161AD), founded by Trajan (98-117AD).
14. Mirror image characters to produce rubbings appear cut upon the backs of bronzes as early as the Warring States period of the Eastern Zhou Dynasty. Printing from wood blocks is variously assigned by scholars to the sixth century AD or to the end of the ninth century. It appears to have been mainly elaborated in Sichuan (Joseph Needham, ‘Paper and Printing’, Science and Civilisation in China, Volume 6, Cambridge, 1985, pp26, 146).
15. The cutting of the Confucian classics on stone to be inked in for printing is traditionally assigned to the Han Dynasty, and is reliably attested as early as the sixth century (Needham, op cit, p8).
16. There has always been a marked contrast between the ways of life of a cultivator of trees and a cereal grower. Compare the Greece of Athens, the country of the olive tree, with that of Thessaly, a cereal-growing country! The Burgundy schoolmaster, the very first time he has them in the classroom, in the same way distinguishes between those of his pupils who are the children of vine growers, and those who are not. [Author’s note]
17. The Grand Canal, which upon completion stretched from Beijing to Hangzhou, was begun from Luoyang in 605.
18. The Jiangnan channel and dyke at the southern end of the Grand Canal stretched for 400 kilometres from the Chang Jiang River to Hangzhou, on the Qiantang River.
19. Yang Guang, the second and last of the Sui rulers, had a taste for magnificence, and began the construction of his capital at Luoyang in 605. To the west of the city he laid out an enormous park, stocked with exotic animals from all over the empire.
20. Du Fu (712-770) was China’s foremost realist poet. He flourished during the reign of Li Longji (Emperor Xuan Zong, 712-756).
21. Wu Zetian, the wife of the Emperor Gao Zong, took control of the Tang court in 660, and in 690 usurped the throne, assuming the name Sheng Shen (Emperor Wu Zhao, 690-705). When she fell ill two of her ministers conspired to put the emperor Zhong Zong back upon the throne he had briefly occupied in 684.
22. In 755, An Lushan, a Sogdian officer in control of the northern armies, broke out in revolt against the unstable rule of Li Longji (Emperor Xuan Zong, 712-756). When his armies approached Chang'an the emperor fled to Sichuan, and abdicated in favour of his son, Li Heng (Emperor Su Zong, 756-762), who recaptured the capital a year later with help of Uighur troops.
23. Incapable of dislodging the Huangchao rebels from Chang'an, Li Yan (Emperor Xi Zong, 873-888) called in Li Keyong, leader of the Shatuo Turks, who took the city in 883.
24. In 874, a peasant insurrection broke out at Changyuan in Henan. When its leader was killed in 878, he was succeeded in his command by Huang Chao, who captured Chang'an in 880 and proclaimed himself emperor. He committed suicide after being cornered near Mount Taishan in 884.
25. General Zhu Wen, who had deserted Huang Chao to help the Tang court suppress the insurrection, murdered the Emperor Zhao Zong in 904, and put Li Zhu on the throne instead (Emperor Ai Zong, 904-907). He deposed him soon after, and proclaimed himself the first emperor (Tai Zu, 907-912) of the Later Liang Dynasty.
 


Table of Contents




 Three Thousand Years of History, Fifty Years of Revolution by Robert Louzon 1998


China: 3000 Years of History, 50 Years of Revolution. Robert Louzon 1998
Chapter VII: From the Coming of the Manchus to the Opium War (1644-1840)
For the first time in this book, the history of a dynasty will not be confined to a single chapter. This is because during the Manchu domination an event was to happen, the like of which we have not previously come across in our account, and which was to change the whole course of Chinese history; an encounter with a new civilisation.
Chinese civilisation, a civilisation of irrigation which had progressively acquired a commercial adjunct, suddenly found itself in contact with quite another civilisation, born under other skies and of a radically different character: industrial civilisation. It is thus at the time of this supreme event that we have to close our present chapter.
The policy of the Manchu emperors during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries was marked by two efforts that were to a large extent crowned with success. Each of these was concerned with one of the two great problems that make up the history of China; the imperial problem, and the agrarian problem.
The Two Manchu Successes
The Chinese empire was reconstituted by reducing the nomad populations of the borderlands to a state of vassalage.
Ever since the seventeenth century, the whole of Mongolia, both Inner and Outer, has recognised the emperor of China as its suzerain; at the same time Tibet was converted into a protectorate. In the eighteenth century, Dzungaria and the Tarim basin were added to the empire. [1] However, in contrast with what happened under the Han and Tang, the Pamirs were never crossed, for Islam was in the way.
On the other hand, the Russians, who for the first time make their appearance in the history of China, for they were now in the process of conquering Siberia, were held in check. They could not penetrate the basin of the Amur, and they had to agree not to cross the Argoun, one of the two rivers that form the Amur after they flow into it.
But all this was clearly the work of Manchus, and not of Chinese. Not only did the Manchus make up the backbone of the army, but it was as Khan of the Manchus that the Mongol tribes recognised the emperor of China as their suzerain. The situation was thus very much like that which prevailed under Kublai Khan, not as emperor of China, but as master of Mongolia, as grandson of Genghis Khan. It is therefore no longer possible to speak of the Chinese empire in this era, but rather of a Manchu empire holding China in its bosom, just as formerly a Mongol empire likewise held China in its bosom.
The other success of the Manchus was in the domain of internal policy. In contrast to nearly all their predecessors, the Qing emperors succeeded in maintaining a regime of small-scale property ownership.
Hardly more than 20 years after the Manchu entry into Beijing, Kang Xi, the dynasty’s second emperor, [2] ordered the restitution to the Chinese of all lands appropriated by the Manchus. As regards the great Chinese estates that had been formed under the Ming, a certain number of them were shared out amongst the peasants, whilst tenant farmers on the others were given the unrestricted right to renew their leases, and were thus placed in the position of being virtual owners, something like what went on in Catalonia with the rabassaires.
The prevalence of this system of small property ownership in China during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries was due primarily to two causes. It was due in the first place to a very moderate fiscal policy, taxes under the Manchus being the lowest that China had ever known; and in the second place, it was due to the fact that for the first time in their history the Chinese were exempt from military service, this being reserved for the Manchus only. The tiller of the soil was accordingly able to meet his taxation liabilities without getting into debt, and he was not deprived of the labour of his sons at a time when they were at their most productive. Between them, these two reasons enabled him to survive.
Coupled with this improvement in the peasant’s position, there was a noticeable reduction in the desire of people to buy land. This reduction was due to a new phenomenon: emigration.
Emigration
As a result of putting into force measures with the object of making the cultivator the owner of his land, the surplus value, which formerly went to maintain the landlord in luxury, from now on remained in the hands of the cultivator himself. Now the latter was in no way disposed to spend it on luxurious living, but quite simply to bring up a more numerous family. From this it followed that emigration soon became an urgent necessity.
This emigration could no longer be made by cultivating new territories, because all the irrigable land, not only in China, but in the neighbouring countries as well, had by then already been cultivated. Continuing therefore the evolution that for centuries had impelled them towards the sea, the Chinese at last crossed it and in great numbers expatriated themselves to places abroad. They installed themselves along the entire periphery of the western Pacific  –  on the coasts of Indo-China and the archipelagos of Indonesia, and they did so, not to cultivate the soil, but to engage in trade and commerce. It was the beginning of a great venture that was to make the Chinese the great trader of the entire Far East, the one who was to be everywhere the indispensable intermediary.
Now we have seen that the main factor in the concentration of landed property consisted in the necessity for people who had grown rich in the cities through commerce, industry and supplying the state, etc., to ‘invest’ their capital. Whenever it became too abundant to be usefully employed in the businesses where it had arisen, it was immobilised by the purchase of land. But now, thanks to the foothold the Chinese had secured in countries overseas, they could employ it in almost unlimited quantities in international commerce. They no longer needed to buy land, and this was doubtless the reason why the measures taken by the Manchu state to preserve small-scale ownership of estates turned out to be effective.
A great emigration movement is not at its outset a factor making for vitality in the country where it occurs; it is rather a factor that makes for enfeeblement, because it deprives a country of its most intelligent, most resolute, and most enterprising men. Thus it happened in the Greece of the third century BC, when vast numbers of its inhabitants emigrated to the eastern lands opened up to them by the conquests of Alexander  –  a national bloodletting from which the country never recovered. [3]
But it also happens that, by a kind of return stroke, at the end of a certain time this emigration provides the motherland with the means of rebirth. Here again, we find an example in Greece, for it was the Greek colonies established along the coasts of the Black and Ionian Seas in the eighth and seventh centuries BC that made possible the Athens of the fifth century BC. [4]
So it would seem to have been for the Chinese emigration. At the moment it occurred, it was not at all a factor for the strengthening of China, for the China of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries did not reveal any features of greatness: there was no rebirth, and nothing came to fruition there. In the twentieth century, on the other hand, there was to be a China ‘abroad’, those Chinese colonies in the Pacific that had grown numerous, active and prosperous that were to form the mainstay for the ‘modernisation’ of continental China. It was they who were to finance and assure the success of the Guomindang.
Emigration, however, did not deter the cultivator from trying to keep as many as possible of his children at home, and for that reason to gain as much as possible from the soil. The productivity of Chinese land reached its maximum at this time; less and less of its surface was required for a man to live. In spite of the emigration, the population considerably increased. According to Chinese historians, it more than trebled in two centuries.
Social Struggles
Thus it happened that, in spite of the lack of concentration of landed property, in spite of emigration, and in spite of the more and more intensive cultivation of the soil, the shortage of available land made itself no less felt under the Manchus than it had done under their predecessors. Soon there were as many, or perhaps even more, peasants without land than there had been in periods of land concentration, for small property does not avoid poverty. Because of the security it provides, because of the comparative ease and well-being it ensures to begin with, it leads to such an increase in population that in spite of emigration and the intensity of cultivation those who remain must content themselves with a portion too small to enable them to live a decent life.
So the Manchu period also produced great popular movements. Secret societies were now continually on the increase, reforming themselves as soon as they were dissolved, and insurrection became endemic.
We have seen that it was now the south that was the part of China most aglow with life, and it was in the south, throughout the entire region of the Chinese hills, from the Blue River to the Canton River that nearly all the centres of insurrection were to be found during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Nevertheless, the old centre of revolution in the mountainous region of Shandong had not lost its glorious tradition. It was in this northern province that on two occasions, in 1774 and 1777, took place the insurrection of the White Lotus, the most important to precede the great insurrections of the following century. [5] So far as we can judge, all these movements had both a political and a social character. On the one hand, they had the aim of overthrowing the alien Manchu Dynasty, and, on the other, of overcoming destitution by the redistribution of land. These movements were to reach their climax after the date with which we end this chapter, to begin with in the revolution of the Taiping, which succeeded in ruling the lands of the Blue River from 1853 to 1864, and afterwards with the revolution of 1912, the work of the Guomindang, the National People’s Party, the last but one embodiment, after so many transformations, of the Red Eyebrows of the Han era, the final one being the ‘Red Army’ of Mao Zedong.
Unity and Diversity of China
Before closing this summary of the history of old China, it may be pertinent to ask what is its most salient feature.
China is geographically one, whilst being geographically diverse. It is one because, from the north to the south, it is a land of great rivers, a land of irrigation and floods; yet, just as the floods of the Yellow River are brutal and devastating, so the Blue River is one of comparative calm, whose waters are easy to control and navigate.
The climate passes from one extreme to the other. Old China, the China of Han and Wei, is a cold country; the China of Canton is tropical; but China as a whole is subject to the variations of the monsoon, a meteorological phenomenon of great importance.
Against the vast plain of the north are set the plateaux of the north-west and the hills of the south-east, but these plateaux and hills are just as bare and treeless as the plain.
The human geography, as much as the physical, shows this unity in diversity. All Chinese belong to what is called the Mongoloid race, but whilst the Chinese of the north are tall and brachycephalic, [6] those of the south are smaller, and brachycephalism is rare there.
All Chinese have cereal as their basic food, but whilst in the north this cereal is corn, in the south it is rice.
As for the language, the contrast between its unity and its diversity is revealed in a form that is specific to it; it results from the separation of the spoken language from the written language. Thus, as we have seen, the spoken language represents its diversity, a diversity so extreme that two Chinese living no more than a few score kilometres apart sometimes cannot understand each other’s speech; by contrast, the written language represents its unity, for it is a rigorously unified language fixed once and for all over a territory as extensive as almost half of Europe and peopled by more than 300 million, and perhaps by 500 million inhabitants. Thus, thanks to the unity and permanence of the written language there exists a single framework for thought, whilst thanks to the multiplicity and easy changes of the spoken language, the different groupings that make up the Chinese nation are able to express themselves in a way that best suits the peculiarities of their vocal chords or those of their sensibility and of their time.
The same remarks apply to history. Looked upon as a whole, the course of Chinese evolution down to the nineteenth century was comparatively simple. From its origins down to the ninth century, that is, to the end of the Tang, it was on the ascendant, bringing technical and economic progress, establishing communities at home and expanding abroad; from the tenth to the nineteenth century, on the other hand, it was in decline, or, more exactly, it represented an immense dead level, during which nothing new originated and nothing developed. Each of these two phases, moreover, was punctuated by barbarian invasions that resulted in China being dominated for more or less prolonged periods by aliens, who in turn added fresh vigour to the course of the country’s evolutionary progress.
In the course of this evolution, we are confronted with the spectacle of a country where the technical and economic framework, like the political and social framework, has remained almost unchanged for thousands of years.
The fixed framework of the economy was imposed by the fixed framework of nature. In the course of 4000 or 5000 years, no important invention came to revolutionise China’s principal means of production  –  the cultivation of cereals by irrigation. And if to this fundamental branch of Chinese industry some other special industries were early on added, these were also closely bound up with the soil. Porcelain, for example, depends on the remarkable purity of the kaolins of Jiangxi; lacquer can only be obtained from the gum of the indigenous vegetable rhus vernificera; China paper is made from bamboo, from silkworm cocoons, or from the bark of the mulberry tree  –  all more or less specifically Chinese products; finally, silk is dependent on the perfect adaptation of the mulberry tree to climatic conditions, as a result of which it provides at least two harvests of leaves per year, and in certain places, as at Canton, five or six harvests annually.
Over this set framework of work and production was moulded a likewise invariable political framework, which might be called an administrative democracy. The mandarinate dates from the Han Dynasty, and was merely the development and systematisation of the government of the ‘literati’ which had long preceded it. It essentially consisted of placing the administration of the state in the hands of men whose title thereto was due neither to birth, wealth, popular choice nor the sovereign’s favour, but to their own ‘merit’  –  that is, their intellectual merit as it was recognised according to certain canons, and following certain rules.
Then finally, there was the social framework based upon the family, where brothers, sisters and children were closely linked together around their eldest member. This social framework had its permanence assured by a religious bond  –  ancestor-worship.
The ancestor cult impels the Chinese to beget a very numerous progeny, so that he might be assured that this cult will always be fittingly practised in regard to himself after his death. This cult, the only true religion of China, as has been said, found its origin and justification in the vastness of the territories that lay open to clearance and cultivation by the primitive people who were confined to the valleys of the Fen and the Wei. It was the rapid breeding of children based on the family cult that ensured the development first of all of the Great Plain, then of the Blue River lands of the south, and finally, but lately, of the great territory of Manchuria.
On the other hand, within these frameworks so remarkable for their rigidity and permanence, how amazing and continual were the changes!
Politically, China was by turns an empire, a single national state, two states, one northern and one southern, and a multitude of states. It was sometimes to be a state or a number of states that were purely Chinese, and sometimes a state or a number of states ruled by the barbarians.
Socially, China was to experience all the property forms; feudal, capitalist and peasant. A complete system of individual property was to be found there, as well as that of simple right of use, with all the forms of ownership in between.
At times, China practised the fullest free trade, whilst at other times it was to experience the most rigid control over its economy.
China had periods of monetary stability when it even sought to protect precious metals from variations in their value, [7] and it practised inflation to the very limit, so that the value of its money reached zero.
Finally, this China, so solidly built on the main beams of the family and the emperor regarded as the father of the people, was the classic country also of secret societies  –  societies half-mystical, half-political, where the individual found satisfaction for his personal aspirations, and the classic country of immense popular insurrections that swept aside everything in their path.
For the fixed framework of nature and the permanence of the mode of production which imposed a certain political, social and moral permanence did not in any way prevent the evolution of these societies by the very fact of the permanent conditions under which they lived, an evolution that led them to react differently according to the period. [8]
We must, on the other hand, take account of an inevitable psychological reaction. The rigidity of the framework in which men live and work by reaction induces in them a powerful desire for change, an irrepressible urge to get away from what is too well known and too constant. It is because China is the country where the conditions of life have been most immutably fixed by nature that it is also the country where the greatest number of experiments have been tried  –  one might even say all experiments, because, if not in the political domain, at least in the social order, neither the history nor the proposals of any innovators offer anything that has not already been attempted in China. The more China found itself prevented from escaping the grasp of the Yellow River and the irrigation channels, the more it looked for ways of changing them.
Such is the contrast that the history of China presents to us, and which seems to us to be its most striking feature.
Notes
1. In 1758, an army sent by the Emperor Qian Long to pacify the area south of the Tianshan Mountains set up administrative offices in Kashgar.
2. Aisin-Gioro Xuan Ye (Emperor Kang Xi, 1661-1722) was the second ruler of the Qing Dynasty.
3. Alexander the Great (336-323BC) conquered the Persian Empire, and penetrated as far as India. To hold down his empire, he founded several cities to which mainland Greeks were encouraged to emigrate in order to set up city state institutions on the classical pattern. Thereafter the city states of old Greece declined in power, until they were incorporated into the Roman Empire.
4. The first Greek colonies along the Black Sea coast were Sinope, Trapezus and Amisus, founded from Miletus. The prosperity of Athens during the fifth century BC depended upon grain imports from the Ukraine, and when this lifeline was cut by the Spartan navarch Lysander in 404BC, Athens was obliged to surrender.
5. The White Lotus sect began the revolt of 1774 in western Shandong under the leadership of Wang Lunin. There were further outbreaks along the Han River in 1795, and in Henan, Shaanxi and Sichuan in 1796.
6. That is, round-headed.
7. According to Ular (L'empire russo-chinois), the tael was not, as is generally thought, a monetary unit, but a simple unit of weight. The real monetary unit was the unit of work itself, which corresponded to a number of taels of silver, which varied according to the work required to produce the silver at the time in question. If you had borrowed a certain number of taels, you could not pay off your debt with the same number of taels if the value of silver in labour units had varied in the meantime. [Author’s note] English edition, A Russo-Chinese Empire, London, 1904, pp56-7. [Editor’s note]
8. Let us suppose that a certain structure of life would produce a certain effect within society. If the structure does not change, but the moment after a new effect is added to the preceding one, and so on until quantity is transformed into quality, this effect would then acquire sufficient strength to lead to a qualitative change in society, its evolution, in other words. [Author’s note]
 


Table of Contents




 Three Thousand Years of History, Fifty Years of Revolution by Robert Louzon 1998


China: 3000 Years of History, 50 Years of Revolution. Robert Louzon 1998
Introduction
Two kinds of facts dominate the history of China. The first, common to all irrigational civilisations, has to do with China’s relations with its neighbours  –  the non-irrigating and uncivilised ‘barbarians’. Invasions and counter-invasions recurred regularly throughout the whole 2000 years or more of China’s recorded history.
The second kind of fact, and this is quite peculiar to China, consists in the popular revolts of its people.
The Barbarians
The two great conquests of the formidable technical change involved in the Neolithic Revolution, by which access to civilisation was opened to man, were the cultivation of the soil and the breeding of cattle. These two techniques were not at all linked, and cannot be associated together. Cattle breeding, such as is practised in the Western world today, presupposes that during the dead season (that during which vegetation is at a standstill, whether this be in winter or in summer), there is a sufficiency of provender left over from the season of plenty to feed all the cattle on hand. In ancient times, on the other hand, the food resources of the good season were generally just sufficient to sustain the cattle during that season alone. As soon as the dead season came, the herd had to be led to new heights or to new latitudes, where it was still the fertile season, and life could be sustained. Thus, the breeding of cattle was closely bound up with the nomadic life.
The result was that the two great branches of food production developed separately, each in the region best suited to it. Whilst cultivation of the soil found the irrigable lands most suitable, cattle breeding on the other hand preferred steppes and prairies, both of them in the good season providing vast stretches of pasture land where a herd had but to graze on foods more nourishing than those of the more richly watered lands.
So grew up, as much amongst yellow people as amongst whites or blacks, two deeply different types of people, the contrast between which is one of history’s dominating characteristics; the farmer and the shepherd. The tiller of the irrigated land or agriculturalist is essentially sedentary, whereas the shepherd is essentially nomadic; the first thrives on what he cultivates  –  principally cereals, corn, rice, maize and generally grain; the second is a meat eater, a carnivore; the one is stuck in his valley, the other has the immense stretches of steppe and prairie as his domain; the one is bent over his soil, the other stands erect in order the better to watch his herds; the first works with his arms, the second with his legs; being only in contact with things, the first attains his ends by patient and constant labour; the second, being in contact with animals, has other than his own will involved, and so must always be on the alert and be ready to prove himself the stronger.
This contrast between the two kinds of life and labour has always been the occasion of conflict between these two different kinds of people.
In those irrigated lands which are marked only by oases lying at great distances from each other, the two kinds of people are in close contact, with the nomad shepherds wandering between the oases. In this case, the general rule is that the shepherd establishes his domination over the oasis, and the sedentary agriculturalist becomes the serf and often even the slave of the nomadic cattle breeder. Such is the position even now in the Saharan oases, where the negro of the oasis is the haratin of the desert Tuaregs.
On the other hand, when irrigation covers a great stretch of territory lying together, as in the valley of a river, the nomad is unable to dwell amongst the sedentary folk; he must live outside the region, and consequently cannot in any permanent way establish his domination over the agriculturalist. But even so, attracted by the riches of the irrigated soil, he exerts a constant pressure on its inhabitants, against which they in turn are constrained to exert an equally constant resistance. The massive and compact character of this peasant population is generally sufficient to render this resistance effective, but if one fine day for one reason or another this resistance weakens, then there is immediately an irruption of the nomads  –  in other words, an invasion. The shepherd then establishes his domination over the lands of the agriculturalist. He cannot, however, maintain this domination without consolidating his position in the occupied territories, and so it follows that he ceases to be nomadic, and sooner or later becomes absorbed amongst the people he has conquered, becoming in his turn sedentary, and so an agriculturalist.
We find this process at work everywhere, amongst the Semites invading Chaldea and founding empires there, and amongst the Turks and Mongols spreading out into the Indus valley and laying the basis for the political unification of India. [1] Nowhere, however, has this contrast between the two kinds of people been more pronounced than on China’s northern frontiers, and as a result nowhere has this factor played so great a rôle as it has in China.
On opposite sides of the Great Wall  –  that remarkable barrier separating cultivator and shepherd, and symbolising their mutual hostility  –  there dwell indeed the archetype of the peasant and the archetype of the shepherd.
On the one side sits the Chinese, who has developed the intensive cultivation of the soil to its greatest possible limits, so that, according to É Réclus, he is able to live on between some 600 and 700 square metres of it, or even on 500; [2] on the other side roams the Mongol, who as originator of all the great migration movements, is the only truly great nomad, because with his horse he is far more effectively mobile than the Arabian shepherd. For the horse is not only capable of undertaking long journeys, it can also charge its adversary at top speed.
What enables the Mongol to use his horse is the fact that Mongolia is not the kind of desert-steppe such as we find in the Middle East, but a grassy plain more like a prairie, especially near the Siberian forests in the north. The Chinese call it ‘the grassland’. The shepherd there is not obliged to restrict himself to sheep merely grazing on the shortest grass, nor to the camel nourishing itself on those hard stalks, more woody than they are herbaceous, which grow at great distances apart in desert countries.
Thus intermediate between steppe and prairie, Mongolia enables the horse not only to live, but to have a sufficiency of food that enables the female whilst nourishing her young to have a surplus of milk available for man. Wherever the Mongol roves, other than in the complete desert, his horse will provide him not only with transport, but also supplies his nourishment in the form of milk and flesh, and even helps to prepare it; for its flesh becomes eatable after a more or less prolonged period under the saddle.
The Mongols sometimes made good use of their capacity for movement, and sometimes they misused it. All the great historic invasions have started from ‘the grassland’. Mongolia was the original homeland of the Huns who pushed their way as far as Champagne, [3] of the Avars who advanced as far as Thuringia, [4] of the Turks, the Bulgarians and the Hungarians who established themselves on the outskirts or even in the heart of Europe, [5] as well as of the Tartars who invaded Russia, [6] and of the Mongols proper who advanced to the gates of Vienna. [7]
Such were China’s neighbours, its most immediate ones.
And there was nothing to separate them. Unlike the position in India, there was not the slightest mountain barrier, the smallest forest, nor the tiniest river intervening. From the irrigated valleys of the Wei and the Fen, the cradles of Chinese civilisation, we pass without interruption over more and more arid loess plateaux to the Mongolian steppe. On the north and north-west frontiers of China, the steppes of the Gobi and Lop Nor run alongside some 2000 kilometres of cultivated land.
China thus lay wide open to the ‘barbarians’, in other words, to the nomads. But so also were the lands of the barbarians open to the Chinese. Accordingly, China has always responded to invasion by counter-invasion. China has been invaded as often as India, its sister irrigational civilisation, but with this difference that India, separated from the barbarians by the barriers of the Himalayas and the Hindu Kush, has never issued from its homeland, whilst China has invaded as often as it was itself invaded. From the first century before the Christian era down to modern times, there has almost always been a Chinese empire, that is to say, a state embracing along with China proper  –  a country of irrigation and agriculture  –  other and often immense countries inhabited by peoples with nothing in common with the Chinese themselves, differing in their languages, their culture, their way of life and their modes of production. Thus China was largely imperialist.
Class Struggle
Unlike the Indians, who are the most religious of peoples, the Chinese are as little religious as it is possible to be. The Chinese are the only people who are atheist as a whole. By ‘atheist’ I mean literally without god. The proof of it is that it is impossible to name the god or gods of the Chinese, no matter the so-called religion to which they belong (with the obvious exceptions of the small Muslim and Christian minorities). The ‘gods’ of the Chinese are simply men. These are the ‘sages’, whose teachings serve as a guide to the faithful in their private conduct.
These sages are two Chinese, Confucius and Lao Zi, who stand for the two great indigenous ‘religions’, and an Indian, Gautama, for the imported religion, Buddhism, whose whole life was passed in combating the priesthood of his own country (the Brahmins), but these priests in the end succeeded in completely extirpating Buddhism in India, since its inhabitants’ religious fanaticism could not be reconciled with a practically atheistic code of morals. These three men, Confucius, Lao Zi and Gautama the Buddha [8] are historical personalities who lived some 600 years before the Christian era.
The reason for this atheism of the Chinese is to be found in the conditions of their life and work. The man whose harvest depends almost exclusively upon the vagaries of the weather and the atmosphere is necessarily religious. It is nature  –  that is to say, ‘God’  –  that will give him abundance or scarcity. Men in sub-desert countries and those countries where the monsoon plays a predominant rôle thus believe in God, whether he be Islam’s single god or the thousand gods of Hinduism.
The Chinese peasant, for his part, depends far less on the rain. This is not so much because he does not suffer from drought like the rest of the world, but because his principal scourge is not drought.
China’s chief scourge is flooding. The Yellow River, one of the two Chinese rivers that water the country where Chinese agricultural technique, the Chinese people, the Chinese state and Chinese ideology originated, is subject to frequent and terrible inundations which cause it to spread over and devastate the surrounding countryside for hundreds of kilometres, sometimes causing it even to form a new river bed at a great distance from the old one. In the historic period, since the first millennium before the Christian era, the Yellow River has cut no less than four distinct beds, without taking account of fluctuations that only affect the immediate surroundings of its mouth, or of such instances when the river sometimes follows a particular course for only a year, as it did in 1887, when it temporarily became a tributary of the Blue River. In that year, it flowed into the sea at a distance of 600 kilometres from its present mouth, and some 800 kilometres from where it flowed into the sea at the dawn of history.
However, as distinct from drought, flooding can be controlled by man. It is a matter of labour. In the present state of our knowledge, man can no more prevent the rain than he can cause it, but no matter how immense may be the volume of water carried by a river swollen by the rain, he can, with sufficient labour, compel it to flow to the sea without overflowing its banks. All he has to do is to construct adequate dykes along its banks.
Constructing dykes and maintaining them is thus the basic task of the Yellow River Chinese peasant. It means hard work that brooks no delay, on the accomplishment of which his subsistence depends. The Chinese peasant does not have to say: ‘Lord, Give us this day our daily bread.’ His daily bread depends entirely upon his own efforts.
This is why the Chinese do not believe in gods, but in men. And this has two important consequences.
In the first place, China is not a country of religions; it is pre-eminently a country of philosophy, and particularly that which concerns man  –  moral philosophy. The Chinese is as essentially moralistic as the Indian is essentially religious. That is why during its ‘classic’ period, several centuries before the Christian era, China produced a whole series of great philosophers whose teachings are curiously reminiscent of those that flourished in Europe  –  20 centuries later, at a time when the West had begun to free itself from the shackles of religion by establishing its power over nature through science, just as the Chinese had formerly established theirs through labour.
Thus paralleling Xun Zi (third century BC), who regarded human nature as fundamentally evil and called upon the state to curb it, [9] we have Hobbes (seventeenth century), who moreover shared his purely materialist conceptions; [10] paralleling Mencius (fourth century BC), who regarded human nature as fundamentally good and in consequence recognised the right of revolt (so sanctioning Chinese peasant practice), [11] we have Rousseau (eighteenth century); [12] and finally, Mo Zi (fifth century BC), who saw human love as the basis of morality and combined it with a utilitarian justification, [13] was the forerunner of our own Guyau (nineteenth century) with his morality ‘with neither obligation nor sanction’. [14]
Another still more important consequence is on the social level. It is a commonplace, if a very true one, to say that one of the main effects of religion is to enslave the disinherited, and that religion, ‘the opium of the people’, is no more than the chanting of an ancient lullaby to ensure that the people, that great infant, remains fast asleep.
It is therefore not surprising that a non-religious people should be particularly prone to rebellion. It is thus that, in contrast with India, in the whole of whose long history hardly any social movement or revolution is to be found, China has always been a country of political revolutions and ‘social reforms’. Formidable revolts, rising and spreading almost simultaneously like great tidal waves, are amongst the quasi-cyclical phenomena of its history. These uprisings are usually the results of the work of secret societies. They are to be found at the beginning of nearly all important political changes.
The class struggle manifests itself not only intermittently during periods of great popular disturbance, but also in a permanent fashion through the mutual opposition of the two native Chinese ‘religions’.
The duality of faiths in ancient China in fact only reveals the opposition between the rich and the poor. Confucianism is the religion, or, more correctly, the philosophy of the bourgeoisie, whilst Daoism is that of the proletariat. [15]
Confucianism and Daoism go back to the same period  –  about the sixth century BC, but they differ as much as the lives of those who practice them. The first is essentially a petit-bourgeois morality, a utilitarian one; it reminds us of Franklin and Bentham. [16] The second is a hope and belief in the progressive development of the world according to laws that are outside the control of human beings; it reminds us of Karl Marx.
According to the Chinese chronicles, Confucius was a government official. He began his career as an inspector of the sale and distribution of grain, and ended it as a Minister of Justice. His code of morality, his philosophy and his religion (whatever you want to call it, for these three things are all mixed together in the bourgeois mind) were those of the perfect government functionary, who above all wanted order to prevail. Now for order to prevail, there should be no extravagance amongst those in power, and there should be zeal amongst the workers. The head of state must therefore be without vanity and should spend without extravagance, whilst the people ‘must profit from all the seasons, must make use of all pieces of land, must devote themselves to their duties, and must economise wisely in order to support father and mother’ (Xiao Jing). [17] Moreover, there was nothing ascetic in this code of morality. Festivals, and even revelries, were not to be prescribed, because it was not necessary to ‘hold the bow-string always taut, without ever relaxing it’ (Li Ji). [18]
To attain these ends, relations between sovereign and people must be based upon those of father and children. The family is the prototype of the state. Virtue consists in applying these family qualities to all domains of life.
As regards understanding life and the world, Confucian philosophy contents itself with reviving a very ancient Chinese belief that the world is essentially composed of two complementary principles  –  the male and the female (the yang and the yin).
To this social utilitarianism, this apotheosis of the static, Lao Zi, the founder of Daoism, about whose life we know almost nothing, opposes the conception of the world becoming. The world is subject to Dao, a sort of mysterious power, which the Greeks called anagkh, and which we today describe by the no less mysterious terms of ‘evolution’ or ‘historic necessity’, and which Chavannes defines thus: ‘that which impresses upon beings the direction along which they develop; it is basically that which causes their forward progress’.
It follows that morality should consist in conforming to Dao in following the evolution of things, and in obeying the laws of social becoming whilst going along with it. The great Chinese philosopher expresses this in a set of rules for practical conduct whose proud and magnificent detachment would form an excellent epilogue to Kropotkin’s Anarchist Morality: [19]
To create without keeping,
To work without profiting,
To excel without dominating,
Such is the Way.
Nowhere else does the class struggle reveal itself with such clarity and vigour as in the opposition between these two philosophies. They are class philosophies in the fullest sense of the term. On the one hand, there is the philosophy of the satisfied, who only ask that things should go on as they are, and formulate regulations ensuring that they will continue; and on the other, there is the philosophy of the dissatisfied, the socially oppressed, who trust in the hidden forces of nature, in ‘progress’, if not to save them, at least to save their descendants.
Admittedly, these two philosophies seem rather to have deteriorated, Confucianism into ancestor worship, and Daoism into the practice of soothsaying and astrology, but even under these inferior forms it is easy to find the sentiments that gave birth to these two systems of belief, which stemmed from two opposing classes.
Such are the two principal factors in the history of China: the constant presence of nomadic barbarians at the gates of the country, or even right at its heart once the gates are forced, and the presence of a people who, not subject to the grip of religion and believing only in themselves, are always ready for revolt once the situation becomes intolerable.
These two factors, moreover, constantly react upon each other in the course of history, a popular revolt being often the forerunner of a foreign invasion, whilst counter-invasion of barbarian land is often for China a means of putting an end to the class struggle, at least temporarily.
Notes
1. Semitic influence, already present at the beginning of Sumerian history, became dominant during the Dynasty of Agade (c2340-2159BC) and more or less permanent after the First Dynasty of Babylon (c1894-1595BC). Turkish attacks upon India began with Mahmud of Ghazni in 1001AD and continued under Shihab ud-Din, Muhammad of Ghori, whose general, Qutb ud-Din Aibak, set himself up as Sultan of Delhi. The Mongol Tamerlane (1336-1405) captured Delhi in 1398.
2. Élisée Réclus, Nouvelle géographie universelle, Volume 7, Paris, 1882, p566.
3. The army of Attila (434-453AD), king of the Huns, was defeated in 451AD at the battle of the Catalaunian plains, near Troyes in Champagne, by a joint Roman and Visigothic army.
4. The Avars attacked Thuringia in 562AD, and were checked by an Eastern Frankish army.
5. The Bulgarians under their khan Asperukh first crossed the Danube in 679AD, and in the following two centuries built up an empire in the Balkans stretching from Carinthia to the Black Sea. Dislodged from their lands in south Russia by the Pecheneg (Patzinak) Turks, the Magyars (Hungarians) passed westwards over the Hungarian plain in 890. Their raids continued as far as southern France until their defeat at the Battle of the Lech in 955. The first of the Turkic peoples to enter Europe were thus the Pechenegs, invited by the Byzantine Emperors on various occasions in the ninth and tenth centuries to attack the Magyars and the Bulgarians from the rear. The Ottoman Turks first got their foothold in Europe with the seizure of Gallipolli in 1346. The furthest point of their penetration was their attack on Vienna in 1683.
6. The army of Subodai conquered Riazan, Vladimir and Moscow in 1238, and Batu took Kiev in 1240. The Russian princes continued to pay tribute to the Golden Horde until 1380, and its influence in Russia lingered on until 1480.
7. After the defeat of the Hungarian army at Mohi Heath in 1241, the Mongols of Batu and Subodai advanced to the Danube. Their army was recalled by the news of the death of Ogodai, which meant a return to Mongolia and the election of a new khan.
8. The most famous of China’s sages, Confucius (551-449BC), was born in the state of Lu, where he acted as a minor official and briefly as a minister. The more or less legendary founder of the Daoist philosophy, Lao Zi (604- ) was an archivist at the court of Chu. Gotama, Prince Siddhartha the Buddha (563-483BC), was a teacher who came from the Sakya kingdom on the borders of Nepal and India.
9. Xun Zi (298-238BC) came from the state of Chao, but settled in Chu in later life to write.
10. Thomas Hobbes (1588-1679) was the author of Leviathan, the first systematic treatise on the philosophy of absolute government. He believed that without the state society would be reduced to permanent conflict due to the selfish drives of its citizens.
11. The philosopher Mencius (372-289BC) was a native of a small principality bordering on Lu. He opposed the teaching of Mo Zi on the grounds that the universal love he preached would undermine filial piety.
12. Jean-Jacques Rousseau (1712-1778) was the foremost philosopher of the French Enlightenment. He believed that society was responsible for the decline of virtue in man  –  that in a state of nature he was ‘a noble savage’.
13. The philosopher Mo Zi (468-376BC), an inhabitant of Lu or Song state, was an advocate of universal love, and was held to have written 53 books.
14. Marie-Jean Guyau (1854-1888) was a French philosopher. In his Esquisse morale sans obligation ni sanction he argued for a morality based upon innate human qualities.
15. The school of Confucius, for a time suppressed under the Qin dynasty, was elevated to an official status under the Han, and thereafter remained the official ideology of state. Daoism, on the other hand, with its semi-magical and mystical ideas, continued to have a more popular appeal.
16. Benjamin Franklin (1706-1790), a scientist and politician, and Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832), a social theorist, were utilitarian philosophers who believed that the chief human motives were the pursuit of pleasure and the avoidance of pain.
17. The Hiao King, or Canon of Filial Piety, is traditionally ascribed to Tzi Yü, a disciple of Confucius.
18. That is, the Book of Rites. [Author’s note] The Book of Rites is one of the classics ascribed to Confucius. [Editor’s note]
19. Prince Peter Kropotkin (1842-1921) was the foremost Anarchist advocate of the theory that society should consist of freely associated communal units, an argument he put forward in Mutual Aid (English edition, London, 1939).
 


Table of Contents




 Three Thousand Years of History, Fifty Years of Revolution by Robert Louzon 1998


China: 3000 Years of History, 50 Years of Revolution. Robert Louzon 1998
Chapter II: The Han Dynasty (203BC-220AD)
The general who re-established China’s national unity at the end of the third century BC was to found a dynasty that lasted for more than 400 years. This dynasty was not content with maintaining national unity. It also re-established China’s rule over the non-Chinese peoples, annexing vast territories not inhabited by Chinese, lands and entire countries that were not able to be colonised by the Chinese, in which the conditions of production were altogether unlike those of the Chinese. Whilst Shi Huang Di had founded the Chinese national state, it was the Han who created the Chinese empire. (For the sake of clarity it is best to restrict the word ‘empire’ to those states like the Roman, Ottoman and Austro-Hungarian empires, which included people of different nationalities.)
From now on, the broad outline of the history of China is quite simple, for it came to be dominated entirely by the ‘imperial’ question. It was to become an alternation of Chinese and barbarian dynasties. On three occasions, in fact, China collapsed, and then it was no longer the Chinese exercising their domination over the barbarians, but the barbarians who were to penetrate China; ‘invasion’ was to succeed ‘conquest’, placing one of their leaders on the throne.
In the course of the 2000 years that passed between the accession of the former Han and the abdication of the last emperor in 1912, six great dynasties were to succeed each other in China  –  three Chinese and three barbarian. Moreover, during the interval between each Chinese dynasty and the barbarian dynasty that replaced it, except on the third occasion, was a long period that may be regarded as a ‘Middle Ages’, during which China was divided into several states with constantly changing frontiers, the barbarian states in the north, and the others, the Chinese ones, in the south. It was something analogous to what happened in the West in our Middle Ages, when the old Roman empire was divided between the barbarian kingdoms in the west and the countries adhering to Byzantium, the ‘second Rome’, in the east.
We give below a list of these six principle dynasties, the Chinese being indicated with bold type and the barbarians with italics. As regards the latter, the Chinese name of the dynasty is given only in brackets, for they are more generally designated by the name of the Mongolian people from whom they originated.
* Han (203BC-220AD)
* First Middle Ages (220-588)
* Tuoba (Sui) (588-618)
* Tang (618-907)
* Second Middle Ages (907-1276)
* Mongols (Yuan) (1276-1368)
* Ming (1368-1644)
* Manchus (Qing) (1644-1912)
The Soldier of Fortune
The first Han was made emperor by the intervention of two elements that we are going to see appearing in all the ‘troubled’ epochs of China’s history, and which often changed into each other  –  namely, proletarians and soldiers.
The troubles of 209BC that led to the fall of the successor of Shi Huang Di were occasioned by men whom Chinese historians describe as ‘vagabonds’.
It is not unreasonable to suppose that the existence of great masses of these ‘vagabonds’ was due to the agrarian reforms of Shi Huang Di. There is nothing more dangerous, in fact, than to destroy a man’s attachment to the land. The land holds the man, but the man holds the land. Freed from this tie, being no longer part of a village community, no longer being able to dispose freely of his lands, nor to mortgage or sell them, the peasant soon risks finding himself deprived of the means of production, and is consequently reduced to the condition of a proletarian. Unless at this time there is a general expansion of production making the employment of a great mass of new workers possible, the proletarian becomes a ‘vagabond’, or one of the ‘unemployed’, as we say today.
This problem of men without land, of men without property, which the institution of property has itself created, is well known to present-day colonisers. Granting to natives the right to dispose of the ownership of the lands they cultivate, whether by recognising the right of the tribe to sell its lands, or by dividing up the land between its members, generally results in a quick sale of the lands by those who have become their owners, who, once they have spent the price of the sale, often find themselves deprived of all means of production: they become ‘vagabonds’. [1]
What resources then remained to prevent these vagabonds from dying of hunger, when they did not find employment in productive labour, thanks to a contemporaneous economic revolution? Only one  –  to become soldiers.
The reason the agrarian reform of 361BC that was confined to the state of Qin had succeeded was due to its position as a marcher state, and especially as that march most exposed and vulnerable to invasion. Qin therefore always required soldiers, and once it set out to conquer the whole of China, it needed even more soldiers. Perhaps that was even the ulterior motive for the agrarian reform: to obtain soldiers.
On the other hand, when the agrarian reform was extended over the whole of China, it caused the number of proletarians to swell far in excess of the number of soldiers needed, and so it came about that since they could not become soldiers of the state, they were obliged to become soldiers against the state. These vagabond proletarians in rebellion formed themselves into ‘armed bands’, and the principal chiefs of these bands carved out kingdoms for themselves out of the ‘empire’ that they had helped to overthrow, modelling the kingdoms on those sanctified by tradition before the time of Shi Huang Di. The restoration of the ‘good old days’, of kings, feudal lords, scholars and literati, was the work of upstart troopers.
It was not long before one of these ‘soldiers of fortune’, as Voltaire called them, who had become king of the ancient kingdom of Chu (Sichuan), defeated his colleagues, and installing himself at Shi Huang Di’s capital at Xi'an in the state of Qin, proclaimed himself emperor. He was the first ruler of the Han dynasty.
This dynasty is regarded by the Chinese as their founding dynasty. This is rightly so. It was not only that this dynasty made China an empire, but it was also this dynasty that established the principles of government and the institutions that ruled China uninterruptedly until yesterday  –  as much under barbarian as under Chinese dynasties. The China of 1840 was still that of the ‘sons of Han’.
The Conquests
In foreign affairs, Han’s task was to pass over from the defensive to the offensive. Instead of simply defending itself against the barbarians of the north and west from behind the Great Wall, the Han dynasty established its rule over the country of the barbarians.
It was particularly from the time of Wu, who ascended the throne in 140BC, that this policy was systematically adopted and achieved its greatest success. Wu was the first fully to merit the title of emperor. [2]
In effect, China then became not only mistress of Mongolia, but of the whole of eastern Turkestan as far as the Pamirs, and about the first century of the Christian era, it even penetrated beyond the Pamirs into western Turkestan, where the Dayuezhi [3] of the Amur and Syr Darya recognised its suzerainty.
This was its first, and practically its last, contact with another great irrigational civilisation, that of the Indus, whose political and cultural ties with Afghanistan and Turkestan were very close. It was a civilisation that was at the same time Greek in its art, an old remnant of the Greek regimes installed in these lands by Alexander’s generals, and Indian in its religion, Buddhism. If Greek art had only a limited influence on the art of China, Buddhism, on the other hand, was destined to achieve its greatest triumphs in China. Not only was it to become the third official religion of China, but it was to find its true homeland there.
Expansion beyond the Pamirs was ephemeral, but it was long lasting as far as the Pamirs. Since the time of the emperor Wu, the normal range of the Chinese empire outside China proper was to include the Gobi, Lop Nor and Tarim deserts, which outside their oases were peopled only by nomads and cattle-breeders  –  by people who were the antithesis of the Chinese themselves, in other words.
As has been said, China’s national unity was achieved in 221BC, and the Chinese empire took shape about 120BC. China as a national state therefore lasted for no more than a century. This very short period as a national state, contrasting with the long periods during which it was broken up into several states, or existed as an empire, is a very general phenomenon. Contrary to what might be expected, the national stage is an unstable stage; the two major stable forms of the state are those where the people are split up, or those in which it dominates the others.
Colonisation
At the same time as they were subjugating the northern desert countries, in the south the Han were actively pursuing a policy of populating and placing fertile lands under cultivation.
Colonising the basins of the Chang Jiang and the Red River was vigorously carried through, partly by assimilating into China those Annamites who had established themselves in the Chang Jiang basin, and partly by pushing back into the basin of the Red River those Annamites who sought to preserve some traits of their own nationality, but who were nonetheless obliged to accept the rule of a Chinese governor. The conquest was decisive over the Chang Jiang; Chinese domination over the Red River was subject to various alternations, but in neither of these two deltas was Chinese civilisation ever placed in question.
In addition to the colonisation of the south, the Han attempted the colonisation of the north-east. In 102BC they annexed Korea. [4] But here the conditions were less favourable than in the south. Korea certainly offered a tempting plain for intensive agriculture on its western side, as this plain faced China directly, although it was narrow and split up into districts. On the other hand, the peninsula was quite isolated from China, at least by the land route, on account of the high mountain range separating it from Manchuria, and so it was never more than half assimilated into China. Korea received rice and its religion from China, but that was about all. On the political plane, its dependence on China was only intermittent, and even when it existed it was hardly more than nominal. The Korean has remained a Korean, both as a citizen and as a man, even though he received his ‘cultivation’ from China, in both senses of the word.
The extension of colonisation was bound to lead to a shift in China’s political centre of gravity, but it was only a slight shift, for the expansion of the empire elsewhere made it as necessary as ever for the centre of gravity to be close to the north-western barbarians, even when they were subdued. From the beginning of the first century of the Christian era, the capital ceased to be Xi'an, the old Qin capital, and was transferred to Luoyang, 300 kilometres to the east and hence nearer the plain. [5]
Political and Administrative Organisation
The system the Han instituted for the government of China and the empire was as long lived as the empire itself. The system was essentially a compromise. When Shi Huang Di wanted to establish his centralised administration, the literati sent him remonstrances arguing that he should rather follow the system attributed by tradition to the legendary emperors  –  to share out the government of the different provinces amongst the various members of his own family. Shi Huang Di did nothing of the sort, but it was the system adopted by the Han dynasty.
The empire, and even China proper, was too vast, with regard to the means of communication available at the time, to be governed directly from the capital. It was therefore necessary to place at the head of each region somebody in the capacity of king, viceroy or governor  –  the name itself did not matter. The individual so appointed had to be endowed with wide powers, one might even say plenipotentiary powers. This was what the first Han emperor did. From the moment he proclaimed himself emperor, he distributed the different provinces of China amongst those warlords who had helped him.
But China was too homogenous, and its unity was rendered too urgent by the danger threatening from the barbarians, to allow any of these powerful governors to free themselves and make independent states out of their provinces. Yet this was what they wanted. So arose the whole corpus of enactments and institutions designed to prevent them from achieving their aims.
The first measure taken for this purpose by the Han was to reserve as far as possible the position of viceroy to members of their own family. The loyalty of these high functionaries was thus guaranteed by the family tie, as far as it could be. The unity of the empire rested upon the unity of the imperial family.
But the cry for unity did not preclude utilising the spirit of rivalry. The motto of ‘divide and rule’ is not specifically Latin. The maintenance of imperial authority over the viceroys could more easily be secured if a permanent means could be found to set them in opposition to each other. This is the origin of one of the most original features in Chinese political customs.
Like any other man, the Chinese emperor has a mother, and furthermore, like every Chinese, he is bound to the most absolute veneration for his mother and to show her complete obedience. The imperial family is thus made up of two families. On the one hand, there is the family of the emperor’s father, which is his only family in the legal sense, whose name he bears and to which he owes all the family obligations; on the other hand, there is his mother’s family, which means nothing to him in the legal sense, but with regard to which he must do all his mother demands. It therefore follows that if the mother is in any way an intriguer, which is usually the case, the two families are at daggers drawn over the distribution of titles and offices.
The conflict becomes all the more acute when the empress’ family by the method of murder or ‘invitation to suicide’ arranges for the emperor’s heir to be a minor so young that a regency is formed, at the head of which there is always the mother, until the infant emperor comes of age. The two families exercise their power in such a way that during the minority of the emperor it is the maternal clan that rules, whilst after the mother’s death it is the paternal clan. Finally, between the emperor’s majority and the death of his mother, the balance swings between one or the other clan, in accordance with the greater or lesser filial devotion evinced by the emperor.
This family dualism has remained the foundation of Chinese politics for 2000 years and under all the dynasties, even the non-Chinese ones. We find the key rôle of the Emperor’s mother under a Manchu dynasty at the beginning of the twentieth century at the time of the Boxer movement, just as we find it in the second century before the Christian era under the purely Chinese Han dynasty. [6]
But the state not only needs viceroys, it must also have a number of other functionaries of all ranks. To choose them, the Han reversed the policy of Shi Huang Di. The Emperor Wu summoned the literati, and gave them a kind of monopoly in the administration of the state.
This was also a compromise between centralisation, which made the appointment of functionaries solely dependent upon the sovereign’s will, and decentralisation, which made it dependent upon other authorities (local assemblies, constituted bodies, etc.), or upon birth. The Chinese functionaries, the ‘mandarins’, are indeed legally subject only to the central power, but the law that requires that they be exclusively selected from amongst the literati  –  that is, from amongst those who have passed certain examinations  –  greatly limits the central power’s choice. Giving the monopoly of political functions to one group makes a ‘corps’ out of them, with its own interests, its own way of life, and its own power. The state’s absolutism is thus limited by privilege.
But here, however, we again find the adage ‘divide and rule’ at work, because opposed to the corps of learned men there is the corps of eunuchs. Since the emperor’s mother, as a woman, cannot receive men, it is necessary for her to surround herself with eunuchs. These eunuchs, wielding the influence that the mother exercises over her son, thus find themselves in a position to challenge the power of the literati. [7] Together with the rivalry between the two families, the struggles between the eunuchs and the literati encompass the entire history of the Chinese court.
The Fixing of Culture
However, if the literati had to share influence on the political plane with the eunuchs, in the sphere of the intellect they enjoyed a total monopoly, and encountered no opposition.
Since the beginning of the Christian era in the West, the educated have been divided into two rival groups, the clerics and the laymen, and it is largely due to the rivalry between these two groups that understanding has progressed. The cleric with his religious ‘culture’ is the breastplate against which the lay scholar armed with rational and scientific culture is obliged to fence, and the progress of the latter is often to be measured by the vigour with which clerics combat it. Without the likes of De La Barre, there would doubtless have been no Voltaires. [8]
Now in China, the basic rationalism of the people forbids all opposition of this kind. In a country where religion is only a philosophy, the scholar is at once a cleric and a layman; as state functionaries, within their jurisdictions, the mandarins are also the official representatives of Confucianism.
It may be that the absence of this kind of dualism accounts for the barrenness of Chinese thought, and for the fact that since its great classical centuries it has produced next to nothing, its scholars being merely content to comment on the great authors who had lived at the time of the hegemons.
This intellectual immobility of the Chinese people must not, however, be taken as an exceptional characteristic.
As we have seen, by a curious coincidence, the great era of Chinese thought is at the same time as the great era of Western thought  –  the ‘Greek miracle’ of the sixth, fifth and fourth centuries BC. Now if it is true that China has produced nothing new since, the West for its part had to wait for the beginning of the modern era with Descartes and Bacon [9] to mark a new stage in the development of thought. Between the fourth century BC and the seventeenth century AD in the West, as in China itself, there has been hardly anything that was fundamentally new. At both ends of Eurasia, the human spirit slept for 2000 years, and if this sleep has lasted 300 years longer in China, that is a fact of no great consequence. If the Chinese were still able to swear by Mencius but a few years ago, let us not forget that for many centuries we ourselves were able to do nothing but swear by Aristotle. [10] In fact, everywhere in the world thought sleeps in this way, until new techniques come along to give it a shove.
The most serious consequence of this cultural immobility was to keep the Chinese language in a state very close to that adopted by the script at the beginning, and so made it a specialist art. Chinese writing today is the only script that is still ideographic, a script whose signs represent things and not sounds.
A word is formed by a single syllable in Chinese. Since the number of syllables at the disposal of men’s throats is limited, the Chinese are obliged to use the same word to express different things, so that it is only by the tone in which a word is pronounced that the sense in which it is used can be understood. Now since there can be no question of a ‘tone’ in script, in writing a like word, or a like sound, it is necessary to use different characters according to the sense in which the word is taken, and this excludes phonetic writing. There is thus no correspondence between the spoken and the written language. Such is the method of the Chinese language as it is found in the most ancient inscriptions, and such is the method used in China today. Whereas India and Japan themselves adopted alphabetic scripts derived from the Phoenician alphabet, China has continued to write as did the ancient Egyptians. [11]
This duality of the spoken and written language, although expressing itself in a different form, is comparable to that which existed in our own Western world during the thousand years or so when Latin, although no longer spoken, was still the written language; it had the same consequences in China as in Europe, but to an even greater degree, because in China the two languages, that spoken and that written, differed even more.
When a written language is unrelated to a spoken language, the people as a whole  –  the common people, that is  –  cannot learn it. Only a few privileged people have the necessary time to devote to the long study that it requires. If Western scholars had to spend several years acquiring a knowledge of Latin, the mandarins of the East had to spend an entire lifetime of study to acquire a mere knowledge of the principal characters of their writing.
This state of things led to two unfortunate consequences: deprived of this primary intellectual tool ensuring the registration and availability of thought at any time, the great majority of the people could never get beyond the most elementary ideas. All the resources of the intellect, and all the potential riches in the brains of millions of human beings were thus rendered inoperative.
The other unfortunate consequence is that the privileged few themselves, those who had learned to read and write, had not only lost all of their youth and a considerable part of their mature years  –  in other words, the period of life when intellectual vigour is at its height  –  in learning the simple art of writing, but since understanding it alone was a privilege for them, they reckoned that achieving it was quite enough, and from then on they had the right to contemplate their own navels, with no more to do than live in idleness and enjoy the sense of ‘superiority’ indicated by their numerous certificates. So it is that all privilege, all monopoly, sterilises even the minds of those people who are supposed to benefit from it.
Even so, the dialectic never loses its rights. The difficulties of the Chinese script resulted in the invention of printing.
The difficulty that there was in drawing with precision the 40 000 or so characters that made up Chinese writing, by the sixth century AD led to the invention of engraving them on wood and reproducing them by simple impression. [12] The persistence of hieroglyphs thus led to the invention of printing. Extreme difficulty in writing thus had as a result extreme simplicity in its reproduction. The rotatory machines that today produce hundreds of thousands of copies per hour are the descendants of the toiling Chinese writer engaged in the production of a single copy.
The Advent of Commerce
All that we have just seen as regards the political, administrative and cultural organisation of China bears witness to that peasant conservatism that is one of the characteristics of the country. The fact that China was an empire, however, and had to ensure its conquest and occupation of remote territories, also made it impossible for it to remain purely peasant.
Before the Han dynasty, as in all agricultural communities, commerce was profoundly looked down upon. It was regarded as ‘the lowest of occupations’, and those who devoted themselves to it were, as under the early Romans, deemed unworthy even to pay tax. Their position was somewhat like the Indian outcasts, or the Jews in Europe.
But the great expeditions that the Chinese armies under the emperor Wu and his successors conducted as far as Turkestan could not operate without the supply of materials of all kinds which must be provided for the army. Now provisions also means providers. The last years of the second century BC witnessed in China, as a little earlier in Rome, the rise of a class of purveyors of war materials, who, like the purveyors of war materials in all the eras of great wars, as for example the equestrian order in the Roman republic, built up considerable fortunes. But unlike the Roman equites, who confined themselves to exploiting the imperial provinces through the medium of the state, these early Chinese capitalists used their resources to create an industry and develop trade. It is very likely that the two great specifically Chinese industries, porcelain and paper, go back to the Han dynasty. On the other hand, the installation of Chinese armies in the Mongolian steppes for the first time made safe the route which led from China to the frontiers of the Indo-Greek world of Turkestan and the Punjab, whose civilisation was at that time in full swing. It was then that the era of the famous ‘silk road’ began.
It goes without saying that a class that had become so important in numbers and in wealth could not remain indefinitely without citizen status. The first of these ‘nouveaux riches’ sought to attain it individually by the purchase of real estate and thus enter the class of landed proprietors, but very soon the emperor Wu issued an edict prohibiting the reinvestment of money earned in commerce and industry in real estate. The same kind of edict that for long prevented the Jews of Europe from becoming landowners struck the Chinese merchants in the same way, and for the same reason. But whilst the European Jews finally in the nineteenth century secured their ‘emancipation’ and became citizens like everybody else, it would seem that the Chinese merchants, industrialists and financiers secured theirs at the close of the Han empire. This relatively rapid emancipation of the Chinese merchants had the effect of making the Chinese people a nation of merchants as well as a nation of cultivators.
Now if the cultivation of the soil, at least as practised in China, is an element of permanence, commerce is an element of mobility. Commerce continually transforms everything that it touches, it is the supreme factor in the progress of communities. Periodic repetition is the law of cultivation, but constant renovation is the essence of commerce. It follows that if the history of China shows a permanent substratum, from the fact of cultivation predominating in it, overlaying it is a history of frequent revolutions and experimentations due to the importance of commerce. Thus, as Réclus remarked, there is no country where the system of land tenure, for example, has changed more frequently. [13] The stability imposed by cultivation alone is constantly challenged by commercial development.
The Agrarian Crises and the End of the Han Dynasty
It was a popular revolution that brought the Han to power; it was a popular revolution that enabled the junior branch to succeed the elder; and it was a popular revolution that finally put an end to the dynasty.
These two latter revolutions, that of the Red Eyebrows at the start of the first century AD, and that of the Yellow Turbans at the end of the second century were, according to Granet, ‘the consequences of an agrarian crisis due to the development of the large domains’. [14]
From now on we faced with one of the most important dialectical phenomena, common to many countries and many eras: Latifundia perdidere Italiam. [15] The concentration of property as the originator of revolutions was the beginning of the end for Greece, as it was for Rome and for our Middle Ages. By its very development, property leads to its concentration in fewer and fewer hands, and this concentration leads to the destruction of the society that is based upon property. In China, however, the factors of permanence are so powerful that the concentration of property there has never so far led to the end of Chinese society, but it has produced profound political changes, overthrowing dynasties, causing barbarian invasions, and so on.
The process by which the concentration of property operates presents a fairly general character, and it is worth our while dwelling on it.
The concentration of property, even landed property, operates most of all through the medium of transferable capital. The accumulation of capital arising from the supply of war materials, from industrial undertakings, from commerce and from financial operations very soon grows to such an extent that it can no longer be employed, without great technical transformations, in the branches where it had originally been gained. One single outlet for its investments remains  –  the purchase of land. As the capitalists are in possession of vast financial resources and are used to thinking on a large scale, they ‘assemble’ lands in order to convert them into vast private estates. It is thus that the latifundia originate.
But because of the way these were built up in China, the problem of the landless, which we have seen was provisionally solved by means of great conquests, was bound to be renewed.
In fact the great capitalist estate is not exploited in the same way as the cultivator’s bit of land, nor even like the squire’s small farm; its cultivation is less intensive. Cattle breeding replaces cultivation, often to a considerable degree, and to such an extent that during this time we see whole herds of sheep and horses developing in China, despite the Chinese traditional dislike of cattle breeding. As we know, cattle raising on rich ‘grasslands’ requires far less labour for the same surface of ground. That is why only some of the peasants expropriated by the new landowner will be able to sell their labour power to him. We should say in passing that in China the sale of his labour power by an expropriated peasant means the sale of his body. He does not hire himself out as a paid worker, but sells himself as a slave. And private slavery, which did not exist in China before the Han, was at first tolerated under the Han, and then legalised. As for those who had no chance of making themselves slaves, because their services were no longer required, at the end of the dynasty they no longer had the opportunity of becoming soldiers, for the great conquests had been completed. So they formed an underclass of unemployed  –  the ‘vagabonds’.
Thus history repeats itself: the institution of property, as we have seen, produces a first expropriation of workers; its concentration now leads to a second.
The state, however, is always conscious, if only dimly, of the danger which the concentration of property presents with regard to political stability and social security; thus it happens that measures are sometimes taken to hold back this process of concentration, but if they succeed in holding it back for a little while, it is only to cause it to surge forward in the end.
That is why Wu, as we have pointed out, adopted the indirect measure of prohibiting the purchase of land from funds originating in the operations of trade and industry. Later on, during the last years before the Christian era, a more radical measure was enacted: a maximum area of land was stipulated (five hectares for a family of eight persons) and a maximum number of slaves fixed per family. But, as always happens in such cases, all these laws were withdrawn, or never applied, or circumvented, so that finally a rising broke out in Shandong, and in the year 3AD a minister named Wang Mang poisoned the emperor and proclaimed himself emperor in his place. [16]
Taking up again a policy that had already been sketched out by Wu, but systematising and developing it further, Wang Mang now embarked upon a vast experiment in ‘controlled economy’, which was the first attempt to institute ‘state capitalism’ in China, an attempt which we shall see was to be renewed with more thoroughness 1000 years later by the Song.
Wang Mang began with a draconian agrarian reform. The ius abutendi [17] was suppressed. The land became inalienable. Nobody any longer had the right to buy or sell either land or slaves. This meant the end of private slavery. The state, moreover, assigned to itself the complete ownership of all the land.
The agrarian reform was followed by a reform of trade. Prices were no longer to be free. Maximum prices for all commodities were to be fixed quarterly. As a counter-measure, goods which no longer found purchasers were to be sold to the state, which kept them as a reserve stock for a period. Finally, state banks were to be instituted, which would loan money at a fixed rate of interest. At the same time, a fiscal reform was undertaken. A tax on incomes was established at 10 per cent tax of gains made. It was a total failure.
Wang Mang was certainly a man of good intentions. But nothing is worse than men of good intentions when they are not also actuated by a will of iron. Three years after having abolished it, Wang Mang re-established the right of free disposal of land. As for his other measures, there was never even an attempt to initiate them. The agrarian reform ran aground in China during the first years of the Christian era, just as it had run aground in Rome a hundred years earlier.
The revolt that broke out in 3AD in Shandong, a revolt which, like all Chinese popular movements, was based on Daoism, whose adherents painted their eyebrows red as a sign of recognition, was fairly soon put down on Wang Mang’s advent to power, but on the failure of his reforms it was renewed with increased vigour. By the year 14AD, when a famine was caused by a breach in the dykes of the Yellow River, the Red Eyebrows were again in full revolt. They fought the armies of Wang Mang and made themselves masters of the whole of the lower basin of the Yellow River. It was then that the moneyed classes, seizing the opportunity offered them by the defeat of the reformer’s armies, came on the scene in the form of a junior branch of the Han, whose soldiers had succeeded in capturing the capital, Chang'an. Wang Mang was then assassinated, and the first ruler of the Later Han dynasty mounted the throne. [18] ‘All is re-established’, as the poet wrote. It was the year 22AD. The reign of the reformer had lasted 13 years.
The Red Eyebrows, however, were still in the field. They had risen against Wang Mang, but they had not done so to help restore the dynastic succession. So they in their turn marched on the capital, captured and destroyed it. But again in turn they were defeated and destroyed by the Han.
This time, everything was well and truly re-established. And everything, too, was to be maintained, because the social problem was once again to be solved as it had been in the time of the former Han  –  that is to say, by means of war.
The entire empire, which had been more or less left to its own devices during this troubled period, had in effect to be reconquered. A solution was therefore found for the workless and landless  –  to become soldiers. All the Red Eyebrows who had not been massacred were enrolled in the armies of the new emperor, and the reconquest began. This was the time when a general renowned in the annals of China, Pan Chao, reoccupied eastern Turkestan, and when Tonkin and the island of Hainan were subdued. [19]
It goes without saying that the cycle of events then began again, just as it had done under the former Han; war, the amassing of great fortunes, the concentration of property, the expropriation of the toilers, unemployment. The only difference this time was that the cycle started from a higher level, and was consequently bound to end in an even greater tragedy.
By about the year 130AD, China had firmly re-established its domination over the peoples on its periphery, and peace reigned once more. There were 50 years of peace, and then one day the Yellow Turbans appeared and followed the way of the Red Eyebrows.
This new movement did not arise in Shandong, like the previous one, but in the west of China, in Sichuan. Its ideology, however, was the same, because, as with Shandong, Sichuan was the province in China where Daoism was the most developed.
The slogan of the Yellow Turbans was ‘A New Society for the Year 184’.
The emperor was soon overrun. [20] The Yellow Turbans in turn were themselves defeated, but the danger was that the generals who had succeeded in defeating them had through that fact alone now become so strong that they were able to carve out kingdoms for themselves where they were able to declare their independence. One founded his state on the lower reaches of the Blue River; another was in Sichuan, and finally a third, whose son was to depose the last of the Han emperors, was set up on the Yellow River. [21] Thus not only was the Chinese empire, the work of the Han, destroyed, but so was the work of Qin Shi Huang Di, the unification of China.
At one stroke a terrible question now arose: was China itself, and Chinese civilisation, destined in turn to disappear, overrun by the barbarians? 
Notes
1. Cf what happened, for example, in certain tribes in Morocco, where a land reform took place entirely comparable with that of Shi Huang Di (see Chez le Berbères du Maroc, by Célérier; Annales d'histoire économique et sociale, May 1936). [Author’s note]
2. The reign of Wu Di (139-87BC) is regarded as the apogee of Western Han power. He regulated government and commerce, patronised literature, and sent his armies as far west as Ferghana.
3. The people called the Dayuezhi in the Chinese annals are almost certainly the great Kushan Empire that ruled most of north-west India in the first and second centuries AD.
4. The armies of the Emperor Wu conquered Korea beginning from 109BC, and organised it into four commanderies within the Han Empire.
5. Chang'an, the former Han capital, which stood on the site of the former capital of the Qin, Xi'an, had been looted and badly damaged during the fighting at the end of the rule of Wang Mang. The capital was now transferred to Luoyang, the former capital of the Zhou emperors.
6. The paramount rôle played by women in the Guomindang movement and particularly by the Song family, the family of Madame Sun Yat-sen and of Madame Chiang Kai-shek, was doubtless due to this tradition. It seems in short that in China, where the matriarchal family precedes the agnate one according to experts, it was never completely replaced by it. So the Chinese family is itself also a compromise. [Author’s note] Song Qingling (1892-1975) was the wife of Sun Yat-sen. By marrying her sister, Chiang Kai-shek became head of one of the ‘Four Families’ who controlled Guomindang China, and was related by marriage to two of the others. [Editor’s note]
7. We should note that castration was a result of legal punishment. These eunuchs were therefore criminals. It does not appear that their government was any worse than that of the literati. [Author’s note]
8. François Marie Arouet de Voltaire (1694-1778) was the French philosopher most famous for his opposition to religious obscurantism. When the Chevalier De La Barre was beheaded in July 1766 for insulting a religious procession and damaging a crucifix, Voltaire put himself at the head of the storm of public protest, and proposed that the philosophes show their disapproval by leaving France and emigrating to Cleves.
9. René Descartes (Cartesius, 1596-1650), the author of the Discourse on Method, and Sir Francis Bacon (Baron Verulam and Viscount St Albans, 1561-1626), politician and philosopher, laid the foundations of the experimental method in the natural sciences.
10. Aristotle of Stagira (c385-322BC) was the founder of one of the main schools of later Greek philosophy, and tutor to Alexander the Great.
11. Louzon is mistaken in his assumption that the script of the ancient Egyptians only contained ideograms. It does, in fact, contain a full consonantal alphabet, along with biliterals and triliterals, although ideograms are also used, either on their own, or as determinatives.
12. The traditional date for the invention of printing is early in the second century AD, but the earliest surviving specimen of Chinese printing on paper occurs on a dharani sutra scroll from Pulguk-sa in Korea (c704-51AD). The oldest dated complete Chinese printed book still extant is the British Museum copy of the Diamond Sutra of AD 868, brought by Sir Aurel Stein from the Caves of the Thousand Buddhas at Dunhuang (Joseph Needham, ‘Paper and Printing’, Science and Civilisation in China, Volume 5, Cambridge, 1985, p149). See notes 14 and 15, Part I, Chapter V.
13. Élisée Réclus, L'homme et la terre, Volume 3, Paris, 1905, p78.
14. Marcel Granet, Chinese Civilisation, London, 1930, p128.
15. ‘It is the latifundia that have destroyed Italy.’ (Pliny the Elder, Natural History, Volume 18, no 55)
16. Wang Mang (9-23AD), the nephew of the dowager Empress, became Chancellor of Military Affairs during the reign of the Emperor Ping Di (1-6AD), whom he poisoned. In 6AD, he became Imperial Regent, and in 9AD proclaimed himself first emperor of the Xin Dynasty. It did not outlast his downfall.
17. That is to say, ‘the right to use up’ (Latin).
18. Liu Xiu, known under the reign title of Guang Wu (25-57AD), suppressed his rivals (25-36AD) and established the power of the Eastern, or Later Han Dynasty (25-221AD), which ruled from Luoyang.
19. From 73 to 97AD General Pan Chao conquered the whole of Chinese Turkestan as far as the Indian frontier. Hainan, Tonkin and Annam were conquered by an expedition sent out in 42-43AD.
20. Xian Di (189-221AD), the last emperor of the Eastern Han Dynasty, became a puppet in the hands of the general Cao Cao, and was finally dethroned by the general’s son, Cao Pi.
21. The ‘Three Kingdoms’, renowned in later Chinese story, were Wei (220-265AD), the most powerful, ruling the north and north-west from its capital at Luoyang, founded by Cao Pi (the Emperor Wen Di, 221-227AD), Wu (229-280AD), founded by Sun Quan (Emperor Da Di, 229-252AD) in the south-east and south, and Shu Han (221-264AD), regarded as the legitimate line, founded by Liu Bei (Emperor Zhao Lie, 221-223AD) and ruling the west and south-west from Chengdu in Sichuan.
 


Table of Contents




