

The Anatomy of Work
Georges Friedmann
Heinemann
This is a study of the division of labour in modern industrial society, which summarises and comments upon many of the outstanding sociological contributions. It should be required reading for any socialist who supposes that he can hope to communicate effectively with the working-class, while knowing nothing of the structure of factory life. Friedmann is particularly good on those explanations of industrial activity which try to leave the personality of the worker out of account of automation, he asks, how can anyone fail to see that, behind the technical presuppositions upon which alone our mystical prophets of “automation” insist, particularly the training of highly qualified staffs for direction, control and supervision, there are social conditions of vital importance without which the new technology can only be of value in a very limited number of cases?’ And of the attempt to explain the diminishing returns of the division of labour beyond a certain point he insists that ‘Behind the economic and technical causes there are those of a psychological nature ... boredom, dissatisfaction, the desire for some form of real training, for variety, for a feeling of achievement.’
Marxists should attend especially to the way he brings out the slide in Marx’s writings from the demand for the humanization of work and the insights into work as education to the concentration upon liberation work. The belief that man is free when he is at leisure is what underlies the Soviet Union’s equation of the shortening of the working-day with the road to socialism. But what matters is that man should be free at work, not from work. And to understand how this is possible we need much more study of those problems to which Friedmann’s book is an excellent and illuminating introduction.
 



Literature and Revolution
L.D. Trotsky
Ann Arbor Paperbacks. $1.85. (Cresset)
In no work so much as this perhaps is revealed the union of greatness and weakness in Trotsky. The greatness lies in the grasp of actual social connections. When Trotsky writes about literature directly, he writes in the tradition of Belinsky and Chernyshevsky. He grasps the relation of Russian life to poetry. Of Alexander Blok, Trotsky wrote, ‘To be sure, Blok is not one of ours, but he reached towards us. And in doing so, he broke down. But the result of his impulse is the most significant work of our epoch. His poem, The Twelve, will remain forever’. What Trotsky saw here is very much what Pasternak tried to show us in Dr Zhivago. The weakness comes out in the substitution of an a priori scheme of things for the actual complex reality wherever he comes to a point made difficult by his own theory. Consider Trotsky’s proof that there cannot be proletarian culture, that there was bourgeois culture and there will be classless culture, but nothing in between. This is based on a Marxist scheme of things whereby the working-class arrive and perform their revolutionary tasks at once. But what of a working-class which arrives and yet waits, potentially revolutionary, but only actualising its potentialities on the rarest of occasions? Must such a working-class live only with bourgeois culture or no culture at all? If we accepted Trotsky’s answer we should be left with very little remedy for the present non-revolutionary condition of the working-class. The problem of the age on the edge of which Trotsky stood is that of a society where the bourgeois revolution goes on, and the working-class has to wait on the sidelines of history. On questions of culture as they confront this age, Trotsky is as helpless as anyone else imprisoned in the categories of Leninism.
 



The Radical Left throughout the world have cause to mourn the death of C. Wright Mills, when still in his late forties with many years of creative work in front of him. This most untypical American Professor of Sociology would not have been sad if the chief stimulus of his work were a stimulus to disagreement. And so for once a death may prompt us to ask in a properly critical spirit: just what was his achievement? Where can he lead us and where may he mislead us? His earlier sociological works White Collar: The American Middle Classes (1951) and The Power Elite (1956) directly underpin his later political works such as The Causes of World War Three (1958) and Castro’s Cuba (1960). So that it is possible to find a unity in his work, by means of which one book may throw light upon others. And the light that is thrown by The Causes of World War Three reveals the basic weakness of all Wright Mills’ work.
The apparent contradiction of that book is that on the one hand we are shown a whole social and economic system (that of American capitalism) driving towards war, while on the other hand we are offered a solution to the problem which involves no change in the overall shape of that social and economic system. But this apparent contradiction is perhaps to be resolved by considering the ambiguous way in which Wright Mills describes the American social system. Wright Mills describes the behaviour of the American political, economic and military elites. But he never makes it clear whether he is describing social roles or the people who are playing out those roles. Is he describing a system which lays down roles so that the actors have no alternative but to play their prescribed parts? Or is he describing a set of actors who happen to be playing their parts in this way but to whom other interpretations of their role are open The indecision between these alternatives or some third possibility means that Wright Mills can both use a rhetoric of inevitability about the processes of modern bureaucratic capitalism and also invoke the responsible intervention of intellectuals within the system.
The ambiguities in Wright Mills’ political writings are assisted by the scarcity and selectivity of his facts. It is impossible to tell from The Causes of World War Three whether he would have regarded the Kennedy administration as a reversal or an endorsement of the trends which he describes; it would be equally impossible to draw from it an intelligible account of Eisenhower’s role in ending the Korean War and working for a Summit. Both these gaps spring from a reluctance to be complex, which is stylistically honourable in Wright Mills the pamphleteer, but dangerous for Wright Mills the sociologist.
Yet Wright Mills’ final conclusion is clear : the wrong decisions are being taken by the wrong people. It is up to the right people to intervene. Here the political writings are backed up by the sociological analysis of The Power Elite. What that analysis misses is the active connivance of the ruled in the dominance of their rulers. Conservative political theorists would describe this connivance in terms of ‘the consent of the governed’; Marxists would describe it in terms of the ideological pervasiveness of the ideas of the ruling class. Neither would miss the existence of this social bond. It has traditionally been missed by liberal radicals, who have therefore been prone to conspiracy theories of society. And although Wright Mills was well aware of the fallacies of such theories there is at least a hint of conspiracy about The Power Elite.
This mistaken analysis is perpetuated in a version of the dichotomy between rulers and ruled which leaves the ruled necessarily for the most part helpless in the hands of the decision makers. It is characteristic of Wright Mills’ work that he sees the notions of an impersonal fate and an incomprehensible destiny as essentially notions belonging to the consciousness of the ruled. They cannot make history and these notions reflect their impotence. He never follows up two key questions : are not these notions equally (in a variety of forms) part of the consciousness of the rulers? And are not both ruled and rulers impotent partly precisely because they are impotent? Wright Mills’ failure here is part of the Marxism of his later years, an unfortunate episode to which I shall return.
His view of the power elite and of the centralization of decision-making in vast bureaucracies leads him to see ‘the ordinary man’ as passive, a prisoner of circumstance, needing to be renewed by someone else. The ruled are, for Wright Mills, not actively part of the system in the way the rulers are, for they are not active. The labour movement he treated in an early book and then left alone; and he always seems to view the labour movement in the world at large through the image of the American labour movement rather than vice versa. Wright Mills’ ‘ordinary man’ is essentially lower middle-class and he receives his classic treatment in White Collar. This is much the best of all Wright Mills’ books. This study of a dependent class shows their abdication of decision-making and their beliefs about society as a constituent part of the social system which leaves them so helpless. The belief is one of the progenitors of the fact. Or to put it another way White Collar shows us one section of the ruled made intelligible as part of a total society, while The Power Elite shows us a ruling class so external to the ruled as not to be an intelligible part of a total form of social life. Ideologically it is the transition from Weber to a crude version of Marx (and not even, as with Lukacs, a Weberian version of Marx).
The path from White Collar to The Power Elite is made easy by Wright Mills’ idealization of the American past as against the American present. The eighteenth century and early nineteenth century in the United States are for Wright Mills a time of decentralized local, face-to-face communities in which responsible publics democratically debate the great issues and mandate their representatives. This idealized picture of the relations between rulers and ruled misses out the true social bonds just as much as the cynicism of The Power Elite does. He identifies the past ruling-class with its own self-image just as disastrously as he misses any connexion at all between the present ruling-class and its self-image except the connexions of self deception and of self interest.
In this sense Wright Mills is himself a victim of the American dream. Indeed The Power Elite must remind us of a long tradition of specifically American radicalism, exemplified in F.D. Roosevelt’s early Presidential tirades against the rich and the powerful. So the relatively complex intra-group analyses of White Collar in the end are not extended to the liaisons between social groups. Hence his radicalism is displaced by a view of class which leads easily into the crudest of all political analyses from the Left: the workers are passive before a ruling group which must be displaced by an elite of the right kind. Who are the elite? The intellectuals. These in both The Causes of World War Three and in The Sociological Imagination are the potential liberators, just as they were for Lenin and for Karl Mannheim. There is something very piquant about the older Wright Mills’ denunciation of his intellectual colleagues as individuals, while looking to them as a group for social salvation.
Wright Mills once described himself as a Leninist without being a Marxist. In this light his transition from The Power Elite and his appeals to the intellectuals to his uncritical support for Castro and his sympathy for the present-day Soviet Union are easily intelligible. The wrong people are taking the decisions; what matters is that the right people should take them. The only problem then is to identify the right people. What is absolutely missing from Wright Mills is the notion that the masses should cease to be masses, that decision-making should belong to everybody and not just to some people. Democracy for Wright Mills is at best idealized bourgeois democracy.
So Wright Mills never attended to two crucial features of contemporary society which are essential to making good the kind of analysis he was looking for. One is the managerial structure which makes decision-making the monopoly of the few, no matter who they are, and which constitutes the social identity of the Soviet Union and the United States. The other is the way in which a term like ‘ managerial structure’ refers to the embodiment of certain attitudes and beliefs in both managers and managed. These are not two things: how society is organized and how people are conscious of and respond to this organization. The way people think and react is the most important part of the organization. In other words consciousness constitutes base as much as superstructure. Or rather consciousness is the unity which makes the notions of base and superstructure false abstractions.
The latest work on which Wright Mills was engaged was a selection from and commentary upon the Marxist classics. This reflects the degree to which his Leninism was finding its basis in a stereotype Marxism which by its concentration on the notions of private ownership as the key to capitalism and on consciousness as secondary to economic forms and forces inhibited him at precisely the point at which he most needed insight.
The moral of Wright Mills’ intellectual career is that social reality always takes its revenge on those who do not take it seriously enough. So towards the end of his life the Wright Mills of The Power Elite was apparently taken in by Khrushchevite managerialism. If Wright Mills had been more anxious to see, and less anxious to see through, he would paradoxically have been in a better position to expose contemporary capitalism. Imaginative sympathy with a social form can be among the deadliest weapons available for its destruction.
Nobody would have replied more vigorously to this criticism than Wright Mills himself, had he lived. The Left has all too few intellectuals for us to be able to spare someone as able as Wright Mills. And if his intellectual achievement is in the end to warn us of a variety of traps which await us, then we ought all to beware. The idea which we too often inherit from Marxism is that social analysis is easy. The lesson, and too often the only lesson, to be learnt from neo-Marxist writers of recent years is that it is enormously difficult.
 



Stalin
Isaac Deutscher
Oxford Paperbacks. 10s. 6d.
The appearance in paperback of the first of Deutscher’s classic biographies is a matter of unreserved congratulation to the publishers. This book is a permanent addition to historiography, not just because of the importance of Stalin but because Deutscher brought to the study of Stalin and the Soviet Union a new level of scholarly seriousness. It is important to remember that Stalin was first published in 1949; a measure of how far we have travelled since then is derived from a comparison of the scurrilous abuse with which this book was treated in Modern Quarterly when it first appeared with the caution with which this re-edition was treated in the Daily Worker. If therefore I dwell on my critical doubts about Deutscher, this is not from any lack of realisation that our debt to him is inescapable.
My first doubt is about the method of biography. Lives take shape in a social context and a social context is not the sum total of individual lives. To write the history of a revolution from the standpoint of the leadership is already to commit oneself to the view that leadership is all-important, that the decisive changes in human history are acted out at this point. And it is but a short step from this to Trotsky’s misguided diagnosis of the failure of the revolution as being due to a ‘crisis of leadership’.
My second doubt can be suggested by looking at Deutscher’s closing paragraph where he compares Stalin with Cromwell and Robespierre. The striking character of the parallel suggests strongly that Stalin’s revolution was what this was, a revolution in which one owning class supplants another. And, if this is so, the self-liberalisation of the Russian bureaucracy to-day is parallel to the self-liberalisation of the bourgeoisie. It is no part of a road to Socialism.
Thirdly, and linking these two earlier points, those who have read Deutscher’s various writings on the years 1924-34 in the Soviet Union should also read Max Shachtman’s The Struggle for the New Course. What Deutscher’s analysis never makes clear, and what Trotsky himself never understood, is why not only waverers like Radek, but brave, principled men like Christian Rakovsky made their peace with Stalin. What Shachtman’s narrative shows is the way in which the objective conditions of industrialisation in a beleaguered Russia presented the Left Opposition with no viable alternative to Stalinism. And this lack of an alternative is the only plausible explanation of the capitulation of not the worst, but the best men in the Soviet Union to Stalin.
 



Ionesco
Richard Coe
Oliver and Boyd. 3s. 6d.
Mr Martin: I have a flat on the first floor, flat Number 8, dear lady.
Mrs Martin: How very extraordinary! oh goodness gracious, how very amazing and what a strange coincidence! I too live on the fifth floor, Sir, in Flat Number 8.
Mr Martin (thoughtfully): How very extraordinary, how very extraordinary, how very extraordinary, and what a strange coincidence ...
In Ionesco’s plays memory does not function normally, experience is no guide to the future, conversation is not communication, ordinary distinction between animals and men break down, and characters do not have distinct identities; hence the surreal, apparently crazy, world of the plays. But, as Richard Coe brings out in this extremely lucid and perceptive book, all this throws more light on the real world than any naturalistic drama ever could. Ionesco comments on the play from which I quote by saying that
‘The Smiths and Martins have forgotten how to talk because they have forgotten how to think; and they have forgotten how to think because they have forgotten the meaning of emotion, because they are devoid of passions; they have forgotten how to be, and therefore can “become” anyone, anything, for, since they are not in themselves, they are nothing but the people, they belong to an impersonal world, they are interchangeable.’
Themes such as depersonalisation, loneliness and alienation haunt Ionesco. The extremism of his plays, their lack of any obvious moral, therein is the moral.
‘The theatre, like all art, must serve no utilitarian purpose; the theatre is not engagement, but dégagement: nonetheless, this “disengagement”, this alienation, this forgetfulness of self, this violent separation from the utilitarian world, is a usefulness without which we cannot live ...’
Dr Coe has produced one of the most interesting contributions to Oliver and Boyd’s Writers and Critics series by letting Ionesco speak for himself, and providing a modest, but penetrating commentary.
 






Alasdair MacIntyre teaches philosophy and has experience of the Communist Party, the Socialist Labour League, the New Left and the Labour Party; believes that if none of these can disillusion one with socialism, then nothing can. He is co-editor of International Socialism.





It was important that the discussion on reformism should be reopened and that it should be done as well as Henry Collins has done it. Collins puts the case for contemporary Left reformism with all the lucidity with which Bernstein put the case for Left reformism (and we forget too easily that Bernstein was a Left reformist) in his own time. This continuing reformist argument matters for at least two reasons. First, reformism is not just a set of arguments held by political opponents; it is the ideological air we breathe. We take in the concepts of reformism in all the transactions of daily life. To combat it is to combat a tendency which constantly arises inside us as well as in our opponents. Secondly, would-be Marxist thinking on this topic is dominated by a stereotype which constantly deadens the discussion. This stereotype consists of a mock battle between an inaccurate version of Bernstein and a misleadingly selective version of Lenin. The chosen battlefield is usually ‘the nature of the state’ or ‘the role of the party’ I shall return to this mock battle at the end of the argument in order to contrast and oppose the revolution which is the concern of Marxist theory with the ‘revolution’ which figures in this mock-battle. But for the moment I am concerned to quarrel more with what the reformism of the stereotype has in common with the revolutionism of the stereotype than with what separates them, that is with the economic basis from which they start. For this is reproduced in Collins’ argument.
What is Collins’ theoretical structure? Since he never states it, it has to be deduced from his arguments on particular issues and I shall risk being unfair. But unless it is stated clearly, what is at stake will remain obscure. I want to pick out five features of his argument, which together suggest a general theory of contemporary society. First, the premisses of his argument are economic. The basic diagram with which he analyses capitalism is one in which political activity may modify or check the workings of an economic system which is a law to itself unless so checked. This economic system is described in partial abstraction from the activity of and the effects upon the people whose social relations are capitalism. In particular, beliefs about the system are not pictured as playing a role inside the system. (One would never guess from Collins that Marx’s starting-point was the critique of bourgeois political economy or that Marx’s revolutionary standpoint was advanced before the specific economic analyses of Capital were elaborated.)
When beliefs enter Collins’ picture, whether the beliefs of capitalists about capitalism or those of Collins or those of Marxists, they appear as external to the system described. So it was with Bernstein too. The basic difference from Marx is about the relation of beliefs to social systems. Because beliefs are external to the system, the politics which impinge on the economy also appears as external to the economy, for the social link between economic activity and political action can never be brought into the picture. For Collins Marxism is an economics and a politics, not – what it really is – a sociology of a peculiarly philosophical bent.
Secondly, in the economic diagram a key idea which Collins takes over from the Lenin v. Bernstein stereotype is that of ‘the limit’. This is the notion that capitalism can survive so long as it can expand; and that it can expand so long as it can find markets. But markets are limited and when the limit is reached, capitalism must become crisis-ridden to the point of extinction. The question which reformists continually put is whether in fact Marx was not profoundly mistaken as to where the limits of capitalist expansion lie. Monopolistic foresight and control, imperialism, technological expansion, the permanent war economy: some or all of these have at different times been offered as temporary panaceas for capitalism, means of pushing the limit back. But in fact this whole concept of ‘the limit’ is thoroughly misleading. The limitations of capitalist production are built into the system from the outset; they are not something which is only reached at a certain point. How those limitations appear differs with different stages of expansion. But there is no particular point fixed in advance at which capitalism must break down. This is why Marx both maintains the existence of long-term trends in capitalism and yet refuses to have iron laws or iron theories about slumps. The slump as the ‘limit’ of capitalism is not a concept known to Marx. This is one reason (among many others) for the quite different emphasis in the economics of Marx and the economics of Varga.
Thirdly, the state in Collins’ argument is essentially the state as it appeared in the stereotype, an executive and legislative power distinct from, even if controlled by the capitalist class. So Collins can see the working class as able to exert pressure on a state which so controls the economy that the capitalists cease to dominate. Thus he is in the odd position of allowing for fundamental changes in the economic structure of capitalism (for his economic argument requires this just as much as mine does), but refusing to allow for corresponding political changes. Yet if the role of the state in the economy is even no more extensive than Collins concedes, it needs to be argued and not just asserted that this type of state is amenable to pressure from the working-class and is able to control the economy.
Fourthly, there is nothing in Collins’ argument about who will make socialism or about why they will make it. Trotsky’s emphasis that socialism can only be built consciously and Lenin’s that it cannot be built by a minority, a party, together entail that a pre-condition of socialism is a mass socialist consciousness. In Collins we find references to ‘working class pressure’ and to ‘constant labour and democratic pressure’. Even if we overlook the imprecision of the word ‘pressure’ questions about the source of these pressures remain. Where are they to come from? How is the socialist consciousness behind them to be created? This void in Collins’ argument is a counterpart to his silence about what he means by ‘socialism’. For the question of how socialism could come about cannot be derived from the question of what it is to be. And the revolutionary case is in part that nothing worth calling socialism could come into being by reformist methods.
The structure of Collins’ argument is then simply this. The capitalist economy in Britain can survive all purely economic strains; the bourgeois state can survive many political strains. But the pressure from without of the Communist world and from within of the labour movement will gradually ease Britain into an undefined socialism. This brings us to the fifth feature of Collins’ theoretical outlook. The CP states are for him imperfect socialist states; about this I shall want to quarrel. But much more important is not what he says about their character, but what he does not say about their external international relationships. The whole interlocking frame of world power politics with the H-bomb at the centre is replaced once more by a curious vagueness. The challenge of Communism gives ex-colonial powers (nothing about their nature either) freedom of manoeuvre and in the end the ruling class will ‘have lost its grip’.
So much for my polemical summary of Collins. What I must next do is to set out by contrast the Marxist case against reformism.
 
II
Reformism is not just a set of theories about society. Reformist theories are themselves part of the social life which they attempt to describe. Of what kind of social life are they typically part? They arise within a capitalism which has learnt some degree of rationalization and of control. They represent a would-be readjustment of socialist theory to social realities. The stage before reformism is the stage of capitalist expansion in which the working-class movement may preserve an outward semblance of revolutionary aims and theory, but becomes in fact directed towards the goal of securing the maximum benefits for the working-class within capitalism. This is the stage which German social democracy reached by the eighteen-nineties: Bebel was its political tactician and Kautsky its theorist. This stage cannot continue for long before someone suggests that theory should be brought into line with practice. The actual involvement with capitalist success should be linked with a confidence in capitalism’s powers of self-regulation rather than unrealistic prophecies of doom. Kautsky gives way to Bernstein.
Thus reformist theories both express and reinforce an abandonment of revolutionary aims. They provide the justification for an adjustment to trade union goals and to bourgeois party politics. The outcome is necessarily a disintegration of the working-class movement in two directions. The leadership becomes assimilated to the parliamentary and administrative structure of the bourgeois state. The mass membership becomes sectionalized, acquires the aspirations of bourgeois society, disintegrates as a movement. The institutions of the labour movement partly become institutions of bourgeois society and partly become part of private rather than of public life.
The acceptance of gradualism is the acceptance of the viability of bourgeois institutions. The acceptance of such institutions is the acceptance – at best – of a mode of life in which reforms are offered to workers rather than won by them. The reformist’s mode is one in which the self-activity of the working-class is necessarily minimized. The self-activity of the working-class is revolutionary for it marks a total break with both the economic and the political systems of capitalism which rely upon the passive acceptance of their alienated role by the workers. And socialism is self-activity as a total form of life. This is in the briefest possible compass why the expression ‘revolutionary socialism’ is tautologous. To accept Left reformist theories into the labour movement is to assist in turning the labour movement away from socialism itself. Reformist tactics are the most effective enemy of revolutionary strategy.
The labour movement, under the influence of reformist theories, and, more importantly, under the influence of the social order which such theories express, becomes subject to the social pattern of capitalism. It responds to the pressures of economic and political life; it is no longer itself an effective agent of change. So that there is nowhere for the ‘pressures’ which Left Reformist speak of to come from. When movements of revolt are generated inside capitalism, the labour movement in its reformist aspects is forced to reject them as decisively as any other part of the bourgeois order. It is not because the theories held by the Labour Party leaders are Right rather than Left reformism that such a leadership rejects CND. It is because the whole party, Left and Right, is adapted to a reformist mode of activity (or inactivity). So it is also with the youth revolt. The goals of those adolescents whose vitality feeds Young Socialist branches are incompatible with the goals of the society to which the Labour Party is so well adapted. Thus the labour movement is debilitated by reformism into playing not even a reformist role. It expresses no revolt of its own and it cannot accommodate other revolts.
If there is a touchstone in contemporary political life it is the question of the H-Bomb. This is because the politics of the Bomb are not just one more issue; the politics of the Bomb are the politics of our kind of society. That Collins can discuss contemporary politics without mentioning the Bomb is itself an indictment of his reformism. There is an illusion abroad, and not only among reformists, that one can characterise a contemporary state in isolation from its world situation – and then later on discuss its foreign policy and its military policy as mere appendages. In fact any state which embarks on certain types of policy is bound to have a corresponding type of internal structure. Consider any policy which leans on the massive deterrence of the Bomb. To implement such a policy there must be an immense and largely secret technological and military organization. This is bound to become at least semi-autonomous, determining how surplus value is disposed of in large part. It is bound to evade democratic control. It is thus deeply incompatible with any sort of socialist order. No state with the Bomb can be a workers’ state. One could only suppose otherwise if the questions of who disposes of surplus value and to whom they are answerable are regarded as irrelevant to the characterisation of socialism. For no classical socialist thinker could these questions have been regarded as irrelevant; but for those who wish to treat the CP states as socialist states they must be so regarded.
Collins asserts that the ‘solidifying interest of private ownership’ is a necessary precondition for ‘the high income and privileged groups in communist societies’ to congeal into a class. I do not understand the warrant for this assertion. Feudal ownership was often corporate not private. Collins offers no arguments to show that capitalist ownership could not also be corporate. What matters is whether the relationship of exploitation holds between groups in a society. Collins admits that the actual CP states have had to practise what Preobrazhensky called ‘primitive socialist accumulation’. What he never raises is the key Marxist question: how could, under the objective conditions of anything worth calling primitive accumulation, non-capitalist forms of society arise? Either the answer is ‘In no way at all’, or not only are the closing sections of Vol.I of Capital nonsense, but historical materialism itself is falsified. What property in the means of production consists in is control over the disposal of surplus value. To separate labour from any share in this creates the social precondition of capitalism. And this is what the process of industrialization does. Industrialization belongs to the realm of necessity, to the formation of a social order under objective conditions which no idealism can transcend.
Thus the onus of proof should be on those who wish to maintain that the Russian and kindred bureaucracies are not a class. But since all the trappings of class privilege appear in their society there is hardly room for argument. The sole remaining props of belief in the non-exploiting nature of the bureaucracy are three-fold: nationalization; ideology; and the bureaucracy’s achievements. But nationalized property is only workers’ property when the workers own the state; Soviet Marxism has all the features of a class ideology; and the achievements of the bureaucracy are typical capitalist achievements. When Collins speaks of the rate of growth of the Soviet economy, he ignores with a piece of loose rhetoric all the relevant capitalist parallels from the nineteenth century to the Common Market. One might as well conclude that because the Americans have solved the problems of rate of growth in the agricultural sector (as Russia has not) the Americans are thereby socialist. Equally it is ludicrous to see symptoms of socialism in the liberalizing tendencies of the bureaucracy. It is worth protesting here at the absurdly low standards of liberality which apologists for the Soviet Union display.
The spectacle of Western scholars who could not study or publish in the Soviet Union praising its liberalism over against that of the capitalist West is a nauseating one. When in the Soviet Union scholars enjoy the freedom of enquiry that Marx enjoyed in Victorian England it will become clear that the Soviet Union is being praised for its likeness to bourgeois society and not for its differences. And those who praise it unconsciously render tribute to the state-capitalist nature of Soviet society.
What is missing from Collins then is both any appreciation of the kind of human consciousness which might build socialism and any criteria of the objective conditions, both social and economic, which are necessary. There is missing also any clear definition of what has to be overcome, the opposition to socialism. But the contemporary ruling class and the contemporary bourgeois state both stand in crying need of analysis. Sometimes the extension of state activity into economic and social life is treated as though this were an absorption of economic and social life into a monolithic political structure. In fact it is as much a dissipation of the old unitary state into a multifarious network of institutions. The decline of the role of parliament in the British state is one sign of this; the relation between the planning agencies of M. Monnet, the traditional French administrative bodies, and private French capitalism is another example. The result of this is that the state becomes continually less accessible to traditional forms of political activity. Within the present structure traditional methods of political attack, such as nationalization, become more and more irrelevant. We find in every large industrialized state, whatever its official political forms, a bureaucracy whose decision-making is carried out by a series of boards which represent the conflicting interests inside the corporate structure. The room for manoeuvre left to politically appointed and elected bodies is negligible. The question thus arises for the reformist: what is he going to reform? The social pattern will more and more be that of negotiation between labour and capital within an organized framework in which the political setting is minimal. Insofar as it does become possible for reformists to acquire state power, all the old Leninist arguments about the bourgeois state still apply anyway; but the changed character of state power itself is probably more important.
I have argued against Collins that reformism offers no hope of keeping in being or creating a labour movement that could in fact bring socialism about; that reformism must see the H-Bomb as just one more issue; that in so doing as well as for other reasons it misconceives the nature of the contemporary state; and that above all it does not understand the type of coincidence between objective conditions and socialist consciousness which is necessary for the transition to socialism. To this last point I must now turn in more detail, because it is here that Collins’ accusation of ‘apocalyptic Marxism’ must be met.
 
III
The transition to socialism will be political in that it will be concerned with the arrangements of power. How does the prospect of such a transition arise? It arises because of the dual character of working-class life under capitalism. To the worker the prospect of overcoming his unfreedom is presented by the very society which also keeps him unfree. The essence of working-class enslavement is not impoverishment. It is that ‘be his wages high or low’ the worker leads an existence which is enforced upon him. The germ of his liberation lies in the twin facts that capitalism cannot prevent him from recognizing that he is unfree and from combining with other workers to free himself. Indeed by its forms of work and social life it up to a point promotes such recognition and such combination.
Against the worker and against the socialist theorist capitalism has three lines of defence. The first is its objective capacity to ride the economic, social and political crises which it continually and inevitably engenders. Its capacity to do this is by no means independent of its ability to disable working-class consciousness, and to evacuate that consciousness of political content. To do this it falls back on its second line of defence, the institutionalization of working-class demands within the framework of bourgeois political and social life. This domestication of the working-class is intensified by its third bulwark, the promotion of middle-class and of sectional attitudes in working-class people. The attrition of consciousness by private ambition, by education in half-truths, by bread and circuses, this is too familiar to need emphasizing. In this capitalist perspective, reformism is absurd. The Left reformist perforce acts as an unwilling liberal; he would do much better to become a conscious and aware liberal. Between revolutionary socialism and liberalism there is no third way. Yet if these are the resources of capitalism, is not revolutionary socialism absurd too? Certainly the idea of the impoverished proletariat led by the elitist party cannot be introduced upon this stage without a comic opera effect. Those who identify Leninism with this do terrible injustice to Lenin’s keen sense of the politically ridiculous. And it is this which enables the Bernstein v. Lenin mock battle to continue: those who accept this false revolutionism as the alternative to reformism do as much as anybody to propagate reformism.
What then is the true revolutionary perspective? It seeks to bring together three elements in our social life. The first is the deep and incurable dissatisfaction with social life which capitalism breeds. The second is the recurrent state of objective crises in capitalist social order. The third is socialist theory. Without the third the first does not necessarily come into relation with the second at all, or only in the most fortuitous way. With the third, dissatisfaction can become creative in that it is presented with a radical alternative to the present social order. But unless that alternative is radical, is the prospect of a whole new way of life, working-class consciousness is left victim to particular reformist aims. This is not apocalyptic: it is a statement of the minimum required for socialist consciousness.
To have reached this point is to have stated in the barest and most meagre outline the case against Left Reformism. The case for revolution begins at this point.
 



The Long Revolution
Raymond Williams
Chatto and Windus, 1961, 30s.
Culture and Society 1780-1950
Raymond Williams
Penguin Books, 1961, 4s.6d.
Hegel said that the function of philosophy was to make man at home in the world. The effect of a good deal of socialist theorizing is almost the opposite. The categories of thought are often so alien to the detail of everyday experience that theory becomes not a kind of insight, but a kind of blindness, and a blindness almost deliberate and willed. On the one hand there is the fabric of life at work and in the family, the worries about children and schooling, the pub and the Trade Union branch, housing and money and holidays. On the other hand there is some imposed abstract political scheme, a mechanical rendering of Marx’s view of history or, worse still, of Lenin or the Fabians. These, coexisting in a single mind, produce in turn theoretical sterility and frustration, a violent refusal to face the complexity of thought and temporary relief in the substitution of easy slogans and formulas for well-founded conclusions.
Raymond Williams has done more than any other writer to liberate us from this. His novel, Border Country, makes it plain why he was so well equipped for the task. For those who have traversed in their own lives the journey between working-class and university life, or between Wales and England, the felt experience is a movement towards and not away from theorizing. To travel in class and in place is also to travel in time through the social strata laid down at different periods in the past hundred years. One can be forced to ask for a view of history because one discovers that one is oneself what the past has made one. All of Raymond Williams’ work is touched with an entirely admirable and unobtrusive self-consciousness of this kind.
This personal quality is linked to a method of approach which in one respect at least promises well. Williams approaches social change through thought about social change. In Culture and Society he discusses the variety of descriptions which people have offered in theories, in novels, in polemical tracts and literary criticism, of social changes since the industrial revolution. This, as The Long Revolution makes clear, is not a substitute for describing such change itself. But the changes did not happen, did not exist, except as an incarnation of human purposes and projects, and we do not know what men were doing who contrived these changes unless we know how they envisaged them. The cultural images which men throw up are a first attempt at a history of human action in their time; but even before that they themselves are also part, and the articulate, conscious part, of the change which such history aspires to describe. We cannot describe a period first in our terms and then ask how good contemporaries were at describing it; for we do not know what they were doing unless we know how they described it. It is in the incoherences of such descriptions that we discover the key to the difference between the true story and the story as told. So Marx began not by going straight to capitalism and measuring up his own description of capitalism against that of classical political economy. He began with the classical economists, whom he treated as the voice of capitalist society, and only later pierced through the veil of half-understanding with which capitalism protects itself.
The danger of such an approach is that by accepting the terms in which a culture makes itself articulate we become imprisoned within those terms and unable to transcend them. This danger is particularly acute when the culture we study is that of our own age or the recent past. For then we cannot get outside ourselves unless we already possess a theoretical background of the kind which Marxism aspires to provide. I do not mean of course that Marxism enables us to leave our skins; but it suggests that we can find a standpoint to judge what we are by what we can be. Marxism brings contemporary possibility on to the stage in order to pass judgment upon contemporary actuality.
Although Williams is not a Marxist, he escapes imprisonment by the present in Culture and Society because he brings together such a host of conflicting witnesses that no one conceptual scheme dominates us. Cobbett, Mill, Disraeli, Gissing, Lawrence, Tawney and many others all contribute to a growing, if contradictory, consciousness of the possibility of a common culture. But in The Long Revolution where the question is asked how far that possibility has in fact been realised the situation is much worse. Put briefly, Williams accepts as authentic the unity of our society and his long revolution is a revolution against nothing except the inertia of the past. The false consciousness of gradualism is allowed to be judged in its own terms.
This comes out clearly in William’s essay on the individual and society, where the beginnings of a good discussion never come to fruition because Williams does not allow for the fact that particular framings of the antithesis always took place in a context of specific institutions. To place what Williams says about Freud in the context of the situation of the intelligentsia in the decline of the Austro-Hungarian Empire or Williams’ metaphors of vagrancy and exile in relation to actual vagrancy and actual exiles would be to transform his discussion. The result of Williams’ abstraction is a loss of tension. We escape the fact that every individual exists at a point where life is a conflict between his unrealised potentialities and the barriers which confront their realisation. We are defined both by what we can be and by what we have to struggle against. Every form of class society up to our own has been at once a release of and an inhibition of human possibility. In our society. class is wholly inhibiting. Or so at least the Marxist argues. Williams never confronts this thesis. Instead of the splendid, tentative discussion of Marxism and literature in Culture and Society we get in The Long Revolution a presentation of Marxism as the ghost of a theory in which most of human life is omitted.
What Williams himself omits is three-fold: work, class, power. This is not to say that in occasional paragraphs their importance is not recognized. But these lonely banners of traditional socialism are never integrated into the book. Instead of class-consciousness we get as the subject of this book far too often an unidentified “we”. Instead of work and its organization we get “the concept of the market”. Instead of power we get public opinion. And the whole argument is weakened by its insularity. Capitalism never appears on the scene properly because no world movement appears there as such. British development is treated as though autonomous.
There have been since the industrial revolution in Britain two main critiques of our form of life. One was the romantic protest against capitalist ugliness whose culmination is in Lawrence and Leavis. The other was the socialist protest. William Morris held them together in his own day: it is a prime victory of bourgeois ideology to have kept them apart ever since. Raymond Williams has done more than anyone else to bring them together again. But so far at the key points in his writings the argument always breaks down. I have not begun to do justice to the richness of the books; but it is clear from The Long Revolution that unless Williams can learn from Marx what Morris learnt he will continue to disappoint as well as to teach.
 



What weighs most heavily against unilateralism with those willing to consider its claims seriously is that it appears to be a demand without a context, a demand isolated from other questions of policy. The jockeying in the Labour Party which has followed upon the Scarborough decision has revealed the danger of this very clearly. Even those willing to accept Conference demands seem determined to interpret unilateralism in such a way that if it were implemented the arrangements of international power should be as little disturbed as possible. It so happens that technical developments in the field of nuclear weapons make this an easy task. The existence of Polaris missiles already makes Britain a less important aircraft-carrier than she was. In two years Britain will be an obsolete component in the American defence system. Britain's contribution to NATO will then be compatible with the renunciation not only of the independent deterrent but also of any British-based American missiles. Moreover the same developments will change the function of all America's satellites. They will become a conveniently placed set of buffer states who will no longer be required for possible offensive purposes. Thus a Britain which demanded that the defensive aspects of NATO should be emphasized rather than the aggressive would fit easily into a necessary and prudent realignment of American policy.
The danger is then that unilateralism is reinterpreted by such Labour leaders as Harold Wilson until it becomes compatible with what CND has already declared to be incompatible, the NATO alliance. Socialists therefore have a responsibility to elaborate a foreign policy which will express an authentic break with present policy. There are of course unilateralists who have already done this but on whose policies we need scarcely waste printing ink. The Communist Party want to create at best a passive satellite, at worst a non-combatant opponent for the Soviet Union. Other socialists content themselves with insisting that the abolition of the bomb is part of the abolition of capitalism, a truism that enables them to avoid the difficult and specific questions of foreign policy. The most serious restatement of such policy has in fact been made on the New Left by E.P. Thompson, John Rex and others. It is about some features of the kind of policy which writers such as those have elaborated that questions ought to be raised.
There are generally three elements in such a policy. The first is the notion of Britain as strengthening and partly leading a Third Force of the uncommitted nations, especially the Afro-Asian powers. The second is the notion of the United Nations as a viable instrument for such a Third Force not merely to express and advocate but actually to enact its policies. The third is the notion of such action as relaxing tension and bringing about controlled multilateral disarmament of the two major world blocks. What this policy shares both with Mr Cousins and with Mr Gaitskell is the view that international politics is a matter of the conflict of nations rather that of the conflict of classes. It is in the light of this shared assumption that the questions about 'positive neutralism' of this kind must be framed.
To the view of Britain as leading a Third Force the objection must be raised that the colonial revolution divides Britain from those states which on this view she should aspire to lead. To this it can be said that positive neutralism demands a Britain committed to support for the African revolution. But this is not a homogeneous affair. And in any case such a commitment would make a radical break with all Labour Party colonial policy. Britain's trading patterns would have to change to at least some extent and this requires a more radical internal change of economic policy. Perhaps this chain reaction could occur. But we need as a first task to become more precise about this possibility.
Secondly, the experience of the Congo certainly does not speak unambiguously for the possible independence of United Nations action. It is very sad that Mr Khruschev's inadequate tactical sense should have helped to conceal how true the Soviet Union's accusations against Mr Hammarskold were. The original resolution on which the UN force entered the Congo was simply defied. The action of the African states with its extremely opportunist swinging to and fro raises parallel doubts about the United Nations and the third force.
Thirdly, where we have had apparently independent political action it has been because the US and the USSR have been in a tense position where neither dared to move forward. In such positions UN action has left American and Russian policy untouched. Such policy appears more responsive to internal pressures than to world events.
Fourthly, the absence of China from the United Nations has to an unknown extent made the United Nations a scene of negotiations when it might have been one of much more continuous bitter acrimony. The conflicts of East and West have simply not been exposed to the full in the UN because the Chinese have not been there to expose them.
These are questions which it may be possible to answer. But until they have been answered at length or an alternative policy has been proposed the statement of the unilateralist case is greatly weakened.
 



The Writer and the Commissar
George Paloczi-Horvath
The Bodley Head. 10s 6d.
If, like the author, I had been for five years in Rakosi’s prisons I would no doubt share his perspective. But it is still a wrong perspective. What Mr Paloczi-Horvath has done is to collect a sample of repressive decrees and actions by Communist states. This is a useful work to have done. But nothing is put in context. Or rather there is an implied context, that of Western bourgeois liberalism. Consequently Mr Paloczi-Horvath presents us with a mindless totalitarian, the writer as a liberal romantic, whose central gift is that of self-expression. In fact, of course, the commissars have theories and the writers have often themselves rejected the view of them implied by Mr Paloczi-Horvath. So it escapes his argument that artist and commissar have often been the same person. What sense can we make of his view of Brecht or Fadeyev, Meyerhold or even Mayakovsky? These have to be reduced to what none of them were, simple time-servers. Even of Fadeyev this was untrue.
What Mr Paloczi-Horvath misses, and what every authentic view of the artist in the Communist state must start with, is the contradictory consciousness of Communist society. The combination of a bureaucratic state-power with a revolutionary theory makes both negative and positive sides of Communist culture explicable. The negative side is the vacillation between liberty and authoritarianism, which characterised the blossoming and withering of the Hundred Flowers. The positive side is the tension which kept Brechl as a revolutionary artist and Lukacs as a revolutionary critic, in spite of the bureaucracy. Mr Paloczi-Horvath sees only the negative.
 



The Ethical Foundations of Marxism
Eugene Kamenka
Routledge and Kegan Paul. 30s.
This is one of the most valuable books yet written about Marx. It makes use of a far wider selection of Marx’s writings than commentators on Marx usually avail themselves of. It displays no fear of complexity. It fails to be the book which we need because of two serious faults. Like almost all other books on Marx it abstracts Marx from his social environment; when looking for explanations of why Marx or Engels thought this or that Kamenka does not look often enough at the social life which surrounded them. Thus he fails to, see that Marx’s errors are often the product of his sensitivity to capitalism; sometimes he reflected it all too faithfully, and what Marx says of men or society in general is in fact something only true of men under capitalism, or only true of how capitalism envisages men. Moreover Kamenka writes about Marx from too external a standpoint and one that is itself seriously confused. The late John Anderson, Professor of Philosophy at Sidney, himself a one-time Trotskyist sympathiser, elaborated a social philosophy too little known in Britain. Anderson was a total determinist and in ethics had views which I find it difficult to criticise because they remain so obscure, even in Kamenka’s exposition. Both Anderson’s confusions and his obscurity infect Kamenka.
I mention Kamenka’s failings only to put them on one side. His enormous merit is to see the contradiction between what he calls Marx’s ethical criticism of society (I would prefer to call jt Marx’s sociological criticism) and Marx’s later economism. For the early Marx the clue to bourgeois society is in the analysis of its freedom and unfreedom; for the later Marx the clue is in poverty. Of the later Marx, Kamenka writes that he was not prepared ‘to see socialism as the extension and culmination of the freedom and enterprise already displayed by the worker. Essentially he stuck to his negative view of the proletariat as the most suffering class; a class whose future was determined not by its character, but by its deprivation.’ These words contain the germ of a critique of Marx which would not only be philosophically sophisticated, as Kamenka’s is, but politically revolutionary too.
 

