

The decisions of the Arab summit in Fez were presented by a large part of the international press as a major event. Le Monde entitled its September 11 editorial: “A decisive step.”
One could remember that certain of the “principles” of the Fez text had already been advanced in the past, albeit in a less explicit and systematic fashion. One could denounce the Fez summit as an operation of the Arab governments to make us forget, by a stunning diplomatic initiative, their complicit passivity during the bloody weeks of Israeli aggression in Lebanon. It was, for example, the first reaction of the Palestinian mayor of Nablus, who spoke of the “abandonment” of the PLO by the Arab regimes, and added:
“We hope that the Fez resolutions will not have the same fate as those of the last summit, which, in not being followed up in any way, was of great benefit to our enemies.”
It is nevertheless undeniable that something new was produced at Fez. It is enough to remember that the Fahd plan whose almost exact similarity to the Fez resolution is evident had been rejected less than a year ago by part of the Arab leaders, by the Syrians and, despite the opinion of Yassar Arafat, by the leadership of the PLO itself. Today, the same “principles” are unanimously adopted, with the exception of Libya, voluntarily absent from the summit, arid of Egypt, excluded from all meetings of the Arab League since the Camp David Agreement.
Nevertheless it remains the case that point 7 implies recognition of the state of Israel and that, we repeat, unanimity was reached by the different currents represented by these regimes on this point also. This is not a secondary point.
In other words, after having passively accepted, even favoured, the dismantling of the most important military positions of the PLO and the dispersion of its forces, the Arab governments, the majority of whom are hit or threatened by grave social and political crises, are putting forward more clearly than ever their moderate solution to the Palestinian problem. This solution entails the creation of a Palestinian mini-state, within the framework of the recognition of Israel, and with the perspective of being able to control this mini-state thanks to the economic hold that they will have over it. North American imperialism directly and/or by means of international institutions could endorse the operation by calling to order the leadership of the Zionist state.
But here is the stumbling block: Begin, as could be expected, has totally rejected the Fez “principles”. After all, why should he accept today, after having dealt a heavy blow to the PLO and having proved once more the powerlessness of the Arab governments, what he has never accepted in the past, the creation of an independent Palestinian state? Neither is he prepared to yield on autonomy a real autonomy of the occupied territories. He continues to oppose it, as he did during Camp David and after. This is shown most clearly by his refusal of the Reagan proposals, which outline an intermediate solution, excluding the creation of a Palestinian state, but proposing an autonomy for the occupied territories “in association” with Jordan.
This is why the impasse has not been overcome, even on the diplomatic terrain. The opposition to the Fez plan on the part of the Israeli Labour Party confirms, moreover, that the attitude of Menachem Begin does not flow from extreme fanaticism or political blindness. It flows from the very logic of Zionism and from the dynamic of a state that was founded and is maintained on the negation of the right of the Palestinians to have a homeland, and that considers that even an embryo of Palestinian independence constitutes a threat to its existence and to its ideological and political foundations.
 



Part I

Part II
 



II [1]
Limits of an Agrarian Reform
The contradictions of rural India were and continue to be so great, the weight of parasitism so heavy, the living conditions of the great peasant masses so desperate, that the urgent need for an agrarian reform simply forced itself upon the country when it became independent. It was almost unanimously recognized that action had to be taken along the following main lines: eliminate intermediaries, guarantee stability to working peasants, limit landholding, and give the land to those who were unprovided with any. And it was indeed in this direction that the attempt was in fact made to take action, thanks to all the reforms carried out or projected in the different states of the Union [2] and by means of typically Indian movements such as the Sampattidan and the Bhooden Movement.
The first goal that was generally specified right from the beginning was the abolition of the zemindari system. All the Indian states have long since voted laws to this effect. [3]
But the parasitic classes that were directly threatened did not grow discouraged. They reported to all legalistic and procedural tricks, first to postpone the vote of the laws that struck at them, and then to postpone their application. And though they did not suceed in completely blocking the reform movement, they did however almost always succeed in having the legislative measures formulated in such a way that they could be got around or permitted a return to the status quo from an economico-social if not from a juridical viewpoint.
Thorner, in his already mentioned essay, makes a detailed analysis of the agrarian reform in the different states. One example is particularly significant, that of the most populous Indian state, Uttar Pradesh, where the reform had a few results (in the majority of the other states, according to Thorner, the results were pretty insignificant).
In Uttar Pradesh the law for the abolition of the zemindari system was already decided on in 1946, but the final vote of the competent assembly did not take place till 1951 (in the Bihar, the overall procedure required not less than eight years!). The time that thus went by was skilfully profited by to set up various devices. But the law itself provided the zemindari with the possibility of saving themselves. In fact a part of their land – classified in the categories of unlet sir and khudhasht, characterized by the precarious conditions of the tenants – was exempted from the reform. [4] It is true that this exception was made for the zemindari only on condition that they kept these lands as working farmers, but the criteria for defining “working farmers” were so broad that they made it very easy for landowners to be so considered. [5] Hence very many zemindari were able to benefit by this exemption and thus be included in a new privileged category, that of the bhumidars. The old formula disappeared only in appearance; in fact, the same persons continued to own the land, and very often that part of the land that was far-and-away the most profitable. For the great majority of the peasants there had been no real change: conditions stayed the same – rent too, with the difference that it now had to be paid to the state in the form of taxes and no longer to the former zemindari. [6] And lastly it must be added that, to the extent that expropriations did take place, they were also amply compensated by indemnizations.
For the zones covered by the ryotwari system (in the state of Bombay, for example), the reform tended above all to ensure the stability of the tenants and to establish a “fair rent.” The effective modifications were still more modest, for the reason that, even from a formal viewpoint, the ancient hierarchy remained in place, and the law, in this case as well, was got around in various ways. The example of the Bombay region is, in this matter, very significant. One of the consequences has been quite exactly the opposite of what the law was attempting to bring about: the area reserved to the tenants under more advantageous conditions of stability diminished and often even the tenants were eliminated. [7]
Measures of limitation of holdings are at an even more backward stage: it is in only part of the states that legislation for this purpose has been adopted. Where the law has been proclaimed, it most often concerns holdings that might be set up in the future and does not intervene in the status quo. And when the limitation has concerned also existing holdings, the privileged class has not failed to make its usual discovery of wangles to conserve essentially its own positions. Even the law that was adopted in Kerala by the Namboodiripad government – not long before it was dissolved – contains clauses which quite obviously play into the hands of the landowners. [8]
The redistribution of land has also taken another form quite peculiar to this country. One of Gandhi’s disciples, Vinoba Bhave, in 1951 launched a movement whose goal was to get the big landowners to make a gift of part of their lands to the landless peasants. According to this reformer’s calculations, if every landowner had given, on the average, one sixth of what he possessed, all the disinherited would have been able to have, on the average, a property of one acre. The authorities decided to back up this movement which had its obvious inspiration in ideas that were in a certain sense traditional for the Indian bourgeoisie.
It is useless to insist on the obvious limits of a movement of a humanitarian nature which counts on the “generosity” of the owning classes rather than on the will to struggle of the disinherited. [9] Suffice it to say that in June 1958 the acres “given away” did not reach four and a half million, half of them, incidentally, in a single state (where Vinoba had developed his personal activity). In many cases, what is more, it was a matter of “well-arranged charity”: the philanthropists preferred to get rid of rocky or practically untillable land. In addition, at the moment of the distribution of these lands, grave difficulties arose: to such a degree that in June 1958 only 782,000 acres had been distributed. [10] What is called the Community Development Programme, officially launched in 1952, did not even have a modification of the structure of the rural regions as its goal, which was rather to create certain substructures and render possible more decent living conditions in the countryside. In view of the fact that the plans were absolutely insufficient, the results even on this level have been pretty meagre. Even the good will of certain government agents collapsed when faced with the mass resistance of a peasant society whose most reactionary elements can still today exert a crushing control.
Hence what is ancient – and even archaic – continues to block the path to renovation in the rural regions of India. And the basic structures have at the most only been shaken a little, without having been really touched in what is essential. It is true that the first cut has certainly been made into the remains of pre-capitalism and feudalism, and that the position of the big absentee landowners has certainly been weakened. But the great mass of the peasants has not derived any advantage therefrom and still remains in the same position of instability and dependence, in the same situation of finding it impossible to bring about the elementary improvements without which a perceptible increase in production cannot be obtained.
In reality the genuine aim of the reform has been to create a solid stratum of enterprise landowners of the capitalist type or a capitalist tendency, and rich peasants. That was a requirement of the capitalist development, however slow, of a society like Indian society. It was and still is a political requirement for the ruling class, to the degree that the crystallization of a stratum of this type might be able to fulfil a function of relative stabilization, avoiding the risks connected with the permanence of forms that were historically outlived and incapable of ensuring the slightest improvement in the masses’ living conditions. [11] But this goal has been reached only partially because of the weight that the parasitic landowners continue to have in Indian society and because of the links that exist between them and the capitalist sectors. The results of this state of affairs on the strictly productive level have already been pointed out. A new experimental confirmation has thus been obtained of the lesson that could have been derived for other countries or other continents: in a backward country, in the historical phase through which we are now passing, the bour-geosie is incapable of successfully carrying through an agrarian reform that theoretically would not go outside bourgeois-democratic limits. Experiences like those of Russia, China, and Jugoslavia have already demonstrated what explosive potentialities arise from this chronic incapacity. There is no reason to doubt that this same law may be equally valid for India.
 
Nehru’s “Reformism” and Bourgeois Democracy
We have been speaking of the Indian ruling class as of a class that is indiscutably bourgeois capitalist. Indeed, it does not seem to us necessary to prove this, for the demonstration is to be found in the overall history of India for many decades downs to our day. We are not overlooking certain airy interpretations of which we spoke at the beginning of this article. But let us say frankly that prattlings about an India that is entering the “socialist world” or that is heading along its own road toward socialism under the direction of its present leadership, seem to us so absurd that it is rather up to those who engage in them to furnish the proofs therefor. We are quite willing to run the risk of being treated as “schematists,” but we are convinced that nobody – however skilful he may be in juggling – can succeed in demonstrating that India no longer has a capitalist leadership or that with such a leadership it can be headed toward socialism.
It nevertheless remains to explain why Nehru’s India has followed so special a course, which led it to start five-year plans, to sketch out an agrarian reform, to pursue a neutralist policy, and to speak of “socialist models.” This task is not in reality very difficult if the slightest thought is given to a few givens in the Indian situation.
India reached political independence by what may be called, if one insists, “peaceful paths,” especially because Great Britain was convinced that its economic interests could be safeguarded and that in that country there had been formed a native bourgeoisie sufficiently strong to prevent independence’s being immediately followed by a social revolution. The British calculations turned out not to be false, but the Indian bourgeoisie has had to use every whit of its trickery to maintain an equilibrium which in any cause could not be anything but precarious.
This dominant class, as has been said in passing, was and still is relatively strong for a colonial or semi-colonial country. If we are not mistaken, there exists no other example of a country of this same type. And the Gandhi movement and the Congress Party were able to create a whole leading stratum which, though quite weak compared to the capitalist countries, is nevertheless relatively important in the given situation. It is hardly necessary to say that the relative industrial development created the basic conditions; the contacts with European culture, the unifying function of Great Britain, etc., did the rest. It would be well, no doubt, to recall – even if it is a detail – that there exist in India newspapers of a higher level than in certain countries of Western Europe. The maturity of a dominant class is to be judged also by the organs that it knows how to produce, the forms that it adopts for the education and information of its cadres.
At the moment when the country reached independence, the Congress Party – the political expression of the ruling class – enjoyed very broad support by the masses. For these masses independence meant not only a formal political transformation but also a transformation of an economic and social nature. Neither Nehru nor his collaborators could ignore this element, all the more so in that, at the moment that Great Britain was giving up India, there was developing in China a mighty revolution which was to exert an ever greater influence on all the Asiatic masses.
The path for Nehru’s India, therefore, could not be that of Chiang Kai-Shek: it had to be that of a prudent “reformism,” even if this was to be found more in projects than in accomplishments. And in view of the still fresh memories of the anti-imperialist struggle, the very geographic position of the country, and its well-considered economic interests [12] a neutralist foreign policy could only seem far-and-away preferable to an Atlantic policy. It is in fact thanks to all these positions – which the Soviet Headers have not failed to underwrite – that Nehru’s party and even more Nehru personally continue to be supported by a broad popular base.
That is, in substance, the Indian “path”, to which speeches about the “socialist model” have provided a propaganda accompaniment which, it was rightly supposed, would be palatable to the masses. Some persons perhaps had illusions about this; others perhaps worried. Needlessly, for, as a top Indian leader specified in effect to a distinguished meeting of capitalists: “It is a question of an ethical aspiration which up to now has had no specific content.” [13] It will not have any more in the future, either.
It would be difficult to deny the fact that the most immediate economic and social problems have not been solved, and that the gap between India and the more developed capitalist countries has only grown greater. Furthermore, the parallel with China has now become so plain that it is a commonplace. Doubts may be entertained about the way in which the Chinese manipulate statistics. But nobody questions the fact that China has recorded a qualitative difference in its favor. Nevertheless, if it is desired to count in India’s favor its political structure, i.e., its parliamentary democracy, it is true that certain formal democratic rights – which can be appreciated especially, if not exclusively, by the ruling classes – still exist in the Indian Union, where it is possible to organize parties and trade unions, arrange mass meetings and conferences, publish newspapers and magazines, and where the deputies are chosen in free elections. But the conditions of the country – such as they have been determined by its historical evolution and rendered specific in the period of independence – are such that the play of parliamentary institutions and of democratic guarantees attached thereto turn inevitably in favor of the dominant, and even the most reactionary, strata. One of the greatest specialists in Indian problems recently wrote:
From the fact that the great majority of deputies is composed of big landowners, usurrers, or their representatives, it follows that the parliamentary system is an obstacle to agrarian reform. [Tibor Mende: retranslated from French].
The genuine class nature of Nehrus’s democracy could hardly be defined with greater synthesis and efficiency. And we shall not consider those Indian peasants wrong who are convinced that, in spite of all bureaucratic and authoritarian deformations, the Chinese communes represent a more effective form of democracy.
On the other hand, it is all too often agreeable to overestimate one aspect of political conditions in India. Though the aforementioned relative guarantees exist, repression is, on the contrary, almost always rapid and pitiless whenever mass movements, even of a trade-union nature, loom up. It is a matter not only of arrests carried out on a wide scale, but also of the frequent use of arms with fatal results. During (last September’s food demonstrations in Calcutta, the dead were counted in the hundreds, the wounded in the thousands, the arrests in multiple thousands. The city had all the appearance of a zone occupied by an enemy army. [14]
But in any case the most serious problem remains that of the prospects for development. Will it be possible for India to keep its present structures much longer, to continue to be a parliamentary democracy, and, are we to observe, even by the intermediary of the necessary evolutions, a passing over to socialism by the “democratic” and “peaceful” path?
Some indications in the recent past – and we allude not only to certain very harsh repressions and to the arbitrary action carried out in Kerala, but also to certain manifestations of an internal crisis in the dominant class – might constitute premonitory signs – even though still far off – of a new course. Everything will depend on the evolution of the situation, first of all the economic situation, in these next years, and, naturally, of the dynamic evolution of the mass movement. If the economic stagnation were still to continue, and if certain elementary requirements of the masses were not to be satisfied, the margin still at the disposal of Nehru and the Congress Party might be narrowed down, and in this hypothesis the Indian bourgeoisie could hardly afford the luxury of parliamentary democracy. The Kerala experience, for that matter, has demonstrated what reply it makes when the play of democratic forces tends, even partially, to turn against itself.
Anticipations have already been made about what the Third Five-Year Plan ought to be, and the projects seem ambitious. [15] Unquestionably the future of India depends to a great extent on what it will be possible to accomplish during the last years of the plan now in process and the five following years. The prognosis, on the basis of the experience visualized, ought to be pessimist. But it is not possible to set aside the hypothesis of a more favorable, or less unfavorable, evolution – one that in any case may be able to postpone certain deadilines in the case that, in a prolonged climate of detente, the United States contributes aid of a very great scope. [16]
It is probable that Nehru will try to manoeuvre in this direction, and, in any case, we have in these last months witnessed a slant of his policy in a more “pro-Western” direction.
 
Toward Decisive Deadlines
It is not possible to tackle here the problem, though it is a fundamental one, of the mass movement in India and its most recent developments. It will suffice to indicate that very important obstacles stand in the way of the development of its immense potential power, obstacles which have constituted and still continue to constitute a delaying factor. The geographic extent of the country, the manifold linguistic, religious, and other sorts of differences, the diversity of historical experiences even in recent periods – all these render the effective and efficacious unification of the movement on a national scale extremely difficult. Thus the forces of even the most important parties, including the Communist Party, are very unevenly distributed, while local parties and organizations flourish, strong in one region or state and practically unheard of in the others. In the last analysis, this state of affairs produces one of the most important weaknesses of the movement: the inadequacy of the peasant organizations. And, what is stranger, is is just among the rural laborers that this lack is the most pronounced. [17]
Aside from the still considerable influence exerted by the Congress Party (the prestige enjoyed by Nehru is a determinant factor), no workers’ organization has succeeded, up till now, in exerting a decisive influence on the national scale upon the majority of the mass movement. We have here a characteristic element that differentiates India from, for example, Indonesia.
During a certain period immediately after independence, the hypothesis could be put forward that, because of a whole series of factors, the mass movement might be channelled in the Socialist Party. But this was not verified, and the Socialist Party – which went through different splits and now has to face the competition of other similar parties, sometimes strong on the regional scale – has maintained a relatively limited influence which is far oftener exerted in petty-bourgeois than in worker or peasant circles. This is to a large degree the result of its conservative policy which led it under certain circumstances to attack Nehru from the right.
The Communist Party is unquestionably stronger, even though more than half of its 27 deputies [18] were elected from only two states, which clearly shows the unevenness of its development. This year feverish discussions, on the occasion of the Kerala and Calcutta events, have opened up about its strength and its future possibilities. In Calcutta, the food movement was attributed to its initiative, though this movement in reality had a much broader leadership and many characteristics of spontaneity stood out in it. [19] In Kerala, which is, however, one of the smallest states in the Union, Communist influence is predominant. Some persons suppose that in the last analysis the repression may strengthen that influence, while others – in leftist circles – claim that the timid policy of Namboodiripad and the non-fulfillment of certain promises have had a negative effect on the popular base and objectively helped the reactionary mobilization. [20] It is hard to form a well-defined opinion on the point. But though almost nobody thinks that the CP will have a vigorous development within a short time, very many are nevertheless convinced that it is following a rising curve. What is essential plainly depends on the positions that its leadership will advocate, especially on the fundamental problems. [21]
In any case the situation inside the mass movement is far from being crystalized, and in the process of development there will be new polarizations and new groupings. It is only in this later stage that the Indian revolution will be able to say that it has found its own leadership.
If there are taken into consideration all the factors that are operative and are destined to be accentuated, it is possible in fact to speak of an Indian revolution in the most specific sense. Explosive elements of every sort and in gigantic proportions are present in this subcontinent of 400 million inhabitants. The roads of neo-capitalism, of gradual reform, of an attenuation of economic imbalances and social contrasts, are, more than ever, closed. And the immediate prospects for the Indian masses in the existing framework continue to be prospects of destitution and domination.
But the imbalances and contradictions, though they can be maintained for certain periods, are operating in the direction of a break in certain other periods. If account is taken of the dramatic problems raised – within a not very distant period, as we have seen – by the stagnation in agriculture; if it is taken into consideration that the fears and prejudices on which the dominant classes have based their power are, in spite of everything, being inexorably worn away; if it is not forgotten that the Indian masses form part of a colonial world in continual ebullition, and that especially the example of China exerts a more and more formidable attraction upon them; if the fact is not neglected that the state (in the broadest sense of the word) and “civil society” have in capitalist and bourgeois India roots that are less deep than in the advanced capitalist countries – then it appears legitimate to be convinced that certain historical deadlines are no longer so far away. And the social transformations which may be produced in India during 1960 and which it is absolutely ridiculous to believe can develop in a more or less “democratic” or “constitutional” framework without a break-up of all existing structures, will be destined to leave in the history of our century a mark comparable to those already left by the two revolutions of Russia and China.
1–3 January 1960

Notes
1. The first half of this study appeared in our Spring issue.
2. According to the Indian Constitution, agrarian reform is a problem that concerns the individual states and not the Union.
3. Even the Congress Party was favorable to the reform, all the more so in that the zemindari had furnished one of the strongest supports for British domination.
4. Before the reform law the unlet sir and khudkasht in Uttar Pradesh added up to 6 million acres, while lands of the other categories totaled a little over one million (cfr. Thorner, op. cit., p 20).
5. The four basic criteria concern not only manual labor properly so called, but also the use of wage-labor, the direction and control of agricultural operations, and the risk of undergoing losses. On the other hand, some measures foresee the prohibition of renting land, but not of turning it over to share-croppers (cfr. Thorner, pp. 20 and 22).
6. Cfr. Thorner, pp. 20 and 25.
7. In Bombay this reduction seems to have been 50%, and even more in the Hyderabad. In the state of Andhra, the majority of the tenants seem to have been expelled (cfr. Some Aspects of the Agrarian Question, 1958, pp. 67–67).
8. Cfr. Agrarian Relations Bill, 1959. The limit of holdings is set between 15 and 25 acres according to the case.
9. A criticism from a Marxist viewpoint may be found in the pamphlet of C.G. Shah, Sampattidan and the Bhoodan Movement, 1955. It is fundamentally correct, but a little schematic.
10. Cfr. India 1959, p. 278, and The Agrarian Prospect in India, pp. 74–75. The Gramdam is a movement similar to the Bhoodan, and consists of donating entire villages. The Sampattidan, on the contrary, consists of donations in money or of other types.
11. On the subject of this evaluation, two tendencies in the workers’ movement are in agreement even though they have fundamental divergences about other questions – those represented by the Indian Communist Party and by the Revolutionary Workers’ Party of India, very close to the Fourth International (cfr. the already mentioned books, Some Aspects of the Agrarian Question and The Programme of the RWPI). The evaluations of a specialist like Thorner (cfr. op. cit.) are similar.
12. Its neutralist policy has enabled India to profit by the economic aid of both the capitalist states and the USSR, in this aspect, India has found itself in a favorable situation, much better than that of China.
13. Cfr. The Japan Times, 18 October 1959 (in Far East Economic Problems).
14. The author was an eyewitness of these events.
15. A criticism in this sense was made by R.K. Dutt in New Age, monthly review of the Indian CP (August 1959).
16. In the aforementioned article R.K. Dutt claims that it will be “not only possible but even easy for America to finance the plan as a whole,” a plan which should reach 10,000 crores of rupees $20,000 million, or £714,285,000. If it is considered that the amount of the three debit chapters of the US balance of payments in 1959 reached $7,500 million, this claim certainly seems exaggerated.
17. Agrarian reform has also been limited because there are not important mass movements in the rural regions. In the state of Andhra, where a strong peasant organization exists, the reform was much more thorough and effective than elsewhere.
18. The Socialist Party has 20 deputies, the Congress Party 366.
19. The agitation was led by a committee formed by some ten parties of the left, many of them calling themselves Marxist. It is unquestionable, however, that the CP was the strongest element in this committee; still, it would not alone have been able to determine The situation that was created.
20. It has been particularly emphasized that, despite its formal promises, the Namboodiripad government mobilized the police for anti-worker repressions. In July 1958 at Quilon there were workers killed.
21. The line of the Indian CP in this post-war period has undergone different oscillations, but it is now aimed toward a sort of critical support for Nehru. This support has been ensured, thanks to obvious concessions to the wave of nationalism, even on the occasion of the border incidents with China. The Indian CP has also emphasized the theses of the XXth Congress about the democratic and parliamentary path to socialism.
 



In these last years, the real situation in India has often been presented in a deforming mirror. For MacCarthy-type ultras, India was a country suffering from the virus of neutralism, which therefore had to be considered as a field of manoeuvre for the most insidious actions by the “communists.” For “enlightened” bourgeois, on the contrary, it was the scene of an advanced “democratic” experiment whose results were to belie certain basic criteria of Marxism and Leninism and refute the need of a “Chinese way” to solve the distressing problems of under-developed countries. In the workers’ movement itself, a tendency was prevalent to engage in apologetics on its behalf: at the time of the XXth Congress the Indian example served as a demonstration of the particular nature of the paths to follow in reaching socialism, and Nehru was even awarded “diplomas” as a socialist or a semi-socialist. [1] Even recently, interpretations that are, to say the least, surprising can be read concerning the nature of present-day India and the aims pursued by its ruling class. [2]
In these last months, nevertheless, events of some importance ought to have inspired greater vigilance concerning apologetic judgments. At the end of July, Nehru proclaimed the dissolution, by an act that was undemocratic in both form and substance, of the only government in the Indian Union which his party did not dominate. A month later, demonstrations by the starving masses of Calcutta were broken up by bloody repression. Still during this same period, a skilfully conducted campaign exploited frontier incidents for the obvious purpose of creating a current of nationalism and strengthening anti-Chinese feelings even in the popular masses.
These are three episodes situated on different planes but which, just because of that, could provide indications about the real situation in India and the present tendencies of its ruling class. If so little benefit was drawn therefrom, it is because, even in the workers’ movement, motifs of propaganda and apologetics – which must confirm well-determined general theses or more or less “new” formulae – continue to be preferred to the direct analysis of reality and all the elements that go to make it up.
 
Realities and Illusions in the Five-Year Plans
One of the most characteristic experiments of independent India is unquestionably that of the Five-Year Plans, one of which was completed a few years ago, a second is now going on, and a third is in the drafting stage. It is known that it is just concerning these plans – and certain proclamations that have accompanied them [3] – that people have been tempted to describe contemporary India as “socialist” or “substantially socialist.” We shall return to this point, but let us first of all tackle the problem from the viewpoint of practical achievements.
It is hardly necessary to say that, the starting-point being very low, there was never in any case a question of reaching, in five or even ten years, considerable absolute levels. On the other hand, however, it ought to have been relatively easy to obtain big percentage increases. And yet even this second point has not been attained.
At the time that the policy of plans was adopted, what were especially put forward were long-range goals. There was talk of doubling the national income in about 15 years and the per capita revenue in 20 or more years. [4] Consumption would have increased – according to other estimates – by a little less than 77% up to 1977.
It will immediately be seen that – even granting that such goals may be reached (which is far from being self-evident) – little will have been done in 10 or 15 years to solve the dramatic problems of India and its population. It suffices to think of the extremely modest value of a doubled per capita income when it is remembered that this income was, in 1944–55, of about 270 rupees [1 rupee = $0.20 or 1s 5d], i.e., less than half the income of the inhabitant of a country like Ceylon, itself backward. [5]
The first plan was to confirm the modest nature of the goals set. It suffices to take as an example investments, which were maintained at between 5% and 6% of the national income (raised to 7% during the last year), which means that they did not go beyond the annual average of the period of British domination. The greatest part of investments was reserved for irrigation and agriculture, whereas industry was attributed, in the overall plan, only a little more than 5% of the total investments. [6]
The final result is that the national income has increased 18.4% – representing about 3.6% per year – while the increase in per capita income was even more limited (only 10.8%). [7] The index of agricultural production showed an increase of about 20%, an increase of small importance if the population increase during the same period is taken into consideration. What is more, in the general opinion, even this result could be attained only thanks to exceptional weather conditions (whereas those same conditions had been unfavorable in the year which served as the point of comparison). [8]
An obviously more important increase – of about 40%, or 8% per year – was achieved by industry. It is proper to note, however, that this advance took place especially in private industry and not in the public sector that was directly affected by the plan. In addition, though considerable percentage increases were obtained in certain sectors (e.g., the electrical industry), in other important sectors the situation was quite different: substantially they remained at the level of the war years, a level that sometimes was not even reached. [9]
The Second Plan was based on perceptibly different criteria concerning the distribution of investments and had more ambitious goals (the rate of investment was raised to 10–12%). The accent was placed on the requirements of the development of industry, to which 19% of the investments were reserved, whereas a reduction of 5% was foreseen for agriculture. The increase in the national income was to be higher than in the preceding plan and to reach about 5% per year. [10] A particularly important increase was planned for the steel industry. [11] As for agricultural production, the increase was to be in the neighborhood of 18% (15% for food grains), that is to say, already at the outset it was lower than what had already been achieved under the preceding plan. This Second Plan is to end in 1961, and it is therefore a little early to draw an overall trial balance, all the more so in that the indispensable statistics are provided with a certain time-lag. But the impossibility of a complete achievement of the plan was rapidly demonstrated, to the degree that the authorities were led to reevaluate the real possibilities after two years’ experience. In practice the goals have been lowered and certain ones have been put in a category for which there is talk about conditional achievement. What is worse is that according to certain indications there is some skepticism about the possibilities of achieving even the thus revised programme.
In the official document announcing this revision, while the causes indicated were inflationary tendencies and foreign-exchange difficulties, it was admitted that in the final period of the First Plan the national income had increased less than 4% per year, while agricultural production had begun to fall off compared to the level attained in 1953–54. [12]
As for the first years of the new plan, the production of finished steel, after having made an insignificant advance in 1957 over 1956, recorded a falling off in 1958 (even compared to 1956). An analogous drop was recorded in rolled iron and in cement production. A drop was already noted in 1957 in the production of products made of jute and cotton, which represent a quite important sector for the Indian economy, and in the sugar industry. [13]
The situation in agriculture was even more serious. Not only has no progress been possible since 1953–54, but a drop in the indices has been recorded. The drop between 1956–57 and 1957–1958 was particularly perceptible. [14]
That means not only that the goals of the plan are not being and probably will not be attained, but that the already grave problem of agriculture will have a tendency to become even more acute. Even in the most favorable period, the increases in absolute amounts were scarcely sufficient to face up to the population increase, and even this at a frightfully low level of satisfaction of this population’s needs. In case of a sag in this production, there is no other way out except an increase in imports, with all the negative consequences for overall economic development that can easily be imagined (it must not be forgotten to what a degree foreign-exchange difficulties have played a role already in these three years). But even this solution – without substantial changes – can be only an inadequate palliative if it is true, as is claimed, that, continuing the present rhythm, the difference between food resources and the population’s needs will reach 25% in 1965, and that the minimum to sustain life could be ensured only by an annual increase of more than 8% in the production of grains. [15] On the basis of overall postwar development, including the period of the Five-Year Plans, an absolutely pessimistic outlook is justified. If new factors do not intervene, and with strong influence, this essential inadequacy in agricultural development can have incalculable political and social repercussions on the structure of Indian society as a whole. The first element of a break might appear on just this plane.
Given the adoption of planning and the “socialist” intentions that go with it, it might be thought that, within the general limits of the Indian industrial economy, the role of the public sector, administered or directly controlled by the state, has been important. In fact, this is not so.
Granted, at the beginning the intentions were excellent and immediately after independence ideas of nationalizations circulated, even officially. But in fact it was to be decided later not to nationalize, the state limiting itself to administering and controlling the newly set-up industrial enterprises. [16] In the industrial investments of the
First Plan, the public sector found itself clearly at a disadvantage. The Second Plan was satisfied to establish a balanced proportion, which meant that the specific weight of private industry would remain preponderant. [17] Thus, as has been observed even in certain circles which, in the past, indulged in certain exalting apologetics, in reality the public sector in India is even more reduced than in certain capitalist countries of Western Europe. [18]
 
Workers’ Wages and Living Conditions
What has been the evolution of the remuneration of workers during these last ten years?
Even though, from this point of view as well, the inadequacy of official statistics is to be regretted, there exist sufficient indications to trace out a general chart of the situation.
Especially concerning the total of wages and profits compared to the net product of industry, it has been possible to assemble the following data [19]:



 


 


1950


   


1954


   


1955




Net product


528.6
(100)


732.6
(136)


775.5
(145)




Wages


236.4
(100)


292.3
(123)


319.5
(135)




Profits


292.2
(100)


440.3
(150)


456.0
(156)




Percentages of wages on product


  44.7


  39.9


  41.1




(Figures in crores of rupees; 1 crore = 10 million)



The percentage of wage income thus appears to have fallen. In other terms, a relative impoverishment seems to have been demonstrated even during this period.
Official indications about the parallel development of labor productivity and real wages unfortunately are not available for later than 1954, but the comparison with the starting-point (1939 = 100) is nevertheless interesting. The wage index rises to 108.6 in 1940, to fall again in 1943 to 67.0 and in 1946 to 73.2. There is then a new rise (with one brief interruption) until 1952 (101.8), whereas we find 99.9 for 1953 and 102.7 for 1954. The 1954 index figure is thus lower than that of 1940 and 1941. Even the increase in productivity seems modest, but it is at any rate more perceptible than that of wages: 1940, 104.2; 1943, 84.5; 1946, 74.7; 1953, 105.8; 1954, 113. [20]
The data concerning the development of wages considered by themselves are not very complete, both because of the references, and because they are sometimes limited to nominal wages. But in general the rises which have been proved during the First Plan were very limited, not to call them drops in real terms as demonstrated between 1956 and 1958. [21]
The observable stagnation of remunerations or the modesty of their increase (and a fortiori their occasional decrease) does not, however, appear in all its gravity unless there is taken into account the fact that the absolute level was and still is extraordinarily low. The national average of annual wages distributed in 1956 was in fact 1,212.7 rupees (running from a maximum of 1,525.9 to a minimum of 786.4). In that year a textile worker received an average of 1,244.5, a metal-trades worker 1,487.9, and an oil worker 1,686.2 rupees. [22]
In September 1959 the author had the opportunity to meet trade-union leaders and workers of the textile industry, both in Bombay – where there exists an important concentration of them, several hundred thousand workers strong – and in Madras – where, among others, the Buckingham Garnatic, with 15,000 workers, is situated. According to the information he gathered there, a worker’s monthly salary was about 120 rupees at Bombay, while it was a little lower in Madras, scarcely reaching 100 rupees (at Buckingham, highly skilled workers – who form about 10% of the total – can, however, reach 200 to 250 rupees).
Since a rupee is roughly equivalent to twenty US cents, or 1s 5d – even if it is realized that more can be bought with five rupees in India than with a dollar in the USA – anyone can observe to what a point these remunerations are ridiculous. According to the personal observations of the author, in Bombay the monthly rent of the most modest of rooms is between 15 and 20 rupees a month, a pair of blue jeans or a work-shirt costs between 15 and 18 rupees, a pair of sandals 4 to 5 rupees, while a pound of rice cost about half a rupee, as does a pound of bread. [23] In the factories the workers can get a miserable meal for 37 rupee cents, while they can eat in a very humble restaurant for half a rupee.
But statistical data and figures can give only a pale idea of the tragic conditions of the popular masses in India. To learn that a Bombay textile worker has to give up between 15 and 20% of his quite miserable wages to have a room means very little in itself: to understand it, one must see what he gets for it in the houses of popular neighborhoods.
In Bombay the workers live generally in slums or sometimes in small villages on the outskirts. Worli is one of these villages, where workers and fishermen live together. The tiny low-ceilinged houses are huddled together in an incredible way, separated only by little alleys of an indescribable filthiness. There is no sanitation, the results of which can easily be imagined. Half-naked children root in the swill, together with animals; they are undernourished and suffer from every kind of disease. The houses seem to be collapsing at every point, and the water leaks abundantly into them during the rainy season. The author was invited to enter the house of an office-worker: a tiny kitchen and a more-or-less square room six feet by six. The family consisted of two adults and four children. They claimed to be the privileged ones of the neighborhood because they could afford to pay a rent of 20 rupees. Another “privileged” person was employed by the Bombay municipality: 72 rupees a month. He lives in a sort of big five-storey barracks built around a large inside courtyard. The “apartments” are composed of a tiny kitchen and a room (ranging from six by nine feet to nine by twelve feet), in which lives this “privileged” man’s family – consisting of 12 persons.
In the slums conditions are still more agonizing. The buildings are very large and resemble schools or barracks. One makes one’s way through interminable corridors, a hundred and fifty feet or more long, half-dark and very dirty. When it rains, it seems that one wades in them ankle-deep in water. The “apartments” consist of single rooms giving on these corridors; they are real dens in each of which live four or five entire families. It is easy to understand why, at night, it can happen that one finds himself stepping on people lying in the corridors. [24]
Bombay is the most advanced city, and, by unanimous opinion, Calcutta has for example the worst rooms. And this is not to mention the real semi-savage huts which characterize the countryside in India. [25] In the lowest circle on this inferno are to be found the worst-off among the masses, the unemployed, without resources of any sort, who, hundreds of thousands of them, do literally cover the sidewalks at night in the most important cities.
 
Agricultural India
However serious the obstacles to industrial development may be, and however worrisome the problems faced by the city masses, it is however in the countryside that we touch on the most dramatic problems of this sub-continent, which is still today very definitively peasant. [26] It is in agricultural production that, despite the Plans, stagnation is the most pronounced; it is in the rural regions that the past makes its paralyzing weight the most felt; it is there that the old social divisions are the most persistent, the destitution the most deeply rooted; it is there also that there are to be counted tens of thousands of unemployed or under employed, who constitute, among the infinite number of India’s sores, what is probably the most painful one. [27]
The most characteristic elements in Indian agriculture can be rapidly summarized. The land is still very little used, and only 19% of the terrain is worked, while only 15% of the arable land is irrigated. [28] Production for family consumption continues to be very important, while productivity is very low, as is per capita yield. [29] The break-down of farms into little parcels is very considerable, and indeed often pathological. [30] The results of the foregoing factors are easily understood. We shall not dwell upon the general living conditions in the rural regions: quite clear indications show them to be worse than those in the cities. [31] We shall only make a brief comment on the situation of agricultural workers.
This category of labor has in India undergone a continuous development to reach the impressive figure of 50 million units, which represents about 20% of the agricultural population as a whole. [32] The tragedy that torments them – and that is really the word for it – is under-employment: about 85% of agricultural workers work only part-time. The average of working days in the year is a little over 200, including days occupied in non-agricultural tasks; besides which, 15% of the workers of this category are unemployed during the entire year. [33] And even when one of them has the good luck to get a day’s work, the daily pay is in the best of cases less than 1.5 rupees for the men, while it reaches scarcely half a rupee for the women and children. Thus, in the course of a year during which the average per capita income for the entire country was 264 rupees, there were only 104 for these disinherited among the disinherited. [34]
This picture of Indian agriculture and of peasant India is so sombre that it has become commonplace to seek the origins of the evil in the economic-social structures. The ruling class itself has had to raise the problem of agrarian reform. Let us pause then at this important chapter in the history of independent India.
The structure of the Indian rural regions is characterized by the existence of a class of non-land-working proprietors who receive a considerable amount of ground rent [35], and by the fact that, as happens in backward countries where important residues of the pre-capitalist period persist, the burden of the working peasants is aggravated by the percentages of intermediaries, usurers, and parasites of very sort. [36] Caste prejudices, fought against officially but in fact deeply rooted, form an additional brake. It is well known that under such conditions it is not possible to expect a vigorous development of the productive forces. Those that profit by their income from land under cultivation – and who already possess privileges of all sorts – have no incentive at all to improve it because they are sure in any case of receiving high rents. This is true for the intermediaries as well. As for the farmers, they are working land that does not belong to them, are in a precarious situation, and also lack any incentive to bring about improvements – and even if they had, they have no margin with which to do so. Furthermore, the high rents cause a lot of capital to be invested in the purchase of land, capital which is thus withdrawn from industrial development. [37] Let us limit ourselves here to a few rapid statistical and classificatory data.
Above all, the data on the distribution of property – and need we remind the reader to what degree they are unreliable? – indicate that about 20% of rural families have no land. If there is next considered the category of those owning up to five acres, it is observed that this comprises about three-quarters of rural families, who all together own about one-sixth of the cultivated area. At the other extreme, the owners of more than 25 acres, who represent only 5% of the total, occupy more than a third of the overall area. A more detailed examination – not placing in the same category those who have only a very little more than 25 acres and those who have more than 100 or even 250 – would give even more significant indications. [38]
There are three classic systems of property relations, whose roots go deep into past centuries, and particularly to the first period of British domination:

The system called ryotwari, in which the property would belong to the land-working peasant, who must pay taxes directly to the state without the intervention of land-owners or other intermediaries. The area occupied by this system is estimated as 36% of the whole. [39]
 
The system called zemindari, in which the property belongs to a landowner, responsible to the government for the payment of taxes (there exist two types: the fixed-settlement zemindari and the temporary-settlement zemindari, according to whether the tax is set once for all or is on the contrary subject to revision). The landowner does not directly cultivate the land, but rents it to tenants. The area occupied by the fixed-settlement zemindari system is estimated at 35% of the whole. [40]
 
The system called mahalwari, in which the property belongs to village communities, responsible directly to the state for the payment of taxes.

Criticisms have obviously been aimed at the zemindari system, with its picture of the absentee landlord, all the more so in that the situation is aggravated by the introduction, between the owner himself and the land-working peasant, of different intermediaries in the form of tenants and sub-tenants and so on. From the economic point of view, this stratification was rendered possible by the fact that the growing value of the land made a counterweight to the tendency toward the stability of the taxes owed to the state by the landowner. [41]
But, as Thorner, among others, has correctly emphasized in his already quoted study, the classic subdivision becomes in the last analysis largely a formal one. In quite numerous cases, in fact, even with the ryotwari system the proprietor did not work his land directly. He preferred to resort to renting it out. Thus, from the social point of view, he tended to identify himself with the zemindari system landowner. This is not to forget, in addition, that very often the usurer enters into the play of forces, a usurer who, as Thorner writes, “without in fact becoming a landowner himself, ends by sharing with the landowners the privilege of finding in agriculture an income without furnishing any agricultural labor.” [42] In the last analysis, the existence of a social stratum that is relatively widespread and obviously very differentiated in its origins and juridical situation – whose common denominator consists in the fact that it finds the source of its profits and privileges in agriculture without participating directly in agricultural production – is one of the essential characteristics of the agrarian “problem” in India.
A more concrete classification might be set up in the following terms. The upper stratum is formed by the maliks or landowners, i.e., by those whose agricultural income is derived directly from property rights. In a typical way, these proprietors rent out their land and limit themselves to receiving the income from it; but in many cases they may work it directly by means of rural wage-labor or workers by the day. There can also be found landowners who combine the two forms, renting out part of their property and having the rest worked directly.
A second stratum includes the kisans, who can be described, according to an expression that is current today, as direct cultivators. These are small landowners or share-croppers who obtain from direct agricultural work a sufficient income – under the best of hypotheses – to feed their families. They must often resort to the classic outside work (agricultural or non-agricultural) – at least for some members of their family. It is only in exceptional cases, and at all events for very short periods, that certain kisans hire labor.
The last stratum includes the mazdur, agricultural wage labor or workers by the day, who work the land of others, and who, if they have a little plot, can derive from it only a secondary source of income.
[To be concluded in our next issue]

Notes
1. Togliatti, in his March 1955 report to the Central Committee of the Italian Communist Party, considered it timely to attribute importance to the fact that “the Indian Congress Party, which is the government party, has declared that it intends to reorganize the country’s economy in accordance with the principles of socialism,” whereas elsewhere, obviously referring to India and the Kerala experiment, he concluded: “... the example of poorly developed countries where the Communist movement is, without violence, drawing close to power.” (Cfr. Rinascità, 5 May 1957, p. 248)
2. We allude in particular to the article in Avanti (Milan edition, 29 October 1959, Socialist World column), in which, in defiance of the most elementary data, it is claimed among other things that “India, on the whole, even if its rulers do not every 24 hours make claim to a precise ideological choice, proves that it has assimilated the main teachings of Marxism, and we think that we are not mistaken in saying that it is adopting a national path of its own toward socialism.”
3. There was official talk of a “socialistic pattern of society.”
4. According to more pessimistic calculations, it is only in 1977 that it will be possible to double the per capita income. (Cfr. India: a Reference Annual, 1959, p. 200)
5. For a period of the same length, the per capita income was 9,410 rupees in the USA, 4,351 in Great Britain, and 978 in Japan (cfr. A.B. Das – M.N. Chatterji: The Indian Economy, Its Growth and Problems, 1957, p. 1). During the following years, the increase in income in India was modest (273 rupees in 1955–56 and 284 [provisional figure] in 1956–57).
6. Investments for transportation were of the same importance.
7. Per capita consumption increased still less, about 8%.
8. Cfr. Das-Chatterji: op. cit., pp. 534–535. Cfr. also – and not only in this connection – Ernest Germain: L’Economie indienne du 1er au 2ème Plan Quinquennal, in Quatrième Internationale, October 1955.
9. Steel production during the First Plan was about 1,070,000 tons, while it had reached 1,250,000 tons at the beginning of 1940. Concerning fabricated steel, the increase from 1941 to 1956 was about 20%, whereas for rolled iron the level reached in 1956 was lower than that of 1939 (cfr. India 1959, p. 323). Let us recall that the general economic conjuncture was, in certain aspects, favorable (results of the post-Korean boom, absence of inflationary tendencies, etc.).
10. Cfr. Das–Chatterji, op. cit., pp. 399 et seq.
11. From 1,300,000 to 4,300,000 tons; cfr. ibidem, p. 545.
12. Cfr. the official publication, Appraisal and Prospects of the Second Five-Year Plan, p. 3. For the relative pessimism about the possibilities of application, cfr. ibidem, p. 19, and The Plan in The Times of India, 1 September 1959.
13. Cfr. India 1959, pp. 320–23.
14. The general index has shown the following trend between 1952–53 and 1957–58 (1949–50 = 100): 102,0, 114.3 117.9, 123.8, 113.4. For grains, in the same period: 101.4, 120.1, 114.5, 114.9, 119.9, 108.3.
15. In a Ford Foundation report on the food situation in India, these elements are given, and it is specified: “It is impossible to conceive of an import and rationing programme that can cope with a crisis of this scope.” (Retranslated from Le Monde, 11 July 1959) Charles Bettelheim, for his part, states that “in 1966 the harvest deficit will be about 30 million tons of grains.” (Cfr. Il Punto, 1 August 1959.)
16. On the subject of the evolution of official ideas on this point, and of the different categories that were set up for the development of the public and private sectors, cfr. Das–Chatterji, op. cit., pp. 237–242.
17. Here are data for new investments in industry:



 


 


Public Sector


   


Private Sector




Forecasts


Achievements


Forecasts


Achievements




1st Plan


  94


60


233


233




2nd Plan


524


 


535


 




(Figures are in crores of rupees; 1 crore = 10 million.)



In general, furthermore, the relationship between public and private investments was 50/50 in the First Plan and should have been 61/39 in the Second Plan.
18. Cfr. L’Unità , 12 December 1959.
19. Cfr. General Report at Ernakulam, by S.A. Dange, the secretary-general of the AITUC (Communist-controlled trade-union federation), p. 28.
20. Cfr. India 1959, p. 389.
21. A comparison with 1947 (before the adoption of the Minimum Wages Act) gives an index figure of 131 in 1954, 145 in 1955, and 135 in 1956 (real wages). (Cfr. India 1959, p. 391). Statistics on nominal wages (1951 = 100) give about 107 up till 1954, 113 in 1955, and 115.9 in 1956. (Cfr. Earnings of Factory Workers during the Year 1956, in Indian Labour Gazette, March 1958, p. 22.) If, however, the evolution of prices (1949, 100; 1954, 101; 1955, 96; 1956, 105 – cfr. India 1959, p. 302) is taken into account, there is observed in 1956, in comparison with 1955, a drop. For the situation in 1958,. cfr. S.A. Dange, Crisis and Workers, 1959, p. 68. It is again Dange who, in the already quoted work, General Report at Ernakulam, stresses the fact that in 1954 the wage level was more or less the same as in 1939 (p. 24).
22. Cfr. the already quoted Earnings of Factory Workers [etc.], pp. 13–15.
23. These are, obviously, approximate indications, especially when the diversity of weights and measures is taken into account.
24. Public housing ventures are absolutely inadequate. What is more, it often seems to be impossible for workers and clerks to pay the relatively high rents for apartments that are nevertheless still very modest (in Bombay, for example, in the Worli district, there are houses for the middle classes – one room, a kitchen, a veranda, sanitation – with a rent between 50 and 70 rupees).
25. Along the route from Bombay to Calcutta Bihlai, where the steel-plants installed by the Soviets are situated, there is an oasis of modern life, characterized by the most advanced technical achievement. But all around it, a myriad of old huts and even tents give a picture of combined development in a country like India. What is worse is that the majority of the steel workers themselves live in conditions defined as revolting by a recent Socialist “investigation.” Water and sanitation are lacking, and 20,000 workers are living in huts. Last year about 1000 dead were recorded as a result of cholera (cfr. The Leader, 1 September 1959).
26. According to a census taken in 1951, the rural population represented 82.7% of the total (cfr. India 1959, p. 45). In 1956–57 about 50% of the national income still came from agriculture (ibidem, p. 189).
27. Chester Bowles, who was the American ambassador in New Delhi, spoke of about 50 million totally or partially unemployed, while the estimates dating from the period of the First Plan counted about 70 million of them. According to Bettelheim, “... about 40% of the Indian rural population are excluded from the circuit of production or participate therein only for a very limited number of working days.” As for unemployment in the cities, very grave in certain great centres (about 350,000 people in Calcutta), cfr. India 1959, pp. 192–3 (the data provided are probably very much lower than the reality).
28. The cultivated land represents 38% of the geographical surface and 61% of the topographically usable surface (cfr. India 1959, pp. 195 and 251; cfr. also The Indian Economy, p. 76).
29. Cfr. Das–Chatterji, The Indian Economy, pp. 57–59. Per capita production was estimated for 1950–51 at 500 rupees for agriculture, whereas it was 1,700 for industry, 1,600 for transportation, and 800 for small enterprises (cfr. India 1959, p. 19).
30. Cfr. two significant examples in Das–Chatterji, The Indian Economy, p. 65, and statistical elements in India 1959, p. 196.
31. According to an investigation carried out from August to November 1951, average monthly expenditure per person was 24.22 rupees in the country and 31.55 in the cities as a whole (54.82 in the four most important cities). (Cfr. India 1959, p. 197)
32. In 1882 agricultural workers were 7.5 million; this figure rose to 33 million by 1931, and to 49 million by 1951 (cfr. The Indian Economy, p. 110, and India 1959, p. 265). In certain states it reaches 45%. (Cfr. Some Aspects of the Agrarian Question, 1958, p. 8)
33. Cfr. India 1959, pp. 265–6; The Indian Economy, p. 111.
34. Cfr. The Indian Economy, p. 111; India 1959, p. 215.
35. According to the specialist D.K. Rangnekar, rent, under its various forms, can vary from 40–50% up to 60% and even 80% of the crop (cfr. Poverty and Capital Development in India, Oxford 1958, pp. 55–9).
36. Cfr. The Indian Economy, pp. 124–5, and Daniel Thorner, The Agrarian Prospect in India, 1956, p. 10.
37. Cfr. Thorner, op. cit., pp. 11–13; The Indian Economy, pp. 125–7.
38. Cfr. India 1959, pp. 195–6.
39. Cfr. The Programme of the Revolutionary Workers’ Party of India, p. 15.
40. Unfortunately, in the source quoted from, the area covered by the temporary-settlement zemindari system is considered together with the area occupied by the third system (overall percentage, 39%).
41. Cfr. Thorner, op. cit., p. 8.
42. Op. cit., p. 10; retranslated from French.
 



Far from having been overcome after the meeting of the representatives of the various Communist Parties at Bucharest, the conflict between the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and the Chinese Communist Party is developing and broadening. The forms that it has taken up till now are not the same as those that marked’ the conflict between Moscow and Belgrade ten years ago, and it still appears improbable that it will reach a quite open and violent rupture. Nevertheless, an objective logic of such polemics has already asserted itself: just as in the “Jugoslav affair,” now in the “Chinese affair,” from a starting-point of certain particular questions, the discussion quite quickly spread to a whole series of fundamental problems closely concerning not only the tactics but also the strategy and prospects of the Communist movement.
It will be recalled that the first symptoms of divergences were foreshadowed in the Summer of 1958 at an especially critical international conjuncture. But it was beginning with Khrushchev’s trip to the United States that polemics developed more and more clearly to the point of reaching the articles by the Chinese on the occasion of the anniversary of Lenin’s birth, and to the point of the clash at the Council of the World Federation of Trade Unions at Pekin, where the Chinese trade unionists practically rejected the Khrushchev report on orientation. The third stage of the polemics – in the Summer of 1960 – was marked by a very brisk counter-attack by the Soviets; this, though it seems to have influenced several Communist Parties, did not drive the Chinese into renouncing their struggle (they limited themselves to an occasional reshading of certain attitudes).
It is not without interest to summarize here the themes that have been and remain the subject-matter of the divergences in question.
 
The Essential Themes of the Debate
1) Question of the War and Peaceful Coexistence
After having adopted at the XXth Congress the theses on the “non-inevitability” of war, the Soviets laid more and more stress on peaceful coexistence, and, especially in the period marked by “optimism” about Camp David, Khrushchev went quite far in a sort of theorization of a possible and desirable compromise with US imperialism, or, at least, with one of its tendencies.
In his 31 October 1959 speech on the international situation to the Supreme Soviet, he emphasized that
the Soviet Union and all the socialist countries have opened up to humanity the road of a social development without war, on the basis of a peaceful collaboration, [that] the conflict between the two systems must and can be solved by peaceful means, [that] coexistence is a real thing [...] an objective necessity arising from the current world situation, from the present stage of development of human society.
On the other hand, Khrushchev explained on the same occasion that the imperialists can really “make certain concessions,” that there are “peaceful” tendencies even among American capitalists, and that “many well-known figures, and in the first place President Eisenhower [...] want to find the way to strengthen peace.” [1] These “optimistic” theses were confirmed by Khrushchev himself in another report to the Supreme Soviet three months later.
The Chinese Communists did not reject the theses of the XXth Congress on war and peaceful Coexistence. But they laid the stress in a completely different way. They insisted on the idea that war is part of capitalism’s nature, that imperialism has not changed and cannot change its nature, and that, as long as capitalism exists, war remains possible.
The Chinese more particularly denied that there are “peaceful” tendencies in imperialism: US imperialism, even after Camp David, had not changed its policy, and was staking, and is still staking, on war (“The ice of the cold war has never been broken,” it was said in Pekin). [2] It is absurd to let oneself be fooled by the idle chatter of Eisenhower, who, far from seeking “coexistence,” is the most qualified representative of imperialism, which is preparing for new military conflicts.
The Chinese furthermore constantly emphasized the need never to forget that Marxists cannot be opposed to every kind of war, but must distinguish between just and unjust wars.
 
2) Question of the Consequences of a Possible War and of Disarmament
Khrushchev did not explicitly share the viewpoint formerly expressed by some Soviet leaders or the leaders of certain Communist Parties that a Third World War might mean total destruction [3] (he asserted several times that the war would mean the end of capitalism). But in spite of that he insisted and still constantly insists on the frightful extent of the destructions that would be brought about by a nuclear conflict and its “fatal consequences.” [4] He was, furthermore, among those who did not exclude the hypothesis that the United States might pull off a come-back in the field of the most powerful weapons and “sooner or later reach the level of the USSR [January 1960 speech to the Supreme Soviet].” The Chinese viewpoint is perceptibly different. According to them – as was the case after the 1914–18 and 1939–45 conflicts – war would mean a new and decisive advance of the revolution, and even “a rapid destruction of the imperialist monsters.” The peoples ought to brace themselves for heavy sacrifices, but they would be recompensed because,
on the ruins of dead imperialism, the victorious peoples would create with extreme rapidity a civilization a thousand times higher than that of capitalism, and a marvelous future for themselves.
On a more confidential level, so to speak, the Chinese do not hesitate to assert that, in the worst of hypotheses, they might in a war lose half their population while three hundred million would still remain to build communist society. It was arguments of this sort that provoked Khrushchev’s reply at Bucharest: “I cannot say, Let us make war: half would die, the other half would survive. If I talked like that, they could put me in a strait jacket!”
As for disarmament, Khrushchev is a convinced supporter: he thinks that it would be really possible to bring it about. The fact that that has never been possible in the past does not form a decisive argument in the matter (v. Gromyko’s January 1960 speech to the Supreme Soviet). The Chinese – who consider a swindle the thesis that the resources rendered available by an eventual disarmament would be able to be used by everybody in favor of the underdeveloped peoples – declare that they are in agreement with the Soviet proposals, and have put forward proposals themselves. But they explain their attitude by saying:
The Soviet proposals are a test for the imperialist countries. By rejecting them, these countries will later unmask the fraudulent character of their peace [v. 7 June 1960 Hsinhua despatch].
 
3) Question of the Attitude Toward the Colonial Revolution
Khrushchev and the CP of the USSR have always proclaimed their support for the struggle of the colonial peoples. But in practice they have often sacrificed this support to the needs of their policy of detente.
The Chinese criticize such attitudes, explain that the Khrushchev line forms an obstacle to the struggle of the colonial masses, and that the armed struggles of the colonial peoples against imperialism are necessary and must be hailed as just wars. The divergence became concrete in a quite visible way in connection with Algeria. Khrushchev hailed de Gaulle’s 16 September speech; the Chinese sharply criticized it; the Chinese recognized the Algerian government; the USSR did so more tardily, and even then only de facto.
The Chinese, furthermore, are more and more critical of certain leaders of the colonial bourgeoisies (especially Nehru and Sukarno). The Soviets accuse the Chinese of not understanding the progressive role of the national bourgeoisie in colonial countries and the need for a national bourgeois-democratic stage in which problems of a socialist nature are not raised (v. for example, Zhukov’s article in the 26 August Pravda).
 
4) Question of the Peaceful and Parliamentary Road to Socialism
The theses of the XXth Congress of the CP of the USSR on the parliamentary and peaceful road to socialism are the object of open and quite closely argued polemics by the Chinese, who do not forget to emphasize the need to destroy the bourgeois state apparatus and to replace it by the dictatorship of the proletariat. May we be permitted to have recourse for once to a rather long quotation? —
We must take part in parliamentary struggles [The Red Flag writes], but without any illusions about the bourgeois parliamentary system. Why? Because, as long as the state machine of the bourgeois warlords and bureaucrats remains unchanged, parliament will always be an ornament of the bourgeois dictatorship, even if the party of the working class possesses a parliamentary majority or becomes the strongest party in the parliament. As long as the state machine exists, the bourgeoisie is completely in a position, at any moment, according to its own interests, either to dissolve parliament if necessary, or to use various open or hidden tricks to transform a workers’ party which is the strongest party in parliament into a minority or to obtain the result that it has fewer seats even if it has received more votes than previously. That is why it is hard to imagine that in a bourgeois dictatorship there can be changes as a result of votes in parliament and it is equally hard to imagine that it be possible for the proletariat to adopt in parliament measures likely to ensure the peaceful passing over to socialism as a result of having obtained a certain number of votes. Several experiences in capitalist countries over a long period have completely proved this, and the experiences undergone in different countries of Europe and Asia after the Second World War furnish new proofs.
The criticism of the “new roads” of the XXth Congress and of the different Communist Parties could not be clearer.
 
The Communes and the “Uninterrupted Revolution”
The polemics about all the foregoing themes has been for several months pretty open and generally known. But divergences have arisen and are arising also in other fields, whether political or ideological, even if the indications are not equally clear and if the reservations and criticisms are most often only implicit.
This concerns first of all the very question of the communes. The communes are considered by the Chinese – and quite rightly, too – as a turn of capital importance in their orientation of economic and social policy, especially in the rural regions. Despite the rectifications that have been repeatedly made, and despite the obvious vacillations in connection with extending them to the cities, the Chinese continue to present the communes as an original contribution of the Chinese Revolution, as the specific form whereby the revolution moves up to a higher stage. The communes are supposed to have the effect either of giving a coup de grace to capitalist survivals or of ensuring a spectacular increase in production – not to speak of the revolution of capital importance that they seem to have introduced into social life by freeing women from the yoke and routine of the family.
Now the Soviet Communists have – to say the least – maintained an absolutely discreet silence on this matter – which quite clearly means an implicit criticism. Otherwise, how would the Soviet Communists not have celebrated in their own way, if they entirely approved of it, an experiment that is so significant and so important – they who never miss a single opportunity to hail the advances and successes of brother parties? But it is sure that the Soviets privately formulated criticisms, and certain reflections thereof can be found in the official texts. They repeatedly stressed, for example, that it is not possible to pass from capitalism directly to communism, that a whole stage of building socialism is necessary. This theme was put forward by Khrushchev himself in his report to the XXIst Congress. [5]
It is highly probable that the Soviets had brought forward objections to certain theorizations of the Chinese – especially in the second half of 1956 – according to which the communes might be an anticipation of communist society [6] (more recently it was stated that they are the best form of transition between socialism and communism). [7] A noted economist, Strumilin, it seems, engaged in rather curious polemics: he set up a chart of what the commune of the future would really be, while criticizing certain possible future aspects of a commune that was not without analogy with the present communes of the Chinese, and specifying in any case that it was not a “problem of today or even of tomorrow.” [8]
But it is not this aspect of the problem that most worries the Soviet leaders, who, good empiricists that they are, would not worry excessively about theorizations that were really hazardous. What is more important for them is that the communes represent roughly an experiment in development in the rural regions that is quite different from both the Stalinist experiment of the ’30s and from the present Khrushchev experiment.
It is well known that the post-Stalinists, in order to overcome the critical situation created by Stalinist practice in the Soviet villages, made a very broad turn by adopting an agricultural policy that might be defined, so to speak, as a new form of NEP under radically changed objective conditions. It is above all in staking on the stimulation of the individual interest of the peasant – which Stalinist collectivization had stifled without being, obviously, in a position to replace it by historically superior stimuli – that Khrushchev sketched out the new course in this field. The post-Stalinist reform in certain people’s democracies (around the period 1956–58) had a basically analogous meaning, despite great differences in objective conditions from the viewpoint both of economics and of social structure. If Khrushchev’s course corresponds to the attempt to use for productive purposes whatever remained of backwardness, of still looking to the past, in the Soviet peasantry – which was to a certain degree possible without major risks in view of the country’s general structure and the extraordinary upsurge in industrialization – the Chinese course involves the attempt to overcome, already at this stage, the particularism and egotism which constitute the heavy historic burden of the peasants.
It is therefore comprehensible that Khrushchev should be worried when faced by so original an experiment that is being developed on a gigantic scale. If the Chinese communes attain their goal by really achieving the successes counted on by those who are promoting them, then there will be a striking confirmation of the fact that there is a way of socialist construction in the rural regions which is not the Soviet way, which is not that of Khrushchev. The practical example might be able to cause polemics to rebound also in the Soviet Union, where people will not fail to wonder about the possibility of following different paths, closer to those of China, which might no doubt be followed more easily in view of the higher level of the Soviet economy. It is obvious that in the people’s democracies as well a whole series of problems might be raised from a different angle. [9]
We may say in passing, for it is not the subject of this article, that it is the general orientation of the development of the Chinese economy for now several years, and not only the more recent orientation in the rural regions, which is marked by an undeniable originality. Actually the Chinese leaders seem to have taken into account most attentively the more negative experiences of the Stalinist line of the ’30s, and – whether in the development of agriculture, or in the proportionality that they try to establish among the different branches of industry, or in the care they show for certain minimum needs of consumers – they are following a course which, due allowances being made, is closer to the conceptions of the Left Opposition than to those of Stalin and his theoreticians.
The capital importance of this differentiation, of the existence of a “Chinese way,” appears in its full scope if one reflects on the influence that the Chinese example will be able to exert on the new countries, especially the underdeveloped ones, who will in the future tackle the construction of socialism. Although it is for the moment a matter only of an eventuality, it must all the more worry the Soviet leaders that some country in a quite specific and almost unique transitional stage [10] has already demonstrated in practice its interest in the communes.
On the more theoretical level, in the last months and especially in the polemical articles accompanying the celebration of the anniversary of Lenin’s birth, the Chinese Communists further insisted on their thesis about the uninterrupted revolution, on their very special interpretation of the formula “democratic dictatorship of the people,” and on the criticism of the orientation of the Chinese leadership during the second revolution (1925–27). [11]
Lenin [they wrote among other things] applied and brilliantly developed the Marxist idea of the uninterrupted revolution, considering it a basic principle of orientation of the proletarian revolution. Lenin explained that the proletariat must win the leadership of the bourgeois-democratic revolution and, without interruption, transform the bourgeois-democratic revolution into socialist revolution. Lenin later specified that the socialist revolution is not the final goal, and that it is necessary to advance still further to accomplish the transition to the higher level of communism. [...] Lenin specified: “The first [the democratic revolution] grows into the second [the socialist revolution]. The second solves in passing all the problems of the first. The struggle, the struggle alone, decides to what extent the second succeeds in rising higher than the first.” [Report of Lu Tin 1960]
It is true that a little further on, with an offhand eclecticism, the writer of those lines praises his party for having combined the “doctrine of the uninterrupted revolution and the development of the revolution by stages.” But this concerns an attempt at an a posteriori justification of past policy on which our magazine has already had the opportunity of expressing its opinion [12], and whose reach is inevitably limited by the Chinese themselves, when, for example, they give the famous formula of the democratic dictatorship of the people an interpretation to which Trotsky would have had no major objection (“The people’s democratic dictatorship is set up by the working class and based on the alliance of the workers and peasants” – editorial of the People’s Newspaper, quoted in a 22 April 1960 Hsinhua despatch), or when they criticize the party’s 1925–27 course in the following terms:
During this period the opportunism of Chen Du-Siu showed that the policy of the united front of the Communist Party with the Kuomintang was an abandonment of the principles and positions which those of a communist party ought to be. He advocated that the Communist Party must be reduced in principle to the level of the Kuomintang. The result was the defeat of the revolution. [The Red Flag, quoted in a 21 April 1960 Hsinhua despatch]
Let us leave aside the unfortunate Chen Du-Siu, who was only applying the line imposed by Stalin and his Comintern (as the Chinese know very well, even if they still find it to their interest to take shelter behind so petty a falsification): the criticism that The Red Flag formulates here more than 30 years later is exactly the same that the Left Opposition formulated against Stalin at the time itself. It cannot be said that Max Reimann is wrong if he says that this business of the uninterrupted revolution reminds him of the themes of Trotsky’s polemics [13], any more than it can be denied that Khrushchev and his companions have good reason to be worried about what is going on in their powerful and dynamic ally!
 
The Khrushchevist Basic Perspective and Chinese Criticism
In an article appearing in Pravda on August 12th, the Soviet leader Ponomarev endeavored to specify the scope of the problems raised in the current polemics by explaining that the divergences on the war and coexistence in reality implied divergences also on a whole series of basic problems, both tactical and strategic. It could nowise be disputed that these assertions are well-founded. [14]
Indeed, the polemics between the Soviets and the Chinese, in spite of fundamentally ridiculous reserves and often Byzantine argumentation, have such burning interest because they bring into discussion the essential questions of the orientation of the communist movement at this stage. These questions can be reduced to the following three:

How is the historical transition from capitalism to socialism going to be carried out, or, by what ways will imperialism be totally defeated and will socialism be victorious on the world scale?
 
What is the role of the colonial revolution and what must be the dynamic of development of this revolution at the present stage?
 
By what ways will the proletariat of the capitalist countries be able to beat its adversary and conquer power?

Now the prospect of the Khrushchevist Soviet leadership is absolutely clear. In the new stage that we have entered as a consequence of the crisis of imperialism and the economic upsurge of the USSR and the other workers’ states, imperialism can be blocked in its race toward war. The nature of the new weapons is another factor operating in the same direction, given the fact that the interest of the peoples is more than ever to avoid a war of catastrophic consequences and that the old ruling classes, or at least a part of them, would not be able to decide to trigger off a war likely to be transformed into suicide. [15] The historic conflict between capitalism and socialism, therefore, must and can be solved in coexistence, above all on the basis of economic competition between the USSR and the USA.
It would be simplistic to say that Khrushchev and his supporters are completely unaware of the contribution of the struggle of the colonial peoples and the proletariat of the capitalist countries. But the main line of their policy consists in “competitive” coexistence: the economic development of the USSR is the essential factor which in the last analysis will decide everything, while the other factors are assigned, upon the whole, the role of creating, if possible, more favorable conditions for the victory of the USSR in the economic race. [16]
With this outlook, it is understandable that Khrushchev and the Khrushchevists are staking on every possibility of collaboration, were it only with sectors of capitalism, and that they are heading towards a prolonged collaboration with the colonial or semi-colonial bourgeoisies despite the reactionary role that these can play against the mass movement in their respective countries. This picture is completed by the perspective of the “peaceful,” and indeed “parliamentary,” road to socialism that the masses of the capitalist countries ought to accept as a consequence of Khrushchevist coexistence. Furthermore, if by this path they do not succeed in fact in winning power and the Communist Parties can at most only limit the action of their adversaries, that will not be so important, for the outcome of the game will be decided on another level.
The Chinese Communists visibly do not believe in such prospects, at least when they are pushed to their logical conclusions. They do not exclude coexistence between different social regimes, but they visibly do not accept the idea that the final defeat of imperialism could be ensured without war, without very violent clashes on the world scale. For them, war is not inevitable, but it seems to be still the more probable term of the alternative; in any case, the only way to avoid it is, if not wholly to destroy capitalism, to paralyze it more and more by the revolutionary struggles of the masses. For this purpose, the re-enforcement of the FLN’ s struggle is for them more important than attempts at agreement with Gaullist France, and the struggle of the Japanese people is more important than Khrushchev’s trip to the United States.
Of course, they do not express themselves with full clarity; but basically, while still taking military force into account, and especially that of the USSR, they insist more on the contribution of the revolutionary rise of the masses than on developments in purely military relationships, and, while still constantly emphasizing the importance of the economic upsurge of the workers’ states, they are not staking on a final victory emerging above all from this factor [17] – which means, in other words, that their viewpoint and that of the Soviet leaders are very different, if not squarely opposed.
That finds its logical translation in a different attitude toward the colonial revolution and concerning the roads to socialism in the capitalist countries. If primary importance is attributed to mass movements, they cannot be sacrificed to any extent to the needs of coexistence, and one is inevitably led to enter into conflict, especially with the national bourgeoisies of certain countries, who at this stage are playing the must harmful role by becoming more and more the means of transmitting imperialist – even “new-style” imperialist – influence in the colonial movement. On the other hand, no interest can be felt in joining in the idle chatter about the “peaceful and parliamentary” road – which is an illusory prospect that can only demobilize the masses, and one is on the contrary driven to recall certain first truths of the Marxist-Leninist concept of the state, which experiences, even the most recent ones, have regularly confirmed.
We have insisted here on what is the real bedrock of all these polemics between the Chinese and Soviet Communists, on what its essential logic is, even by partly putting aside the desire and consciousness of each. The arguments they bring forward are, in the last analysis, less important, especially if account is taken of the often indirect and veiled form imposed both by their bureaucratic education and by their interest in avoiding a political activization of the rank-and-file members.
Still, there is no doubt that the Chinese fashion of arguing is very discutable. Their documents often have a scholastic and schematic form, and quotation of texts often replaces analyses and demonstrations, which usually remain very summary. Their polemics against the revisionists, which aim sometimes at the Jugoslavs and sometimes at Khrushchev himself, are blended with crude deformations and even falsifications. Especially toward the Jugoslavs they adopt a terminology that very closely recalls the classic Stalinist style (with the traditional epithets of “traitors,” “agents of imperialism,” etc.) and do not even renounce virulent campaigns on the occasion of quite insignificant incidents that are very probably wholly invented. [18] And lastly we have already emphasized in our magazine that they have not failed to revive Stalin’s lamentable idea about the possibility of a new inter-imperialist world war in our time. [19]
It is all these sides of the Chinese polemics that have led some people to present the Chinese position as being Stalinist or neo-Stalinist. Let us leave aside here all that may be Stalinist – or more generally, bureaucratic – in the Chinese experience at this stage. If we consider the current discussion, we should be able to speak of “Stalinism” only by limiting ourselves to certain formal and superficial aspects and by arbitrarily exaggerating them. At bottom, the Chinese orientation is very far from Stalinism, just as it would be very difficult, for that matter, to find serious analogies with Stalinism concerning the economic line and the general policy in the rural regions – not to speak of all the ideological subjects to which we have already drawn our readers’ attention.
But though such an analogy would be entirely false, the limits of the Chinese arguments remain, as perplexity also remains about their attitude concerning the eventual consequences of a nuclear war. In our opinion, they underestimate this problem in too offhand a way (it would suffice to read what the scientists who are expert in this matter are writing, to be convinced of this), thus laying themselves wide open to the criticism of their adversaries. Furthermore, among the very members of the Communist Parties it is exactly that attitude that most often arouses objections and reservations which the Khrushchevist bureaucrats hasten to exploit.
What is more, Mao and his collaborators seem seriously to minimize the forces left to imperialism when they present it as just “a paper tiger.” It is exactly because, after all, imperialism still retains imposing forces and resources that the danger of a new war remains very concrete. [20]
The Soviet Communists and their supporters argue with more subtlety and nuances, and apparently more dialectically: Khrushchev personally contributes his peasant common sense which is not unattractive to more naive and less experienced people. Besides the argument of the destruction that a nuclear war would cause, they seem to state questions correctly when they say that it is necessary to take new situations into account and that it is absurd and childish to limit oneself to repeating what Lenin said fifty or Marx a hundred years ago, or when they attack possibly sectarian attitudes that deny the role of colonial movements under bourgeois or petty-bourgeois leadership.
But, in the first place, it is not a matter of proclaiming methodological criteria which are after all obvious; it is a matter of applying them concretely and showing how and to what degree certain of Lenin’s conceptions should in fact be corrected. On this field, the Soviets remain very discreet and brief: just as, at the XXth Congress, they formulated in a few hasty sentences an allegedly new conception of the conquest of power, so now, without any really scientific organic analysis, they revise the conceptions on war and sketch out a prospect of passing over to socialism on a world scale within the limits of peaceful coexistence.
“Only madmen can wish for such a catastrophe as war – which Lenin termed barbarous and monstrous – to make socialism triumph in the world,” Kommunist wrote. [21] This seems correct, but it is, basically, very vulgar. It is one thing to observe that after the two world wars the revolution made historic advances and to put forward the hypothesis that still more decisive advances would be possible during or after a third world war, and quite another thing to wish for that war. The question is not to know whether war is desk able or not but whether the objective trends of present-day world reality are or are not driving toward war. The question is not to know whether it would be well to pass over to socialism in the world on the basis of predominantly economic competition, but whether that is concretely possible. Granted, war is barbarous and monstrous, and even absurd, if you will; but it is the internal logic of capitalism, which engenders all sorts of barbarisms and monstrosities, of which war is only one.
Let us take another example. What Zhukov writes in part of his article in the 28 August Pravda on the progressive role that can be played in the anti-imperialist struggle in the colonies even by bourgeoisies or petty bourgeoisies is roughly correct. But the problems raised at the present stage are concrete in a different way. To what extent are certain national bourgeoisies still progressive, to what degree can the movement in certain countries go forward without directly attacking the new bourgeois or petty-bourgeois dominant strata? That is the problem that is raised in countries as important as India or Indonesia, and in practice the attitude of the Chinese toward Nehru and Sukarno is different from the Soviet attitude. Zhukov gives no clear theoretical or practical reply, but in fact he sticks to the prospect of a compromise with the colonial bourgeoisies, even the most conservative, and he accepts that the workers’ movement in the colonial countries be relegated for a whole period to an essentially subordinate role.
If the Sino-Soviet polemics are examined from this viewpoint, reducing the formal sides to proper proportions, it is clear that the Chinese are providing answers that correspond much more to the objective necessities of the revolutionary process and to the needs and aspirations of the masses.
 
The Intervention of Kardelj
The Jugoslav Communists also wanted to make their voice heard in the debate that is developing. Once again it was Edvard Kardelj who was entrusted with the task of organically expressing their conceptions.
Let us say right away that the Jugoslavs have confirmed the fact that, on questions like war and the prospects of the international workers’ movement, they have a dangerously opportunist orientation. If the Kardelj who theorizes about the contradictions within a society in transition or about the organisms of proletarian democracy or about the agrarian question in Jugoslavia is capable of expressing very valuable ideas, the Kardelj who discusses “socialism and war” gets lost in a painful confusion by giving us in substance a worsened variant of the Khrushchev theses. [22]
Kardelj insists on the idea that war is not just simply a natural consequence of imperialism, but that it involves a question of correlation of forces: in that, he joins up with the Soviet point of view. He goes, however, very far in the polemics by putting forward a whole series of often absolutely astonishing arguments. [23]
It suffices for us to point out, for example, that, starting out from the fact that the Second World War was carried on by two coalitions, one capitalist and the other composed of capitalist countries and a workers’ state, he draws the conclusion that in that war coexistence surmounted a particularly difficult test; that he attributes to Marx and Engels the idea that a socialist country can start an unjust war; that he asserts that the same Marx and Engels were for peace and against war especially because they thought that war hinders the development of progressive processes inside different countries. Even more than the Soviets, he polemicizes against the Chinese as if they thought that the revolution must triumph thanks to the bayonets of the workers’ states; and he even presents us with the scarecrow of a “socialist Bonapartism” which would lead the workers’ states to take the initiative in starting a war of invasion. It is obvious that it is easy for him to knock down these straw-men that he himself has conjured up. [24] Naturally the reference to Trotsky is not lacking – no fear – as it is not lacking in the polemics of the Khrushchevists [25]: Trotsky is set up in opposition to Lenin and his outlook is once again deformed. Thus an old falsification is picked up again for the purpose of arbitrary polemics against adversaries who are the victims of new polemics, for neither Trotsky nor the Chinese were ever supporters of “socialist Bonapartism,” of the theory that the revolution could be exported with the aid of Red Armies.
To the basic problems of the revolutionary process at the present stage, Kardelj gives a response similar to that of Khrushchev, whose opportunist orientation he even accentuates. He thinks that the passing over to socialism will be accomplished in coexistence, and that outside said coexistence there is no salvation. He accuses the Chinese of sectarianism in the question of the colonial countries, and it is well known that he does not share their ideas about the question of the “new” roads to socialism. On this occasion, he picks up in passing the Jugoslav themes about state capitalism accomplishing a progressive task in the economic development of backward countries, always forgetting that the question of the objective premises of socialism which are posed within capitalism itself is entirely different both from the question of the political (class) leadership of any process and from the question of knowing how the proletariat will be able to replace the old ruling class in power.
But for Kardelj what seems to be most important is to know whether the revolution and socialism should be built by factors that operate inside each country or by violent pressure from outside. The answer is obviously clear: without the part played by factors inside each country, there cannot be genuine socialism; but, in the context of the world situation as is exists in the second half of the XXth century, it is more than ever absurd to be unaware that the internal factors are powerfully conditioned by the reality of the world process, in view of the fact that the struggle between capitalism and socialism is developing not only inside each country but also on the world arena. Anyone who would like to forget this factual element would automatically put himself outside reality, and, in the best of hypotheses, he would be replacing a scientific analysis of the real situation and trends by an illusory and sterile wishful thinking.
 
Why Do They Do It?
It remains only to point out the specific factors that influence each side, pushing it toward its respective orientation.
The Soviet leaders, in the new objective conditions, can no longer hold to a rigidly inspired conception of a maintenance of the status quo, as was the case in the Stalinist era. But they still want to do everything possible to avoid all imbalances and clashes, by simultaneously limiting the dynamic revolutionary intervention of the masses. Their instinct of self-preservation as a privileged social stratum causes them always to understand that the more the revolutionary process spreads throughout the world, the less chance they have of keeping power and escaping the settlement of accounts with the Soviet masses, who hope to suppress all privileges in the workers’ state and to build a genuine proletarian democracy.
The prospect of peaceful coexistence, of economic competition, corresponds very well to these needs of the bureaucracy, which hopes in this way to avoid more and more powerful waves of the revolution and keep the maximum possible control over the development of the world situation, thanks also to the upsurge of the Soviet economy. Khrushchev is all the more engaged in this line in that he likes to present himself to the Russian people, so sorely tried by a still recent war, as the one who will be able to ensure the détente and prevent them from being hurled into a new conflict. There is no doubt that his political fate is tied up with the results both of his internal reformism and of his line of foreign policy centred entirely around peaceful coexistence.
Their specific situation leads the Jugoslay leaders in the same direction. They cannot count on a real solidarity from the other workers’ states, and for ten years have tried to hold out by exploiting a situation of equilibrium, even though it be precarious, created in Europe, and by trying to obtain advantages from both sides. They think that their situation in a war would become untenable, and that they run the risk of being quickly swept away by the storm. That is why they are such ardent supporters of coexistence, which they tried to theorize about even before Khrushchev. The fact that for years they were subjected to virulent attacks and threats by Stalin, who, if the international situation had permitted, would have chosen the path of direct violence to get rid of them, explains – without, however, justifying – how they can express their pseudo-theory of possible unjust wars even by socialist countries.
To interpret the attitude of the Chinese, the hypothesis has been put forward that they are inclined to bring on a military conflict because they consider it would have a favorable outcome, especially for themselves, who, starting out from a more backward level, would, among other things, have less to risk. We are not at all in agreement with such an interpretation, for in reality, from all points of view, they have no interest in deliberately provoking such a course of events. Even leaving aside the fact that basically a world-wide overthrow would be, for the survival of the Chinese bureaucracy, no less a danger than it would be for the Soviet bureaucracy, the Chinese more than anyone else can justly consider that time is working on their side. In a showdown at the present stage, they would find themselves, from the economic and military viewpoint, in a very clear state of inferiority: no doubt, proportions will be considerably changed, if not reversed, in 10 or 15 years.
Their present orientation is rather the following: they think that – since the crisis of imperialism is getting more and more grave and the East Wind is prevailing over the West Wind – this favorable situation must be exploited, something that the Khrushchev policy, according to them, would not do.
It is certain that their exclusion from summit diplomacy and their being kept out of the UNO have played a certain role: they cannot accept being represented by intermediaries; they want in reality to play a more and more important part – and one proportionate to the real force of China – both an world politics and in the leadership of the anti-imperialist front. In particular they want to play a growing part not only in Asia but also in Africa and Latin America; and though the Soviet bureaucracy can at a given moment sketch out a compromise, even if only a precarious one, with Washington, in regard to Africa or South America, for example, this possibility absolutely does not exist for the Chinese, and their line consequently can be only one of very clear opposition both to the old colonialisms and to the new Yankee colonizers. Furthermore, for a whole series of evident objective conditions or special circumstances, they are in a much better position than the Soviets to establish liaisons with the colonial movements, and they have run into conflict with certain colonial bourgeoisies whose real nature and purposes they have in practice been driven to unmask. They can record all the more success in this field in that they seem in spite of everything to have learned well the lesson of certain past experiences. [26] In the final analysis, therefore, the present positions of the Chinese are the reflection of a profound reality, namely, the reality of the Asian revolution and of the colonial revolution in general, a revolution which cannot accept an attitude that is not that of an all-out struggle, which cannot be satisfied by idle talk about “coexistence” or “irreversible” détente. For their part, the Chinese are also under the attack and constant threat of imperialism, which, among other things, still controls a part of their territory. Somehow or other they see, in the steady spread of revolutionary movements in the world, the concrete way to remove the threat and to improve their conditions, including on the economic plane.
In the debate developing in the Communist Parties, in the workers’ movement in general, and even in the colonial peoples’ movements [27], which is destined to exert a very serious influence, especially among Communist cadres and militants, whom it will aid to political maturity, it has been stated on several sides that the Chinese have adopted the positions of the Trotskyists. We need not recall here our basic criticism of the Chinese leadership, which, in spite of all, remains bureaucratic and has a bureaucratic conception of the problems of the transition to socialism, beginning by that of the structure of the workers’ state. We have already expressed elsewhere our reservations about their successive theorizations. Still, it is after all clear that at the present stage certain of the conceptions that have traditionally characterized our movement are penetrating on a large scale, by the intermediary of the Chinese, into the Communist movement, even though in a rather approximate and deformed way.
The dialectics of the historical process in its dynamics is such that even certain bureaucratic leaderships are obliged more and more openly to raise for themselves problems of the development of the revolution, and thus to draw near the conceptions of revolutionary Marxism.
22 September 1960

Notes
1. In his January 1960 speech, Khrushchev explained more specifically what the ultra-warmongering and what the “pacifist” tendencies are in the United States. For the two speeches quoted, we rely on the Italian text, distributed by the press bureau of the Soviet Embassy in Rome.
2. See a 27 May 1960 despatch of the Hsinhua News Agency. For the Chinese texts summarized in this article, see the same source, and particularly its despatches of the following days: 1, 21, 22, 23 April: 27 May; 7, 8, 16 June.
3. The Polish delegate to the Council of the World Federation of Trade Unions explained that the war might destroy the earth in a few minutes (v. Hsinhua News Agency despatch of 9 June 1960). Togliatti, for his part, wondered out loud in the following terms:
Let us suppose concretely that there should fall on our country 20 or 30 nuclear devices capable of causing causing total destruction and a desert; what socialism would one be able to build under those conditions? [v. I’Unità , 24 July 1960]
4. Khrushchev returned to this theme in his speech to the Bucharest Congress, while, more recently, the Kommunist wrote that a war would mean the destruction of entire countries and that “the masses cannot pay no matter what price” to aid the transition to socialism (v. l’Unità , 1 September 1960).
5. Khrushchev at the XXIst Congress denied the existence of divergences between the Soviets and the Chinese by saying: “You will not be able to see divergences any more than anyone can see his own ears.” Obviously the divergences existed, despite the fact that at that moment they could not be seen, exactly in the same way that ears exist even if nobody can see his own.
6. Cfr article in our Autumn 1958 issue.
7. See 19 August Hsinhua despatch.
8. v. Le Monde, 30 August 1960, where Li Fu-Chen is quoted as saying: “The best form of transition from collective property to the property of the whole people, the best form of transition from capitalism to socialism.”
9. It seems that in certain people’s democracies (Bulgaria and East Germany) tendencies rather inclined to follow the path of the communes did in fact tend to appear at a given moment.
10. We allude to Sekou Toure’s Guinea.
11. On the “uninterrupted revolution,” see our Autumn 1958 and Spring 1960 issues.
12. Especially in the Spring 1960 issue already mentioned.
13. According to certain news information originating with Neues Deutschland, Reimann seems to have expressed himself in such terms during a speech in the Central Committee of the SED in August 1960.
14. Unfortunately we were unable to procure the integral text of this article, but on the basis of press reports its general significance appears quite clear.
15. v. Khrushchev’s speech at the Bucharest Congress, and a report of Togliatti, an ardent supporter of the Khrushchevist theses, to the CC of the Italian CP in July (L’Unità , 24 July 1960).
16. This emerges also rather clearly from a key-article in Kommunist, no. 10, 1960.
17. For example, an article about Cuba in The Red Flag insists much more on the possibility of defending the island against an imperialist attack by a mobilization of the masses than on possible outside aid (v. 1 September 1960 Hsinhua despatch).
18. See, in the Hsinhua News Agency despatches and releases for the first ten days of September, their support of the polemics of the Albanians against an alleged attack by “Jugoslav bandits.”
19. See, among other references, page 7 of the 1 April 1960 Hsinhua News Agency bulletin.
20. In obvious polemics with the Chinese, the Soviets wrote that “imperialism is still, unfortunately, a powerful wild beast.” [See already quoted article of Kommunist.] In a more recent (October) article, The Red Flag has tapered off the expression “paper tiger” by specifying that this expression has a strategic value but does not exclude on the tactical level a real temporary strength on the part of imperialism.
21. Quoted by Le Monde, 19 September 1960.
22. The Soviets are somewhat embarrassed by this fact and have tried to differentiate themselves, either by criticizing certain extreme assertions of Kardelj or by resorting to real sophism (see the reply to Kardelj published in Pravda, 2 September 1960).
23. We are relying especial on the ample summary published by Avanti!, organ the Italian Socialists, who, being very close to the Jugoslavs on these questions, may be considered to reproduce their arguments quite faithfully.
24. He does so, what is more, with passably vulgar arguments.
25. See for example Khrushchev’s 31 October 1959 speech and the already mentioned report of Togliatti in the article in Kommunist, no. 10, 1960.
26. The agreement of China with Guinea provides that Chinese specialists in Guinea may not have a higher standard of living than the Guinean citizens who are carrying out the same tasks. Evidently the Chinese have not forgotten the Jugoslav polemics against the Soviets on this subject, and in practice it is the Jugoslav point of view that they accept.
27. It seems that the most direct support for certain Chinese positions is given by Sekou Touré.
 






We are happy to bring our readers the following article penned by a well-known Italian Marxist in tribute to the great bourgeois philosopher, Benedetto Croce, who died last November. Croce was born in 1866, and his influence on Italian thought, and to a certain extent on its politics, spread over many decades, two world wars and the era of Mussolini’s fascism. He became a Senator in 1910, and was Minister of Education in 1920 and 1921. Croce’s chief work, which embodies his philosophic system, The Philosophy of the Spirit appeared in four parts from 1902 to 1917. Livio Maitan’s brief article gives a Marxist critique of Croce’s work and highlights the significance of his long career. – Ed.



The philosophy of Benedetto Croce made its appearance at the beginning of our century, and came to full flower in the first decade of the century. It arose at a time when the Italian bourgeoisie, having achieved the unification of the country, had reached the stage of maturity. It was the philosophy of this bourgeois class, the expression of the post-Risorgimento [1] Italian world. Due to Croce’s genius, there was repeated for our bourgeoisie what had already occurred for the German bourgeoisie in the preceding century: it developed a superiority in the ideological sphere in contrast with its political and economic inferiority. In truth, with the exception of Hegel’s philosophy, no bourgeoisie in the 19th and 20th centuries has enjoyed a more systematic and lucid philosophical expression than the one achieved by the Italian bourgeoisie, thanks to Benedetto Croce.
Croce’s philosophy, to use an image already employed for Hegel’s philosophy, is characterized by its conservative solemnity. It adequately expresses the conception of a world where the bourgeoisie has conquered power without a really revolutionary struggle, by means of a series of compromises at a time when the bourgeoisie on a world scale had already lost its revolutionary elan. Anyone who comes in contact with this philosophy cannot avoid the sensation of a critique that conserves, not of a critique that destroys. It consists not of the genius which penetrates to the bottom of things and dissects them, but of a comprehensive intelligence which embraces and rearranges things without negating them, contenting itself with curbing usurpations and exaggerations in the distribution of the parts.
As the natural interpreter of the laity of a class which had to fight the Vatican and the clericals to fulfill its historic function, Croce was particularly Italy’s ideologue of the Giolitti epoch. [2] As Gramsci [3] wrote in his authoritative essay Croce fulfilled an indispensable conservative role by joining the intellectuals of southern Italy to the Agrarian Bloc and thus, on a different plane, accomplishing the same function fulfilled by reformist transformism. After the inevitable foibles of youth, Croce adopted a “tolerant” attitude to the workers’ movement in its reformist form, because, despite his hostility to socialism, he could assign a function to it within the framework of his general conceptions. But he hardened, became bitter and blind to the workers’ movement after 1917 when it no longer appeared to him as an element of ferment but as an element of destruction of the system.
More able than any in interpreting the general interests of his class, and of interpreting them from the standpoint of a certain perspective, Croce was the “clerical” type who does not betray. The genuine intellectual has the function, not of placing himself above the battle or of being a righteous, acolyte, but of keeping intact the vision of universal interests – from the point of view of a given society – and of never yielding to opportunist or expedient temptations which can come into conflict with or endanger permanent values. In this sense, in the best sense of the word, Croce fully deserves the designation of having been a genuine intellectual.
 
Croce and Fascism
Official eulogies to the contrary notwithstanding, the victory of fascism marked the definitive crisis in Croce’s ideology which had already been impaired by the shattering blows of the First World War and of the immediate postwar period.
Despite his waverings, Croce’s attitude in practice toward fascism was not incoherent. So long as fascism appeared to him as an anti-Bolshevik force, as the most effective one against the revolutionary spirit of the workers, he granted it his support. Afterward, his opposition to fascism was determined by the fascist critique of the liberal state. For long years, however, this did not involve militant opposition, but merely the re-evocation of a world suppressed by fascism. It was only when fascism approached disaster, and When the more responsible groupings of the bourgeoisie decided to change horses that Croce assumed a more important position in the anti-fascist resistance movement.
If he could witness the fall of fascism with the honors of a victor, the fascist phenomenon marked the inevitable disintegration of that political and social equilibrium on which he had built his philosophic system. Fascism represents the epoch of the. most regressive attitude of the bourgeoisie which has come to the twilight of its system, condemned to negate the very values of which it had once been the passionate prophet. As the expression of a mature society, Croce could not become the ideologue of new degenerated forms. He was incapable of this as much because of the universality through which he understood and expressed the interests of his class, because of his genuine intellectual integrity, as well as because of his antipathy to the plebeian character of fascism which he hated with the hatred a big bourgeois has for petty-bourgeois demagogy.
 
The Philosopher in His Twilight
By an irony of history, which Hegel calls the “cunning of reason” (List der Vernunft), Croce, precisely in the twilight of his philosophy, involuntarily performed a function whose import he did not understand. In the crisis opened by the First World War the major talent of the Italian workers’ movement was being shaped in philosophic thought through Croce’s works, and should rightfully have accorded him the greatest recognition, when Croce turned upon this movement as its most implacable critic. Twenty years later, at the close of Gramsci’s life, it was once again Croce’s philosophy which penetrated like a ray of light through the wall of fascism, exercising an irresistible attraction on a new generation of intellectuals who, with Croce’s ideology as a starting point, were to follow the same philosophical and political road Gramsci had traveled before them. Just as the founders of dialectical materialism had been molded in Hegel’s philosophy, so Marxist thought in Italy – with hardly an exception – was refined in Croce’s ideology. And that was all the more plausible, as Gramsci remarked, since Croce was an idealist who had learned something from Marxism.
Groce, who played no political role at the high point of his life, became a politician proper in a period when his philosophy was already exhausted. In truth, Croce’s role was more than ever finished. Croce had no longer any role to play in a society where an equilibrium could not be reestablished, in which Giolittism had no longer any room for development, in which the laity itself had been stifled by the return of clerical reaction, in which all the regressive forces have been revived for a last effort on behalf of the bourgeois order. It was impossible to reknit the Agrarian Bloc. His serene ideological function was at an end. He could not even make a valuable contribution for his class in an occasional polemic against communism, so painfully myopic was the character of his last writings.
Priests, liberals and Marxists met at Croce’s funeral: a symbol of the multiplicity of viewpoints from which Croce can be judged! The priests, without abandoning their livid sectarianism, intended by their gesture to give recognition to the clearly conservative function of this “spiritualist” whom they hope to have liquidated in order to become his cultural successor. The liberals wept the most sincerely and sadly. Sons of the same world and nourished on the same ideology, they wept over the parsing of the last vestige of glory of their class, because the void created by his departure enhances the sinking feeling of a society which is crumbling to ruin.
As for the Marxists, they wanted to render homage to their unwitting teacher. They wanted to recognize an objective historic value which devolves equally on the representatives of antagonistic historic interests. Arid it will be the anti-Crocean disciples of Croce who will build the new house which will produce a new, more universal culture than that of Croce because it is the expression of more universal interests.
 
Footnotes
1. Risorgimento: resurrection, a term that designates the movement for Italian unification in the 19th Century.
2. Outstanding Italian bourgeois politician between 1900 and 1920; a liberal who united the anti-clerical petty bourgeoisie of southern Italy with the bourgeoisie of the north.
3. Together with Bordiga, Gramsci was the most outstanding personality of the Italian Socialist Left, later one of the founders of the Italian CP. He died after years of imprisonment in fascist jails.







Our two-monthly publication schedule is responsible for a certain delay in the appearance of this study by Livio Maitan, foremost Italian Trotskyist. However, the reader will quickly see that the analysis of last May’s municipal elections is only the springboard for a searching examination of parties, class forces and particularly of the resurgence of neo-fascism in Italy. – Ed.





The following facts emerged from a scrutiny of the municipal electoral returns in Italy one year ago: (a) The Christian Democratic Party, which is headed by Alcide de Gasperi, prime minister since 1945, recorded serious losses; (b) the workers’ parties (Communist Party and Pietro Nenni’s Socialist Party, PSI) maintained, and in some cases strengthened their positions; the right wing parties (the National Monarchist Party, PNM, and especially the fascists of the Italian Social Movement, MSI) rolled up considerable gains.
  
The Extreme Right Gains
This year’s electoral round reaffirmed the same phenomena in an even more pronounced way. To a large degree the Catholic party (used interchangeably with Christian Democrats) continues to lose ground; the workers’ parties strengthened their positions still further; the right (coalition of monarchists and neo-fascists) won a striking victory both in the realm of votes (e.g. in Naples the monarchist vote rose from 77,000 in 1948 to 147,000 in 1952. In Rome the fascist vote rose from 49,000 in 1948 to 142,000 in 1952) and in the realm of control of city governments (Naples, Bari and all the cities in Campania province are now controlled by the right parties).
Even a casual analysis of the election results leads to the following conclusions:

The gains of the workers’ parties were made partly at the expense of the PSDI (right wing Social Democratic Party of Italy headed by Saragat and Romita) and of the PRI (Republican Party of Italy headed by Minister of Defense Pacciardi) who were allied to the Catholic party and to the liberals, and in part at the expense of the government party.
The votes lost by the Catholics, some two-thirds of them went to the right, namely in certain cases to the liberals but especially to the monarchists and the neo-fascists who, in some cities, also gained at the expense of the liberals.

However a correct evaluation of the election should take into account the fact that the elections occurred in the central and southern part of the peninsula which have their own particular social and political formation. In the South – especially in certain areas – the right has always held very strong positions while the Catholic party was far from enjoying the political monopoly for its class as was the case in the North. It should also not be forgotten that the present wave of neo-fascism was preceded five or six years ago by what was called the Common Man movement which, while not being fascist, nevertheless attracted those who had good reason to yearn for Mussolini’s dictatorship. On the other hand, an advance of the workers’ parties was possible, even in considerable proportions, because they had not attained in the past nor even today their maximum electoral possibilities.
It is not our intention to deny the significance of the recent electoral campaign as a sharpening and polarization of class forces. But it would be erroneous to consider that the relationship of forces existing in the Center and the South are duplicated in the industrial areas of the North. As was demonstrated there in the 1951 elections, the right has not yet attained as high levels in the North as in the Center or the South.
 
II
Let us now review the contending forces and their policy in the electoral campaign.
  
The Neo-Fascist Party
The extreme aggressiveness of the right constitutes the new factor in these elections. The MSI champions as openly as is possible – without running afoul the law against justifying fascism – the fascism of 1922-1943 as well as the puppet regime of the so-called Italian Social Republic proclaimed in the North during the Nazi occupation. Despite its purely verbal declarations of loyalty to democratic principles, it is unquestionable that under the MSI banner are gathered those who long for the two Mussolini decades; those who see in the rebirth of fascism the only hope for a revival of the so-called “national and traditional forces”; the youth who do not know fascism from their own experience and who have fallen into the trap of those who exalt Mussolini’s Italy as the Italy of “grandeur,” “heroism” and of “the Roman virtues.” Consequently, the social composition of the MSI and its electoral following could only be clearly, preponderantly petty bourgeois.
And the reason for its success is lodged in the discontent of broad petty bourgeois groupings with the government which is joined to the irrational anti-communist hatred which is proper to the petty bourgeoisie under certain conditions and leads to the formation of pro-fascist currents. Up to now, with few exceptions, it can be said that the MSI has no roots among the proletariat (its trade union influence remains insignificant). But one has only to attend a neo-fascist meeting to understand that they already have a base (at least in certain cities) in lumpen-proletarian circles.
Through a vigorous electoral campaign, sparked by ample material resources, whose aim was much more that of political agitation and propaganda than competition for votes for control of city halls, the neo-fascists succeeded in organizing well-attended meetings in the big cities. Participating in these meetings were people in a fighting mood, a not negligible part of whom were ready to engage in physical combat with the police or members of the workers’ parties.
The orators held forth on the glory of the fatherland, or the merciless struggle against the communists as traitors to the country, to religion, civilization, etc. They bitterly denounced the Catholic government accusing it of having been and of remaining in fact the ally of communism and of Stalin against “the national forces.” Attaining the most uncanny likeness to the empty and blustering Mussolini-style rhetoric, and sometimes going so far as open threats not only against the workers’ parties but also against the bourgeois parties and politicians, these speeches created waves of enthusiasm in the crowds particularly when the demagogues reiterated certain arguments or metaphors.
 
The Monarchist Riffraff
Its ally although in some places it was spawned in the same strata. As against the plebian character of the MSI, the PNM is aristocratic and conservative in character. It is true that in certain cities (notably, Naples) the PNM is followed by ordinary people who certainly do not stem from the reactionary aristocracy. We are speaking here of the “popolini,” namely the non-proletarian groupings among the people who live by their wits, from parasitic occupations, charity and rackets, as for example, the “bassi” of Naples where the vigorous breath of industrial civilization has not yet penetrated.
The lumpens of the MSI have been won over by plebian demagogy, by rhetoric about the fatherland, honor and the glorious past of the Eternal City. The “popolini” who follow the monarchists and who are stirred at the memory of the king’s little children or the misfortunes of the queen who is described as nearly blind, respond to paternalistic appeals in which, since the time of the Lazzaroni, they have placed their only hope of securing the means of livelihood.
The MSI masses are impelled by myths; the monarchist masses are tied to the fortunes of the royalty through the intermediary of the wealthy (such as the shipowner Lauro of Naples) who buy votes and applause and who distribute one shoe before the election and the other after it, on condition of victory.
The PNM campaign places this party to the right of the government which is reproached for passivity toward the communists and its so-called repressive attitude to the “national forces” of the MSI. It goes without saying that the idea that was kept before the masses in these meetings was that of a possible return of the monarch from his Portuguese exile on the heels of a resounding victory either now or after the next general elections.
The most innocuous campaign was that carried on by the minor parties of the democratic center. That applies especially to the republicans and the social democrats who revived their ruminations on the polarization of forces, on the dangers of a civil war which only a victory of people – like themselves – who are both progressive and faithful to liberty and to the defense of the country, could avert. However two considerations concerning these two parties should not be lost sight of.
First, the alliance with the Catholic party even on the scale of municipal elections was not achieved without difficulties: the protests of the Roman Republican Federation have their counterpart in the presentation of independent (but unsuccessful) social democratic candidates in certain localities. Secondly, especially in the second half of the electoral campaign, the attitude of petty-bourgeois circles influenced by these parties was characterized by a vigorous reaction, to the boldness of the fascists – a symptom which should not be underestimated as limited to the following of the republicans and the social democrats.
 
De Gasperi and the Catholics
The campaign of the government party presented – and for good cause – the most complex and contradictory aspects. At the outset, the almost exclusive preoccupation of the Catholics was to prevent a success of the workers’ parties: notably they wanted “to spare at any price the City of the Holy Father the shame of a Bolshevik mayor.” Toward this end, the right wing Catholic circles especially, controlled by Catholic Action in which Luigi Gedda plays the principal role, began a pathetic campaign. Gedda proposed for this purpose the unification of all non-communist forces and threatened to ban members of Catholic Action from appearing as candidates of the Christian Democrats if they did not conclude an alliance or a fusion with the monarchist and neo-fascist right.
The resistance of the de Gasperi wing of the Christian Democratic party created serious difficulties until the emergence almost at the last moment of Don Sturzo’s proposal. Don Sturzo, an old priest, founder of the Peoples’ Party (Catholic) after the first world war, exiled by fascism, very influential even today in the Christian Democratic Party, proposed the formation of a single list composed of representative personalities of the different political tendencies but more by virtue of their competence and their qualities than in their capacity as representatives of the parties. Officially adopted by the Catholic leadership, the proposal remained inoperative due to the opposition of the social democrats and the republicans, to the pretensions of the right, and due to the continued resistance of sectors of the Christian Democrats.
The development of the electoral campaign effected changes in the propaganda line of the Catholic party. From exclusive anti-communism, they gradually shifted to a sharpening of propaganda against the right. (This does not apply to the propaganda of what was called “the Civic Committees,” an electoral organization managed by Gedda). This is to be explained either as a reaction to the demagogic attacks from the right – especially the neo-fascists – or as a victory of the “centrist” wing of the Christian Democrats or as the consequence of the following consideration: as the votes of the left were largely crystallized, it was necessary to hammer at the right in order to avoid a larger defection in that direction.
The speech with which de Gasperi concluded his campaign at Rome provided striking evidence of what the anti-fascist motives of Christian Democrat electoral propaganda were at the close of the campaign. Said de Gasperi: “These people (the neo-fascists) will not come to power; we will not consent to it.”
 
The Stalinist-Made “People’s Bloc”
The battle of the workers’ parties (PCI and Nenni’s SP) was organized in varied forms but on the basis of a single general policy. This policy can be summarized in a few words as follows: the need to wrest influence over petty bourgeois strata and even over broad strata of the bourgeoisie itself away from the governmental party and into the fold of the opposition. That is what they call the policy of alliances, which, according to the Stalinists of the peninsula, is the touchstone of the political clairvoyance of Togliatti and his colleagues (and they add, somewhat discretely, of his superiority over their counterparts in France).
In the electoral field, this policy is conveyed, as we have said, in varied forms. In certain localities – notably in small cities and villages – there was a “people’s bloc,” or a unified socialist-communist list with some places left open for independent candidates (these blocs, were often grotesquely camouflaged under the most extravagant denominations – even under the name of the Holy Father!).
Secondly, there were independent socialist and communist lists or the unified list of the people’s bloc allied to lists composed of so-called independent democratic personalities. These for the most part consisted of political relics who were washed up with their own class and were taking their last political fling as Stalinist fellow travellers. The head of the list at Naples was Arturo Labriola, one-time revolutionary syndicalist, later an odious renegade from the workers’ movement. The Number One man in Palermo was an old reprobate, compromised with fascism, who, after having unsuccessfully offered his collaboration to the liberals and the neo-fascists, joined the Stalinists and presented a parallel list under the label of “Frederick II of Swabia”! (In general, these lists made a mediocre showing although the Stalinists often called upon their following to cast their votes for them.)
The third form of struggle adopted by the socialist-Stalinists, to the supreme delight of the bureaucrats, was concretized in Rome where the old reactionary, Francisco Nitti, and others of his stripe (liberals, monarchists, former deputies of Common Man) presented a list entitled “Capitol” in which 40 independents were interspersed with 20 Nennists and 20 Stalinists. Although the real relationship of forces obviously favored the Stalinists, they had to agree to serious restrictions on their propaganda.
The second phase of Catholic propaganda directed against the neo-fascists found, its counterpart in Nenni’s campaign. Although veiled, it consisted of real offers of the SP leader to de Gasperi in about the following language: “You will not be able to continue to govern all alone. If you want to avoid capitulation to the right, collaborate with us. The SP in particular can constitute a democratic rampart against the onslaught of fascism.” We will return to this question later.
The gains made by the workers’ parties does not justify the conclusion that their policy was, on the whole, correct. It must not be forgotten that the overwhelming majority of left votes are proletarians who vote for their parties at the present juncture regardless of their policy. But so far as the petty bourgeois masses are concerned, it cannot be said that the workers’ parties profited greatly from the Catholic crisis. It is true some 20,000-30,000 former Christian Democratic electors voted for the Nitti list, but on the other side some 150,000 went to the right.
The specific orientation of the petty bourgeoisie is extremely important in determining a policy toward them. It was evident, especially in Rome, that there was a petty bourgeois shift away from the Catholic party but it was a shift especially to the MSI. These are people who are against the government and have vague feelings of hostility to the regime. If they follow the MSI, that means that they are no longer moved by Christian-liberal aims. It is therefore futile to hope to win them by presenting the workers’ parties as radical-democratic parties who propose to make Rome “a democratic and modern city.” On the contrary, the petty bourgeois layers, turning away from the Catholics, can only be attracted on the basis of class agitation and principled revolutionary propaganda and can thus keep them from taking the road to pro-fascism.
 
III
The results of the elections at the end of May emphasize and accentuate the crisis of bourgeois leadership in Italy. The disintegration of the government party and of its allies in “the democratic center” is becoming more manifest and more decisive: all the more since the specific weight of Catholic or liberal votes is not comparable to that of the communists or neo-fascists which are qualitatively superior as militant votes.
 
Italian Capitalism’s Dilemma
Two fundamental problems are now posed to the Italian bourgeoisie:

To discover a political formula, which assures a greater political stability to the regime by rallying dynamic forces around it;
On the electoral plane, with the 1953 general elections in view, to set up an effective electoral front which can win a sufficiently large majority.

Up to now, the responsible bourgeois groupings have not decided the question and in actuality remain in an impasse. In effect, if the Christian Democratic disintegration is undeniable and if it is doubtful that the center can assure a new victory in 1953 by keeping the same platform as in 1948, a serious alternative leadership has not yet stepped to the front. For the moment, the MSI and the PNM do not provide sufficient guarantees, and the most representative organs of the industrialists have not withheld their attacks against them, especially the neo-fascists.
This attitude results from several factors. Above all, so far as the monarchists are concerned, they have not the slightest base in the North and there is no possibility that they can gain one in the near future. Besides, the monarchists, by posing the question of the return of the king, may very well create a constitutional complication which the responsible bourgeois correctly deems to be untimely.
 
Neo-Fascists Still Unacceptable
So far as the MSI is concerned – and this is really the heart of the problem – a first difficulty consists in its too openly fascist character which justifies the fear that an MSI push may call up a violent reaction from the proletarian masses and even an unfavorable response from certain petty bourgeois layers. (This fear is legitimate. There are people in Rome who voted for the left candidates in reaction to the clamorous demonstrations of the MSI).
Another factor, which in the last analysis threatens to become decisive, is the attitude of the American rulers. Up to now the State Department has remained hostile to the MSI for about the same reason it has been hostile to the de Gaullist RPF in France and for other reasons which can be easily understood. As long as this attitude remains, the chances of the MSI becoming the new leadership of the Italian bourgeoisie will be greatly handicapped.
If to all this is added the fact that in the present situation of world capitalism, which survives thanks to the support and under the control of Yankee imperialism, a nationalist ideology such as is propagated by the MSI does not correspond with the reality. Its difficulties in making headway among the broadest layers, who were its natural milieu in the past, is also increased. This consequently serves to explain the hesitation of the Italian bourgeoisie, which has not yet decided to turn its back on de Gasperi, and for a second time confide its fate to the plebeian reactionaries of fascism.
 
IV
That Italy is moving toward a sharpening of social and political conflicts and toward a polarization of the contending forces could have been deduced from an analysis of the situation in the country considered within the larger framework of the world situation. This has now been confirmed beyond the shadow of a doubt by the results of the recent elections. There is no need to elaborate the question.
What, however, is of greater interest to us, is the specific forms this process may take and how the bourgeoisie will eventually resolve its crisis of political leadership in more than a passing manner.
The Catholic party confronts contradictory needs. Concerning its more general action – i.e., an action which seeks to create a new situation and new relationship of forces – it has not much latitude before the 1953 elections. In this sphere, the cards are dealt: and the government cannot reasonably hope to achieve what it has failed to achieve in the last four years. But if real possibilities did exist, the Christian Democrats would have to become involved in a contradictory situation. On the one hand they would have to take “left” measures or pseudo-measures (agrarian reform, social policy, etc.) in order to limit the influence of the workers’ parties. On the other hand. they would have to sharpen the anti-communist repression so as to satisfy one of the most vociferous demands of the right (which they are going to do in any case).
The Catholic party has to assure itself of allies in the electoral field who can broaden the base of a future government. To continue the policy of the “democratic center” – opposed both to the workers’ parties and to the neo-fascists – the Christian Democrats have the possibility of broadening the front by the addition of monarchists or Nennists. But the inclusion of the monarchists (which would automatically exclude the PSI) would create serious difficulties. The monarchists would put a high price on their participation, and an agreement with them would compromise the alliance with the social democrats and the republicans. These leaderships could only accept a union with the monarchists at the cost of a loss of influence in radical petty bourgeois circles.
The possibility of a de Gasperi-Nenni alliance is, in our opinion, improbable. In effect, the response of the Catholics to Nenni was formulated in the terms of an ultimatum, demanding precisely what Nenni cannot concede to openly, at least at the outset. The opinions expressed at the last central committee meeting of the PSI reflect a certain stiffening of the Nennists, and Nenni himself has retreated to a certain degree.
 
An Alliance with the Right
Outside of a continuation of centrist policy, the Catholics have the alternative of an alliance with the right. This eventuality cannot be completely excluded for tomorrow or the day after and certainly, for very good reason, not for the more distant future. But for the moment, this eventuality does not appear very probable. An alliance with the fascists would inevitably entail the rupture of the alliance with the social democrats and the republicans. And there are even sectors of the Christian Democratic Party (which do not fall within the strict scope of Catholic electors) which would not go along in such a policy.
An alliance with the MSI would prove very costly to the Christian Democrats: It would entail the sacrifice of de Gasperi and his colleagues and would cause a deep-going split in the party. That is why we do not believe we are on the eve of such an operation which could only be carried through after the next general election and in the event of a Catholic defeat and a decisive advance for the MSI.
We do not deem probable in the immediate period that the bourgeoisie will opt for an early fascist solution. Naturally the lessons of the past should not be forgotten nor the neo-fascist danger underestimated. In this connection, we will not share responsibility with the Stalinists who minimize the success of the MSI, or even worse, sometimes try to present it in a favorable light as an element of disintegration in the Catholic majority. On the contrary, we believe that anti-MSI agitation is incumbent on the workers’ parties and the trade unions.
  
How Dangerous Is Fascism?
But it is also wrong to believe in the possibility of a mechanical repetition of events. In the last analysis, the experience of thirty years ago will not be without its effects on the attitude of the masses and of the workers’ movement in decisive turning points. It should be added that the MSI – which is the only consistent fascist organization – is not without its weaknesses. Its cadres are poor in type and up to now it does not have a leader of the scope of a Mussolini or a Hitler – and everyone knows the essential role which the anointed leader plays in movements of this kind in releasing the enthusiasm of fanatics.
The MSI still lacks a clear perspective and a precisely drawn policy. That also flows from the fact of its division into ferociously antagonistic tendencies which constitutes another factor of weakness. By and large, these consist of the traditional tendencies, conservative and plebian. Up to now, the problems dividing the party have been the questions of the alliance with the monarchists and the support of the Atlantic Pact, which is fought by the left wing in Il Meridiano.
However, if the industrialists are not at present impelling the MSI toward power, they are nevertheless in one form or another giving it assistance and assigning to it an important function: the organization of anti-working class shock troops which have already been set into motion by the MSI in certain instances. (During the electoral campaign there were violent clashes in Trieste provoked by the neo-fascist “squadracci” creating a disturbance in a working class neighborhood.)
Finally, it should be understood that the process of a move in the direction of fascism on the part of the Italian bourgeoisie could unfold more rapidly if in the months to come there were to be a mass shift of the petty bourgeoisie in the direction of neo-fascism. In face of such an eventuality, and if in addition the MSI emphasized its support of the Atlantic Pact, the responsible bourgeoisie could change their tactic and abandon “democratic reformism.” (During the course of the election campaign, the official speakers of the MSI declared themselves for the Atlantic Pact while attacking de Gasperi and the Americans. Their attitude was confirmed on the occasion of Ridgway’s visit.)
Obviously the attitude of the worker’s parties will play an essential role. A policy based on the unity of the proletarian front, on counteracting the influence of the neo-fascists among the petty bourgeois masses, of vigorously answering the attacks of anti-working class shock troops, of clearly demonstrating to the bourgeoisie that a pro-fascist policy on their part would produce a very vehement reaction from the proletariat – all that would hinder or at least considerably slow down the course toward the fascist state and could even lead to a complete disorientation of the strategy of the ruling class.
If the bourgeoisie is now still hesitating in choosing its road, that is undoubtedly because it is keeping such a possibility in mind.
Rome, June 23, 1952
 






The English translation of Regis Debray’s essay, Revolution in the Revolution? published in the July-August issue of Monthly Review, appeared after the reply by Livio Maitan had been written. However, all quotations from the Debray text were checked to conform with this English version.
As the author of the reply published in this issue observes, news of Debray’s arrest and imprisonment by the Bolivian authorities, had just become known at the time the article was submitted. Since then a worldwide movement of protest has arisen against the attempt on the part of the military dictatorship to railroad Debray to prison, or worse, on trumped-up charges that Debray had “participated in armed action” to overthrow the Barrientos regime.
The Fourth International, its sections, co-thinkers and supporters throughout the world, including the Socialist Workers Party and Young Socialist Alliance in this country, are actively and energetically supporting the movement to free Debray from the clutches of the Bolivian “gorillas.”
The Debray “thesis” has already engendered widespread discussion in the world press. In addition to the specific views expressed on the character and perspective of the revolutionary development in Latin America the Debray essay contains a free-wheeling attack on a number of political tendencies in the world socialist movement. Its controversial character is bound to give rise to sharp polemical exchanges as the stakes involved are no less than the future of mankind both in Latin America and the world at large.
It is unfortunate that Debray is precluded from participating directly in the discussion his essay is bound to evoke. Nor should it be made the excuse to refrain from the polemic. For, as Debray himself points out in his essay, “sacrifice is not apolitical argument and martyrdom does not constitute proof.”



* * *
As I was writing this article, the world press reported Régis Debray’s arrest in Bolivia.
Our movement has associated itself with the campaign of solidarity with Debray who is presently in the hands of the reactionary Bolivian military officers. But our elementary duty of solidarity does not obligate us to leave unanswered the attacks he has leveled against Trotskyism, all the more so in view of the particularly grave nature of the attacks and their aim of discrediting us among the Latin-American vanguard.
* * *
Régis Debray’s book, which was published in Cuba a few months ago, has already engendered polemics in the revolutionary workers movement. This was inevitable, both because of the author’s generalizations, which he maintains are based on the experience of the Cuban revolution, and because of his attacks, most often in highly questionable forms, against the most diverse tendencies. More specifically in regard to the Fourth International, Debray employs methods that are purely Stalinist, ranging from baseless slander to grotesque distortion and outright falsification. [1] These attacks are on such a low level that one is even tempted to make no reply at all.
However, aside from the intrinsic worth of Debray’s essay, it will be read and discussed by broad strata of the Latin-American revolutionary vanguard. Thus it provides a timely occasion to state once again the past and present concepts and positions of the Fourth International with regard to the major problems of the Latin-American revolutionary movement.
The Fourth International, it should be noted here, had already clearly developed its stand on these problems in its first congresses following the war. [2] At a time when the traditional workers parties demonstrated the most complete lack of understanding of phenomena of the greatest import to the development of the mass movement in certain countries and adopted extremely opportunistic schemas, which sometimes put them on the same side as American imperialism and the oligarchies, the Fourth International was able to grasp the social and political content of Peronism and a series of national-revolutionary movements, to stress a living application of Leninism, the necessity to take the revolutionary road in Latin America too, and to affirm that in the historic stage which was opening up, the working-class and peasant masses could be mobilized in a victorious struggle against imperialism. After the victory of the Cuban revolution, some of these ideas became commonly accepted and are no longer debated within the broad Latin-American vanguard. But this was not so fifteen or twenty years ago, and even now there are parties with an unquestionable mass influence which do not accept certain concepts, even if at times, out of opportunism, they sign declarations reaffirming these principles. [3]
Also on the crucial problem of the nature of the Latin-American revolution the Fourth International has always taken the clearest stand. On just this issue, it has been criticized, even recently, by revolutionary leaders like Douglas Bravo. [4] Bravo’s fundamental concern seems to be to avoid overly simplistic and mechanistic conceptions which could result in restricting the forces which can be mobilized in an anti-imperialist struggle.
Let us disregard the criticisms of those who judge the Fourth International’s conceptions on the basis of a few Posadist documents, which in fact often border on a caricature. The only way to begin is by objectively analyzing the problem, regardless of where it leads. Proceeding in this way, we characterized the Latin-American revolution as a revolution which was destined, not by the will of some impatient agitators but by its own logic, its own intrinsic necessity, to become transformed uninterruptedly into a revolution of a socialist nature as it achieved aims corresponding to the interests and aspirations of the masses. Twenty years ago, such a conception could have been considered as either describing a very broad, long-range tendency or as an attempt to impose on the Latin-American reality criteria drawn from the historical experience of other revolutions. But after the Cuban revolution, such an interpretation is no longer possible – in four years time this revolution ran through the complete cycle from revolutionary democratic opposition to the Batista dictatorship to open struggle against American imperialism, expropriation of the indigenous possessing classes, and the establishment of a workers state. [5]
In order to provide a clearer indication of our views, I will summarize at this point what we wrote in connection with the 1965-66 polemics in the Guatemalan movement. [6] We stressed then that these were not abstract quarrels; on the contrary, behind the formulas and even the nuances lay specifically concrete political variants. This was all the more true because the Guatemalan movement had already undergone very important experiences and because inevitably the stand of certain organizations is judged primarily on the basis of their past activity.
Thus, one could not forget the practical significance – during the Arevalo-Arbenz period up to the 1954 aggression – of the line of democratic revolution which involved collaborating with the so-called national bourgeoisie. The PGT [Partido Guatemalteco de Trabajo – the Guatemalan Labor Party, the name taken by the Guatemalan Communist Party], in fact, renounced any independent role, transforming itself into a point of support for the bourgeois reformist government, which at the crucial moment capitulated before the imperialist and indigenous reactionary forces. To this must be added the fact that after 1954 the PGT raised the slogan of restoring “democracy” and that even after a turn toward armed struggle its line remained eclectic, being based also on legal activities. [7]
But the problem of the nature of the revolution becomes most concrete when it comes to determining which social classes are participating in the struggle, which classes are ready to go all the way, and which must actually play the leading role. The Trotskyist movement has never denied a priori that sections of the national bourgeoisie could align themselves with an anti-imperialist struggle; but it has stressed that if the leadership is left up to such elements, the struggle will, in fact, be held back and diverted and will at best end in the establishment of a neocolonialist regime where imperialism would maintain its grip and the masses would be robbed of the fruits of their struggle. That is why it is absolutely necessary to understand what the dynamics of this process must be and to make others understand it, to establish a platform which leaves no room for ambiguity, and to ensure – this is the decisive factor in the last analysis – that the leadership is in the hands of the working class in alliance with the poor peasantry. This in no way means mixing up the beginning of a revolution with its final phase, nor does it mean raising at the outset slogans that can be materialized in reality only as the end result of an entire period of revolutionary struggle, or substituting subjective interpretations or an absurd idealization of the masses for analyses of concrete situations. What is important, let me repeat, is to grasp the permanent character of the revolution, whose profound logic is not only anti-imperialist and anti-feudal but at the same time anti-capitalist; to understand that possible alliances with petty-bourgeois and national-bourgeois forces at certain stages cannot be carried out at the price of surrendering or restricting the leading role of the proletariat and the poor peasantry, that is, those forces which emerge in the social context of economically backward societies as the revolutionary motor power; to realize that the test for every revolutionary leadership is its capacity to raise slogans and organize actions which, at each stage, can impel the anti-capitalist dynamic of the struggle forward, while starting from a mobilization for the goals of democracy and national liberation. [8]
The problem of the nature of the revolution demands our attention all the more since false conceptions in this area have served as the primary ideological vehicle for the opportunism of the Latin-American Communist parties. Indeed, it is precisely the concept of a national democratic revolution involving an alliance with bourgeois capitalist social layers and classes which underlies the rejection of the revolutionary road and guerrilla warfare and is at the core of every eclectic and wavering notion. [9]
To conclude this point, the permanent nature – in the Marxist and Trotskyist sense of the word – of the revolution on the order of the day in Latin America must be proclaimed in the current stage more than ever before, particularly due to the following reasons:

the lesson of Cuba has been assimilated by all those in the vanguard and by a broad sector of the masses;
in no country can the so-called national bourgeoisie take a favorable or even neutral attitude toward movements which by the nature of things cannot help but align themselves with the Cubans against the bloc of US imperialism and the indigenous possessing classes on a continental scale from the very outset;
the struggle at least in a series of countries and for an entire period, will be much more difficult than it was in Cuba; it will exhibit a tendency to cross over the borders of the various states; it cannot be definitively won unless it spreads throughout the continent, a perspective which no national bourgeoisie will accept, even temporarily.
 

The Guerrilla Struggle
For almost ten years now the Fourth International has stressed the importance of guerrilla warfare as a specific form of armed struggle, pointing out at the same time that the poor peasant movement would play a major role for an entire stage of the revolution in the colonial and semi-colonial countries.
Without reviewing our positions in detail, the following will indicate where we stand: In our opinion the discussion in progress within the Latin-American revolutionary movement will be useful and productive insofar as it focuses on analyzing specific situations in certain countries rather than on drawing generalizations which are at once as vague as they are enticing. It is precisely the originality of the Cuban experience – in many respects it took all tendencies in the international workers movement by surprise – which should counsel avoidance of rigid schemas, especially in connection with the concrete forms and stages of the revolutionary process. [10]
However, before turning to the crucial experiences of the most recent years, I would like to indicate briefly some considerations which have been raised on several occasions both by the International and by our Latin-American movement.
No one is unaware of the fact, first of all, that there are countries in Latin America whose social structure has very different features from those of the countries where guerrilla warfare is now developing or has developed in the past. If we look at Argentina or Chile, for example, where a very large percentage of the population is concentrated in the cities and employed in industry and its associated sectors, it seems very unlikely, if not excluded, that a possible rural guerrilla war could play a decisive role. The decisive element will most likely be the revolutionary struggle in the cities, in which not only the working-class masses but also the disinherited plebian masses congregated on the periphery of the great urban concentrations will participate. [11]
In addition, in our opinion, it is clear that no guerrilla movement can achieve lasting success unless it has issued from the broad mass movement or succeeds rather quickly in establishing firm ties with it. We do not mean this as a restatement of the traditional concept of the mass movement gradually maturing until it culminates in armed struggle. We are well aware that any hypothesis of guerrilla warfare is based on the assumption that, in a general sense, a revolutionary, or pre-revolutionary situation exists, or can ripen very quickly in most of the Latin-American countries. We are, broadly, in agreement with such an analysis. But it does not follow that any group of bold militants can effectively begin guerrilla warfare at any time, after having met a minimum of technical requirements. It is in just this respect that the Cuban experience has been arbitrarily and improperly generalized upon. Too often the audacious character of the action of the small group that made the Granma landing – which clearly marked a healthy break with traditionalist and tail-ending concepts – has led people to forget the following essential factors:

the Cuban situation in 1956, not only from the economic and social standpoint but also from the more strictly political standpoint, was such as almost necessarily to impel the adoption of certain methods of struggle and to promote broad support for those who fought arms in hand against a ferocious dictatorship hated by virtually the entire population;
the very small vanguard which began the struggle included in its ranks a man like Fidel who, even aside from his having what proved to be exceptional abilities, was already known as the leader of a national revolutionary current with significant mass influence [12];
despite their very close ties with the Batista regime, the American imperialists did not display such aggressive hostility toward Castro’s movement in 1956-59 as to deprive it of all margin for political maneuver, even in capitalist circles in the United States.

Underestimation of these factors and failure to analyze the real situations in the early years after Fidel Castro’s victory led to outright putschist moves resulting either in the useless loss of the lives of courageous militants or in the unleashing of repressions which cost the working-class and revolutionary movement dearly as a whole. That is why those who want to learn from the past in working out a revolutionary line must draw a balance sheet not only by centering fire against opportunist resistance and right-wing capitulation (which on a broad scale unquestionably represents the main danger) but also by taking into account a series of negative experiences ranging from those in Venezuela in 1962 and in Peru in the same period, to others less well known but not less significant (in Argentina for example). [13]
Finally, our evaluation of the role of the peasantry involves no concession to the idea maintained by some that the urban working class in some colonial countries is itself, in the last analysis, a privileged social layer. Such a concept – aside from its inherently erroneous nature from the standpoint of Marxist analysis – could only result in underestimating the need to mobilize the urban masses in the struggle, which is nevertheless of primary importance for even the survival of guerrilla warfare in the rural areas. [14]
But let us turn to the more specific accusations made against us. According to Debray, the Trotskyists are opposed to guerrilla warfare and are partisans of a strategy of self-defense, which, it is claimed, has also been adopted by a section of the movement in Colombia.
Our attitude toward guerrilla warfare has already been specified in outline and we will return to it further on. As for self-defense, we consider it neither a method to be universally employed nor rejected a priori. There are countries – in Latin America and elsewhere – where self-defense has corresponded, or now corresponds, to a need recognized by sections of the vanguard and where giving it a concrete form has been, or would be, a step forward of major importance. In other cases, however, restricting the struggle to self-defense would inevitably involve defeat and a serious setback for the revolutionary movement.
Leaving aside certain rash parallels or certain aphorisms which are as empty as they are pretentious. [15] Let us take a look at the cases cited to point up the errors and failings of our movement. Aside from a very vague allusion to Brazil and the peasant leagues led by Juliao, he primarily takes up the cases of Guatemala, Peru, and Bolivia. I will not return to the first country. It is sufficient to reaffirm here, to eliminate any possible misunderstanding, that guerrilla struggle must now be the fundamental method in Guatemala and that it must be centrated primarily in the rural areas, where, moreover, the leadership of the revolutionary movement as a whole must normally function. [16]
 
Hugo Blanco and Peru
The Peruvian experience has undoubtedly been one of the most momentous of the past five years, an experience rich and varied, outstanding in the multiplicity of movements, the application of palpably different lines, the temporary successes followed by devastating repressions, and by tragic setbacks. No serious attempt to make generalizations valid for all of Latin America can be undertaken without a detailed and profound analysis of what has occurred in Peru. It goes without saying that such an analysis cannot be attempted here due to limited information at present on some important events and because such an analysis can be worked out only through the joint efforts of our entire Latin-American movement and the Peruvian movement in the first instance.
Regis Debray treats this paramount experience in the most offhand way: two lines on Blanco in the context of a gross falsification, allusions to Luis de la Puente Uceda brought in as part of a polemic against Huberman and Sweezy’s Monthly Review. [17] That’s how you dispose of the most burning questions!
However, to gain even the slightest understanding of Hugo Blanco’s work, one must start from the context in which it was executed and grasp its objective implications in the given conditions. When he began his work among the peasants, Blanco was reacting on the one hand against adventurist and putschist tendencies which had developed within his own organization; and on the other hand, he was breaking with the tradition of a certain kind of urban left, which was, indeed, partly bound to obsolete schemas, partly always ready to discuss new roads but incapable of taking practical steps to establish ties with the peasant masses. Blanco’s experience did not in any way develop in accordance with abstract models but in ever closer association with the real mass movement. Now, after the fact, only a blind man could fail to realize the truly historic importance such work has had in educating the peasant sectors, even aside from the fact that it is still too early to assess the impact on the future of the revolutionary movement made by the Tacna trial and the events which followed it in which Hugo Blanco emerged as a hero of the Peruvian and Latin-American people.
The self-defense concept was in fact maintained in the revolutionary movement in Peru and I had the good fortune to participate personally in intense discussions on this subject. This idea was not conceived in an imitative or artificial way. It was formulated on the basis of the experience of the land occupations and heedful interpretation of the attitudes and aspirations of the peasants who participated in them.
It goes without saying that no one from the outside drove the peasants to occupy the land. This was, in the last analysis, one of the consequences of the new situation which the Cuban revolution created in Latin America. The problem of defense was inevitably posed as soon as the government chose the repressive road and the peasants fell under the bullets of the army and the police. It was the peasants themselves who took this attitude, mulling over ways to defend their gains and to protect their lives. This was how the idea of the need for armed struggle took shape among them.
It was always clear to us that self-defense was only a stage and that once armed struggle became generally accepted it would take other forms and would have to pass through guerrilla warfare probably for a prolonged period. But it was not possible to skip a stage – even a limited one – in the subjective development of the masses. An appeal to the peasants for guerrilla warfare from the outset would very probably have fallen on deaf ears, even in those areas where there was a living movement – at most such an appeal would have been heeded by a few vanguard elements who, in any case, would have risked acting without the understanding of even the social groupings from which they came. The other alternative might have been an armed struggle taking the form of guerrilla warfare from the time when experience demonstrated in practice the impossibility of whining in a direct confrontation with the adversaries and the necessity of creating specialized mobile guerrilla detachments, which while of course representing a very small minority would nonetheless have enjoyed the active support of the overwhelming majority of the rural population in their fight. It is significant, moreover – Blanco himself stressed this fact in one of his letters from prison – that once the Cuzco leader was forced to adopt forms of struggle which could no longer be properly characterized as a tactic of self-defense, he held out much longer, despite all the well-known difficulties, than others, including, we might add, the MIR [Movimiento dela Izquierda Revolucionaria – Movement of the Revolutionary Left] nuclei who nonetheless felt that they were following a much more effective course. The essential reason for this, of course, lay in the fact that Blanco enjoyed very wide support among the peasant population.
We do not know whether in prison Hugo Blanco has drawn an overall balance sheet of his experience or what his present views are on the future perspectives for the Peruvian revolution. Some allusions contained in a letter addressed to the November 1966 student congress seem to indicate that in his eyes the key link is still to organize the peasant movement.
In any case, Blanco has explained in some letters written in prison how he interprets certain aspects of the struggle he led.
In the first place, for those who have imputed reformist tendencies to Blanco (perhaps because he used the organizing of unions as a means and concerned himself also with the most modest needs of the peasants in his region, not overlooking the fact that partial gains could prove valuable in reinforcing the self-confidence of the peasants), the following passage should be noted:
“We have discovered a broad and sure road and we are advancing. Why should we lose our heads now? Those comrades who are in prison must understand that the party cannot mobilize itself in harmony with their weariness at confinement but only in accordance with the needs of the Peruvian people and the possibilities open to them. If there are some who are free and in a hurry and who feel that they are able to be guerrillas, that is magnificent! Let them prove it by devoting themselves to a peasant union, the one in Chumbivilcas for example, coming and going on foot. After that they can talk to us about guerrilla warfare, if they have enough strength left. Doesn’t organizing peasant unions train militants in the nomad life? Doesn’t it give them knowledge of the terrain and the population? And it brings the most important result – the conscious incorporation of the broad masses in the struggle. We must gain as much ground as we can before the armed clash comes in order to be sure of victory.” (Mariscal Gamarra Prison, June 1963)
Here is another very important passage:
“As to the tactics of guerrilla warfare, I am completely in accord that they should be taught to defense committees. These should not be empiric, and in this respect, the vanguard party has a role to play. All knowledge of guerrilla tactics which can be adapted to our militia strategy must be taken advantage of.
“Manco II, for example, who surrounded Cuzco ready to crush it, was abandoned by his troops because the time for planting or harvesting – I don’t remember which – had come for potatoes.
“None of that interferes with guerrilla organization. Some units can be organized to aid the militias. But the fundamental organism for the open struggle in Peru will be the militia of the unions led by the party. Let us take all the advantages of the peculiarities of our situation.
“We will not part with anything, having advanced so much.
“You say, ‘it is astride the campesino movement that the FIR [Frente de la Izquierda Revolucionaria – Revolutionary Left Front, the Peruvian section of the Fourth International] should face the open struggle for power.’ I agree, it was so in Cuba. The difference lies in that they first grabbed the arms and then mounted the horse. We are on the horse but lack the arms. Why get off the horse?” (Hugo Blanco’s Answer to Rosendo, April 7, 1964. See International Socialist Review, Spring 1965, p. 46.)
It is thus clear that Hugo Blanco poses these problems very concretely, in relation to what is happening in the mass movement at a given stage. It was logical, moreover, let me repeat, for him to insist above all on the necessity of linking up with the real movement when putschist tendencies were rife even in the FIR, for him to insist on the necessity of adopting means of struggle which took shape in the course of the experience of these movements, especially the experience of occupying the land. It must not be forgotten either that the fact that Hugo Blanco’s methods ran counter to those of the traditional workers movement was confirmed by the openly hostile attitude of the Communist Party.
I will return later in connection with Bolivia to the question of dual power which holds a central place in Hugo Blanco’s outlook. [18] Here only the elementary point need be noted that dual power is neither a “theory” nor an abstract goal but a real situation which can occur at a given time, as it did in Peru, at least in certain regions, both before and after Hugo Blanco’s arrest. The problem which confronted the Cuzco leader was, therefore, how to take advantage of a given situation. He made some contributions and undertook some real actions. It is on this basis that he must be judged. Or should he be reproached for not disregarding the existing conditions, including the temper and aspirations of the peasants among whom he worked?
This said, we may properly seek the causes of the negative outcome of Blanco’s fight as well as that of de la Puente and Lobatón.
No one can exclude the possibility a priori that errors were committed. In my opinion, on the basis of present information, aside from any possible errors or failings, the basic reason for the setback was that the movement’s success remained limited to a few regions, especially the Cuzco region, while among the working-class elements in the cities the movement never broke out of a rather sterile routinist line of activity. This was reflected, among other things, by the relative isolation of the action led by Blanco, who could count on the aid of only a small organization already hit by severe repressive measures. As for the situation in the cities, a major obstacle was the still quite important influence of the CP, which had in no way rectified its opportunist line, contributing by this, among other things, to the defeat of attempts to rejuvenate the trade-union movement.
I will not analyze here the guerrilla experience of de la Puente Uceda’s MIR. I will state, however, that on the basis of its programmatic statements, the accusations of putschism against the MIR do not seem well founded. Whether or not some lines of action were actually put into practice, as some documents referring to the very first phase of the guerrilla struggle claim, for example, is another matter. It must be stressed in addition that the ELN [Ejercito de Liberación Nacional – National Liberation Army] action, which according to some sources made both more of an effort to apply valid standards for guerrilla warfare and to achieve real ties with the masses, was also unsuccessful. [19]
From the start of de la Puente’s movement, the United Secretariat of the Fourth International, since it did not have the direct information needed to make a precise political evaluation, limited itself to expressing its revolutionary solidarity with the courageous militants who had undertaken the armed struggle. As for the FIR, aside from this or that expression which may perhaps have facilitated hostile interpretations, its basic judgment was that conditions in the mass movement and the MIR’s relationship to it would not permit the action to succeed, that a tragic outcome was inevitable despite the courage and revolutionary intransigence of de la Puente and his companions. I am well aware that the validity of a prediction cannot be ascertained merely by establishing a correlation between it and the actual outcome. However, the FIR’s enemies and critics – who often vie with each other in sectarianism – should recognize that our comrades took a clear stand from the outset and that neither the mass mobilization nor the major social and political crisis which the MIR combatants counted on touching off or fostering by their decision to begin a guerrilla struggle occurred.
For my part, again acknowledging that the question will have to be studied in much greater detail, I am inclined to the view that the defeat of the 1965 movement was not due essentially to false theoretical conceptions, or overall line, but was rooted in an incorrect analysis that led to the belief that the conditions vital to its success existed. These conditions – namely:

a growing movement in the countryside;
real ties between the group undertaking guerrilla warfare and this movement;
active solidarity on the part of the exploited urban layers;
a political crisis so acute as to impel very wide segments of the population into struggle, eliminating those important areas of passivity and apathy which have unfortunately featured the Peruvian situation at crucial stages in the past – did not exist in 1965, nor did any such development occur after the struggle began. An understanding of the situation and the real tendencies at work would have led the MIR either to postpone its move or, at least, to follow other criteria in carrying out the initial action. [20]

New attempts are now being made to prepare the way for new waves. “New figures,” Guevara wrote in his message, “are reorganizing the guerrilla struggle with tenacity and firmness.” We are not able at present to judge the scope of such attempts. But, in any case, the fact cannot be disregarded that defeats have been suffered and that much work – even elementary, prosaic work – is required to prepare the way for a new upsurge of the mass movement, or at least, some of its important sectors. This is all the more true because the Peruvian vanguard has suffered extremely grave losses from murders and arrests, depriving the most advanced organizations and groups in particular of virtually all their most capable leaders, and because the problem of freeing the movement from the pernicious influence of the traditional opportunist organizations is far from resolved, especially in the urban sectors.
It would be absurd to think that all these obstacles could be surmounted through some small groups adopting very general schemas and applying a series of norms (whatever the intrinsic worth of such schemas or norms). I am convinced that the Peruvian reality, which is so complex, so rich, holds surprises in store for us. While there is not the least doubt that the future will definitively sweep away all theory and practice of “a peaceful road,” an alliance with the so-called national bourgeoisie, of revolution “by stages,” etc., at the same time we will see types of revolutionary armed struggle which no one can now predetermine. The essential thing is for the vanguard to note in time changes in the situation and new opportunities. This is not possible through fidelity to fixed schemas but only through continually updated analyses.
 
The Struggle in Bolivia and Venezuela
Debray devotes a little more time to Bolivia than Peru. But, his analyses, characterizations, and observations are not less arbitrary and impressionistic, even though his conclusion that guerrilla warfare is likewise required in Bolivia is fundamentally correct.
The momentous experience of 1952 and the following years is summed up by Debray as follows:
“In 1952 the miners destroyed the oligarchy’s army, established a liberal government, received arms and a semblance of power. The revolution turned bourgeois; the miners gradually severed connections.” (p.33.)
The characterization of the 1952 MNR [Movimiento Nacionalista Revolucionario – National Revolutionary Movement] government as “liberal” is astonishing in itself. It doesn’t hold up either with respect to form or content, in either the European or Latin-American usage of the word. But more important, the 1952 revolution was in reality, as we have pointed out many times, and as all who have followed the political events in Bolivia in the slightest degree know, a revolution led by a revolutionary nationalist movement which at the time enjoyed the support of the overwhelming majority of the workers and peasants. In its first years in power, the MNR was driven by the pressure of the masses which supported it to carry out some important measures of a revolutionary bourgeois-democratic nature, going to the point of nationalizing the mines and inaugurating an agrarian reform, which despite its limitations unquestionably benefited broad segments of the peasantry and dealt a hard blow to the traditionally ultra-reactionary landowning class. This is what explains the attitude of the various sectors of the masses toward the MNR regime and why a relatively long period of bitter experiences and struggles was necessary before the masses came to understand the nature of the MNR, which in the last analysis was conservative and unable to lead the revolution to its logical conclusion, becoming more and more hostile to the workers and entangled in the machinations of imperialism. With regard to the November 1964 military coup, Debray’s explanation is of a superficial, propagandist character. He is ignorant of the fact, or he seems ignorant of it, that there was actually a new upsurge in the mass movement – this time against Paz Estenssoro, who was irretrievably compromised in the eyes of the masses – that the miners won victories in armed clashes, including with the army, and that the officers in fact organized a preventive coup to derail a movement that had already become too dangerous. [21]
It was in this context that a dual power situation again emerged in some areas of Bolivia in the period immediately following the November 1964 events, independently of what the Trotskyists or the other tendencies in the workers movement might have wished or decided. In fact, the problem posed was to determine what the short – and even intermediate – term perspectives were and how to exploit a temporary position of strength. But it would have been absurd to disregard the specific, concrete factors, the mood and will of the miners in the first instance. Besides, what could they have done in the spring of 1965 when Barrientos sought a test of strength? Should they have tried to respond to the steps taken against Lechin with improvised guerrilla actions and attempted to convince the miners that they must not mobilize in a massive strike? In fact, the only possibility of blocking Barrientos was to show him that he would run into a very broad counter-attack. Even if the unions had not proclaimed a strike, the miners would have launched it on their own.
Of course, from the time that Barrientos and his advisors decided to go all the way and unleashed a ferocious repression, the strike was insufficient as a counterblow and it was necessary to formulate a new strategy. We will see directly that our Bolivian comrades by no means lost sight of this necessity and Debray could have ascertained this if he had read their press and their resolutions instead of contenting himself with old anti-Trotskyist clichés. But it would be completely wrong to overlook the fact that the Bolivian situation was in fact marked for a long period by very specific features and that at certain times it was objectively possible to mobilize the masses of miners as well as broad sectors of the peasants in an armed struggle for power without going through a phase of guerrilla warfare as other countries in Latin America have experienced or will experience it. If these opportunities were not taken advantage of, it was because there was no genuine revolutionary leadership capable of uniting the movement on a national scale. [22] It must not be forgotten either, to come up to the most recent years, that a certain cleavage had occurred between the workers and broad sections of the peasantry, which in fact explains why the latter did not take part in the 1964 events, subsequently maintaining a wait-and-see attitude. This is a factor which could not be disregarded without very grave consequences in any possible formulation of a guerrilla strategy and still more in its practical application.
The possibility of adopting an orientation toward guerrilla warfare had already been seriously discussed in Bolivian revolutionary circles in the final period of the Paz Estenssoro regime. Immediately after the military coup, a POR [Partido Obrero Revolucionario – Revolutionary Workers Party, the Trotskyist organization] document set as the party’s number one task the centralization of arms in order to form a proletarian army and provide training and instruction in military tactics. [23] More precise decisions on this matter were taken some months later (March 1965) at a POR plenum. The headline in Lucha Obrera which announced this meeting is significant in itself: “Se reunió en Huanuni Comité Central del POR: aprobó documentos sobre acción armada y guerrillas.” [Central Committee of the POR meets in Huanuni – adopts documents on armed action and guerrillas.] (May 1, 1965, issue)
Further, in July 1965, when the PRIN [Partido Revolucionario de Izquierda Nacionalista – Revolutionary Party of the National Left] and CP trade-union leaders decided at an assembly of the miners to terminate the struggle in the Siglo Veinte region, the Trotskyists favored adopting forms of armed struggle. Indeed, following this assembly, nuclei, including the Trotskyist Cesar Lora, left the urban centers where they had been active previously and tried to organize themselves as guerrilla detachments north of Potosi. Unfortunately, they were detected rather quickly and César Lora himself was murdered by the military on July 29.
Let us also note, finally, that beginning in September of that year other attempts were made to organize guerrilla warfare. Among other things, publications which called for armed struggle specifically in the form of guerrilla warfare were distributed. These explained that it was necessary to link up this struggle with the combat conducted in the mass movement. The content of these publications was given a favorable reception in the Trotskyist press. [24]
It goes without saying that we are ready to discuss in greater detail all the positions taken by the International and the comrades of the POR on the perspectives and roads of the revolution in Bolivia, provided our critics take the trouble to inform themselves of our views and remember that our movement deserves the respect due all those who have fought on unceasingly while suffering the cruelist repression at the hands of the class enemy. [25]
As for Venezuela, the Fourth International gave its support to the guerrilla movement there from the outset. [26] And we did not confine ourselves to this broad, general position, but took clear stands several times on problems which arose.
Thus, we did not neglect to criticize adventurist and putschist tendencies. [27] But as soon as right-wing opportunist tendencies began to take shape, we made our position equally clear.
“We are convinced,” the United Secretariat wrote to the Venezuelan Trotskyists in January 1965, “that profound pessimism flowing from a rather static analysis and from a more or less conscious and avowed acceptance of the idea that any revolutionary development is doomed to failure because it would run up against major resistance from American imperialism is at the root of the present positions of the right wing of the MIR [Movimiento de la Izquierda Revolucionaria – Movement of the Revolutionary Left] and the PCV [Partido Comunista Venezelano – Venezuelan Communist Party].”
And the letter added further on, in pointing to certain weaknesses in the analyses of the left wing:
“The left wing, in practice, grasps the crucial point when it maintains that there must be no liquidation of the guerrilla movement (which in any case, among other things, has surmounted the major difficulties of the first phase of establishing itself.)” [28]
As for the more recent vicissitudes, the Fourth International has taken an absolutely unequivocal stand in favor of Douglas Bravo, and supports in particular the theses expressed by Fidel Castro against the Venezuelan CP in his March 13 speech. This, then, constitutes our position on what is presently one of the major problems of the Latin-American revolutionary struggle. [29]
In conclusion, I can affirm that we are in fundamental agreement with some of the points Debray raises, especially as to the necessity of avoiding ambiguity in the movement’s orientation, of forthrightly deciding the question of where to locate the revolutionary movement’s center, etc. Once it is concluded that guerrilla warfare in the rural areas is the essential road for a given country, it follows logically that the leadership center must be located in the rural areas and that its members must spend most of their time with the detachments of guerrilla fighters. It also seems to us that any new guerrilla movement must study all the facts of the Cuban experience in depth, both in their technical as well as political aspects. It is not a question of establishing absolute norms but of taking into account the existence of a considerable number of common features and of drawing the maximum benefit from a precious acquisition.
 
Once Again on the Revolutionary Party
Debray examines another crucial question confronting the Latin-American fighters, the question of building a party and its role in the revolutionary process. In this connection, one can only agree with him when he finds fault with the experience of the Communist parties (including those groups which adhere to the Chinese line), when he rejects making a fetish of the party so that it assumes a primacy not justified by any real function, when he explains that a revolutionary struggle can begin and develop in countries like those in Latin America even without the prior existence of a party. [30] Nevertheless, I should like to make a few brief observations.
Since 1960 the Fourth International has stressed the fact that a revolutionary leadership was able to emerge in Cuba and play a decisive role in forms which it would have been hard to forecast on the basis of previous historical experience. The rise of the Algerian revolution up until 1963 also favored the conclusion that, under certain given conditions, a leadership could conduct a victorious armed struggle and move toward establishing even a workers state without the existence of a revolutionary party from the beginning or with a party still in a completely embryonic stage. [31]
But can one conclude from this, as Debray seems to do, that this variant holds for all, or almost all, the Latin-American countries? Up until now, no one has demonstrated this on the basis not of broad general analogies but of exact analyses of the real situation and the underlying tendencies which might prevail in the future.
Furthermore, we must not lose sight of a fundamental side. The problem is posed concretely because of the bankruptcy of all the traditional parties, which have proved incapable, and in all likelihood will continue to prove incapable, of leading revolutionary struggles to a victorious conclusion. It is these parties – the Communist parties above all – which have represented, and still represent, a major barrier to the development of an armed struggle and which must therefore either be defeated or outflanked. But if a real revolutionary party existed, or could be created quickly enough in one or another country, it would obviously be a favorable factor of very great importance and would greatly facilitate not only the solution of the paramount problem of linking up those waging the arduous struggle with the broad masses but also expedite the conduct of the armed struggle itself. But while it would be absurd to let the absence of a revolutionary party stand in the way of beginning the armed struggle in a generally ripe situation (if Fidel Castro had accepted such logic, the Cuban revolution would not have taken place), it would be erroneous to consider such a development inevitable everywhere and to forego trying to organize revolutionary parties right now in countries where the armed struggle is not immediately in the offing. It goes without saying that even when the second alternative is taken, this does not mean getting entrapped in more or less classical schemas; the thing is to grasp the key link on each occasion. For example, Hugo Blanco held that the peasant unions might play the role of the revolutionary party in Peru. This conclusion is subject to debate, especially now, some years after Blanco’s experience, but in any case it is not a traditional, “orthodox” concept. [32]
Finally, although the absence of a well-organized party did not halt the victorious course of the revolution in Cuba – for a series of reasons, including the abilities of the leadership group – in other colonial or semicolonial countries this lack has proved at certain times to be a major obstacle. For example, different opinions are possible on the stages of the Algerian revolution, on the role of this or that person, on the characterization of the stage inaugurated by the June 19 coup; but it is indisputable that it was precisely the absence of a genuine revolutionary party which had very negative consequences in the evolution of an otherwise very promising situation.
* * *
Underestimation of the importance of generalizations, above all when they have practical connotations for the revolutionary struggles on the order of the day is not a characteristic of our movement. In this article itself, I have again brought up certain ideas on the nature of the Latin-American revolution, on the necessity of armed struggle, on the role of guerrilla warfare under given conditions, and I have reaffirmed the vital need to extend the struggle on a continental scale, which has rightly become the central theme of all the most advanced currents and of the most prestigious leaders from Che Guevara to Douglas Bravo.
However, careless generalizations based on insufficiently concrete analysis should be guarded against, since by their nature they cannot refute the theses of partisans of opportunist views but may give them openings for their arguments. The danger exists of nourishing endless polemics over generalities, thus permitting those who have an interest in doing so to avoid making clear choices in the here and now. That is why we think that the real positions ought to be verified through analyses, the formulation of perspectives, and practical decisions relating to one or another country in a given context. And on the most urgent problems posed at this stage (in Guatemala, Venezuela, and Bolivia, etc.), I believe our line is absolutely clear.
May 10, 1967
 
Footnotes
1. Debray’s principal falsification lies in confusing the Fourth International with the small sectarian Posadist groups. Aside from this, what should we say of an author who claims to be well informed yet can still write the following, among other things, about our movement: “The same analyses and perspectives serve equally well for Peru and Belgium”? (Revolution in the Revolution? Monthly Review, July–August 1967, p. 39.) He is obviously unfamiliar with what we have written on either Peru or Belgium! It is significant, moreover, that he does not turn to our programmatic documents or reports on activities in order to evaluate our views, but cites an article by Sartre, written fifteen years ago, in which the French philosopher expressed his views on Stalinism and the relationship between Stalinism and Leninism. We do not know to what extent Sartre would be inclined to maintain these ideas today.
2. Attention is called in particular to the document adopted by the Third World Congress. See Fourth International, November–December 1951.
3. I have in mind above all the Chilean Communist Party which shortly after the Tricontinental Congress justly became one of the main targets of Cuban polemics. The stand taken by the Brazilian CP even after the 1964 military coup could also be cited. (See especially the interview with Luis Carlos Prestes published in l’Humanité, January 16, 1967.)
4. Debray’s completely vulgar criticisms in reality deal with Posadist documents. (See Revolution in the Revolution?, p. 37. For Bravo’s criticisms, see Sucesos, No. 1752, pp. 32–33.)
5. In rebuttal to Debray’s slanderous accusation that our movement, which he equates with the reformists (this technique of making an amalgam is not new), made the Cuban revolution a target of attack (p. 41), we call attention to the fact that the International Secretariat of the Fourth International characterized Cuba as a workers state as early as October 1960. We also call attention to the fact that our press, despite its material limitations, has published almost all the basic documents and speeches of the Cuban leaders as well as hundreds of analytical articles favorable to revolutionary Cuba. Anyone can ascertain this for himself.
6. On Luis Turcios’ criticisms of the Posadists, we have already stated that they seemed pertinent and corresponded generally to the criticisms made by the leadership of the Fourth International in its polemics of 1960–62 against Posadas’ positions. (See my article published in World Outlook, March 4, 1966.)
7. See on this subject the articles by J.M. Fortuni, Jose Milla and A. Tuzl published in World Marxist Review, December 1964, and April 1965.
8. Here is an indicative passage from the resolution on the dialectics of the world revolution adopted at our Reunification Congress, June, 1963 (Dynamics of World Revolution Today, International Socialist Review, Fall 1963):
“As in the case of equating the beginning of the colonial revolution (under bourgeois or petty-bourgeois nationalist leadership) with its victorious conclusion under proletarian leadership, any idea that this process will occur automatically or inevitably within a certain time limit necessarily leads to a distorted estimate of the actual relationship of forces and replaces scientific analysis by illusions and wishful thinking. It presupposes that the objective process will solve by itself a task which can only be solved in struggle through the subjective effort of the vanguard; i.e., revolutionary-socialist conquest of the leadership of the mass movement. That this is possible in the very process of the revolution, and in a relatively short time, has been adequately demonstrated in the case of Cuba. That it is not inevitable, and that without it the revolution is certain to suffer serious defeats or be limited at best to inconclusive victories is demonstrated by much in the recent history of other Latin-American countries; for instance, Bolivia, Argentina and Guatemala.”
9. Although Debray raises many correct criticisms of the Latin-American Communist parties, he gives the impression that he believes they in fact observe the norms of democratic centralism and that they, at least in some circumstances, have been too democratic. This means one of two things: Either Debray does not know what real democratic centralism is, or he has lost sight of how the Latin-American CP’s actually function. For our part, we incline to the opinion that if democratic methods had actually been observed, the concepts and views of at least some of the parties concerned would have changed after the Cuban revolution.
10. The Fourth International did not hesitate to draw all the conclusions from the Cuban experience which it considered legitimate.
“From the Cuban experience,” reads the resolution on the nature of the Cuban revolution adopted at the world congress at the end of 1960, “the revolutionary Marxist movement must draw a whole series of political and theoretical lessons of primary importance ... The lessons to be drawn concern in particular the role played by advanced sections of the peasantry in certain specific situations; the importance of guerrilla warfare on a primarily peasant base as a form of anti-capitalist revolution; the role of cadres from the radical petty bourgeoisie; the rapid generalization of a collective experience in the countryside; the organization of militia and the role that a revolutionary army can play in certain exceptional periods, even in economic organization. Most of all, however, the problem posed is that of setting up, training, and tempering a new revolutionary leadership in conditions which are specific but probably not unique.” (See Quatrième Internationale, January-March 1961, p. 74.)
11. See on this the Dynamics of World Revolution Today.
12. Che Guevara himself stressed the importance of this condition in the appendix to his book on guerrilla warfare. (Guerrilla Warfare, Monthly Review Press, 1961, pp. 109ff.)
13. It is in connection with such experiences that our movement has criticized putschist tendencies that have at times appeared among revolutionaries identifying with the Castroite current:
“Their weakness in particular lies in the arbitrary extension of certain specific features of the Cuban process, in the over-estimation of the military-technical aspects to the detriment of the more properly political factors, in the tendency to cut off the activity of very small foci from the vanguard and the development of the mass movement.” (My report to the IEC of the Fourth International, Quatrième Internationale, March 1965.)
See also the criticism of adventuristic tendencies in the political resolution of the world congress at the end of 1965. (International Socialist Review, Spring 1966.) Analogous criticisms were formulated previously by sections of the revolutionary Marxist movement, particularly in Peru and Argentina.
14. There are passages on the corrupting influence of cities on the revolutionaries themselves in Debray’s essay, which over and above a few so-called sociological notes reveal a very questionable kind of revolutionary romanticism. Among other things, the author seems to forget that life in the underground in the cities during periods of terror is by no means more comfortable than participating in the activity of armed detachments in the plains or in the mountains.
15. Note, for example, the following statement made by Debray: “The Indian uprising led by Tupac Amaru II in Peru at the end of the eighteenth century could well have been called self-defense.” (p. 29) Or this equation: “Guerrilla warfare is to peasant uprisings what Marx is to Sorel.” (p. 29)
16. Debray talks about a Latin-American Bureau in Buenos Aires, a section (sic!) of the Fourth International. Thus he refers to the Posadists without explaining in any way that the small Posadist minority has not been in the Fourth International since the end of 1961. Another proof of the unsoundness of his “information” is that, far from grasping the importance of the peasant leagues in Brazil, Posadas entertained a sectarian view toward them, which he carried to the point of attacking the American Trotskyists for publishing an interview with Juliao by Joseph Hansen in The Militant.
17. By his explicit reference to the Latin-American Bureau, Debray intimates that Hugo Blanco was sent to Peru from Argentina on the order of the Posadists to impose an artificial line from the outside. But Blanco had no connections with the Posadists and did not import any line from Argentina applicable to the peasants of Cuzco – every serious Peruvian militant is well aware of this.
18. Blanco wrote in another letter: “The fundamental thing is – do you believe that dual power now exists in the countryside? If you don’t, you will tend toward guerrilla warfare; if you do, toward militia.”
19. Criticisms of the MIR were formulated among others, by S. Conduruna, the editor of Vanguardia Revolucionaria, in a very controversial document (in the Chilean magazine Estrategia, No. 3, April 1966) and by A. Pumaruna in an article which appeared in Partisans, No. 31, July–September 1966. (This article gives completely imaginary information on the Fourth International’s intervention in Peru and on certain decisions of the Peruvian Trotskyists.) The MIR vigorously rejected most of these criticisms.
20. The MIR is said to have been accused in Castroite circles of having tried to create stable zones before the minimum conditons had been fulfilled, giving up the mobility necessary for consolidation and success in the first phases of guerrilla warfare. It is obvious that such an error is all the more catastrophic if the general conditions which have been mentioned are not ripe.
21. The fact that the army showed some symptoms of disintegration was an important element in the October-November events. On the fall of Paz Estenssoro, see the detailed analysis made by the Bolivian Trotskyists, Position of the Bolivian Trotskyists on the Barrientos Regime, World Outlook, Jan. 29, 1965, p. 15.
22. The Trotskyist organization in Bolivia has always had a very important mass influence, but it has never had the support of a nationwide majority of the miners and poor peasants.
23. This is the document already cited, published in World Outlook.
24. These publications appeared under the title Pueblo en Armas [People in Arms]. See indicative passages which were printed in World Outlook October 1, 1965. On the views of the Bolivian Trotskyists, see also the article signed H.G.M. in Lucha Obrera, new series, November–December 1966, p. 15.
25. The Fourth International everywhere greeted the commencement of guerrilla action announced in the month of March 1967. A few weeks before, most of the POR leaders were arrested – together with other activists and leaders of revolutionary organizations – on the charge, made public by Minister Arguedas, of having organized the armed movement. The same charge was made against Hugo Gonzalez Moscoso, the secretary of the POR, who was arrested a few weeks later.
26. This position was ratified in the political resolution of the Reunification Congress (June 1963).
27. See the document cited from the 1963 congress; see also the article Amérique Latine 1962, Quatrieme Internationale, December 1962. Douglas Bravo also examined the Carupano and Puerto Cabello events from a critical point of view. (Sucesos, No. 1751, p. 17.)
28. See also my report published in Quatrième Internationale, March 1965.
29. An article by Miguel Fuente (Perspectiva Mundial, March 27, 1967) explicitly expressed support for Bravo, while countering some of Bravo’s criticisms of Trotskyism. Among other publications holding the Trotskyist point of view, the stand of the Argentinian weekly La Verdad should be noted. It began reprinting the Sucesos report on February 27, and wrote in the introduction, among other things, that “the Venezuelan guerrillas are the vanguard of our revolution.”
30. Let us note, however, that Debray does not point out any of the reasons for the failure of the Latin-American CP’s. He states, “For reasons beyond their control, many Latin American Communist Parties made a false start, 30 or 40 years ago ...” (p. 104.) What is the precise meaning of “reasons beyond their control”?
31. These questions were also discussed in the report on the principal document of the 1963 Reunification Congress (Dynamics of World Revolution Today).
32. One may easily grasp the fact, moreover, that if there had been a revolutionary party able to mobilize broad segments of the populace in support of those engaged in the fight at the time of Hugo Blanco’s experience or that of the MIR, the outcome might have been quite different.
 



The peasant movement of the Cuzco region has been the epicenter of the revolutionary struggle in Peru in recent years and remains of crucial importance despite tangible changes in the economic and social structure in some districts, despite Belaunde’s “reformist” maneuvers, and despite repressive victimization of many of its leaders and cadres.
This peasant movement has now found an intelligent and sensitive chronicler who understands its deep-going causes and who has caught its moving spirit in both faithful and dramatic sketches. There is nothing novel, of course, in a journalist outside the revolutionary movement achieving a better living synthesis of a revolutionary process than authors whose main resources are their political ties and outlook. What others have done for other countries in other circumstances, Hugo Neira has done for the Cuzco movement in Peru. His book Cuzco: Tierre y Muerte [Cuzco: Land and Death] [1] thoroughly merits the immediate success it enjoyed; and it deserves to be translated and circulated, at least among revolutionary circles, in all countries of the world. [2]
In a one-page introduction, Neira succinctly summarizes the background of his trip to Cuzco and his account:
“Subject: In December 1963, the city of Quillabamba was taken by unions carrying out an order to go on strike issued in Cuzco by the Federation in order to win the release of imprisoned union leaders, among them, Hugo Blanco. Because of this, ‘Civic Committees’ were organized in the cities against the trade union league of the Cuzquena federations ... Then I was sent to Cuzco to determine what was going on among the peasants.
“Time: From December 1963 to March 1964. But it can occur again at any time and with greater seriousness.
“Basic Problem: Ownership of the land in the South.
“Departments: Cuzco and Puno.
“Social Situation: Out of 9 million hectares of arable land and natural pastures, 3% of the owners possess 83% of the farm area and 97% of the owners possess 17% of the remaining area.
“Reason for the Conflict: There is no adequate agrarian law and the peasants, organized in unions, oppose the tenant system, demanding ownership of the land.
“Additional: They live in very bad conditions with a daily intake of less than 1,200 calories, comparable to that of a concentration camp. High infant mortality – smallpox, tuberculosis, whooping cough and dysen-tary. Three million exploited peasants at the margin of society.
“Maximum wage: Eight soles [about $0.32] a day.”
 
Land Occupation
Thus the account opens at a phase of the movement marked by a new wave of land occupation. In certain zones at least, the struggle had already reached a climax – it is sufficient to note that the main inspirer and organizer of the peasants, Hugo Blanco, had already been held long months in prison at Arequipa. However, Neira shows us the Cuzco Peasant Federation in all its strength and prestige in action under the leaders who came forward with the arrest of Hugo and continued the struggle. He shows us a movement that has undergone many experiences, that has matured, is capable of struggling in different fields, that has gained real positions, maintaining in some zones at least the embryo of dual power.
He shows us leaders with whom the landlords have had to negotiate humbly at times, leaders who have acquired a style of their own in demonstrations and tests of strength. In other words, he shows us the elemental and irresistible powers of the masses and at the same time the audacity and sagacity of the leaders: all this on the backdrop of the ancient capital of the Inca empire, where the landlords, filled with fright and hate, wanted to avoid any rough and dangerous direct confrontation with the peasants in revolt.
 
A Peasant Demonstration
The book opens with the description of a solemn demonstration of mourning over the death of a trade-union leader killed in a highway accident:
“Since dawn, along all the roads, the copper-colored people had been coming toward Cuzco, ‘center of the world.’ The crowd swelled in narrow Recoleta street, all the way to Tullu-mayo and Tres Cruces. In the midst of this taciturn multitude was the headquarters of the Federacion de Campesinos [Peasant Federation]. Here in a sea of trade-union banners, they were paying their respects before the remains of Emiliano Huamantica ...
“Down through the streets, like a serpent of olden times, the cortege descended, this ancient people stirring from their lethargy to conduct in the sacred city one of the major ceremonies of Cuzco ...
“I set out walking in the midst of this multitude, almost all of them in rags and tatters. They had an air, an obstinate fervor, a visible will to be, to persist despite the misery ... I have never seen such faces – like the blind – resistant and bitter with sorrow ... In the Avenue of the Sun, the funeral procession moved by the thousands. Other thousands watched from the sidewalks ... But those going along the cobblestones were the politicalized Indians or mestizos.”
The young daughters of the bourgeoisie or petty bourgeoisie watched the cortege from above, from the windows of their homes:
“In response to the terrible spectacle at their feet, they showed the same awesome lack of consciousness as the bourgeoisie in the capital in face of powerful demonstrations that, in desperation, could tear their world, their pleasures, their privileges up by the roots.”
 
Politicalized Vanguard
The people participating in the demonstration felt a common emotion – they were united in a common grief. However, the Cuzco movement has a politicalized vanguard that reflects – in a relationship of forces particularly favorable to the revolutionary left – the differentiations in the world workers movement. Neira does not fail to catch this:
“Thunderbolts were hurled at ‘Yankee imperialism,’ ‘the oligarchy and the bosses.’ Today Raul Acosta, in his final days as General Secretary of the PCP [Peruvian Communist party], could be heard and one could feel the desperation or decadency of the old Stalinist guard. His speech was the weakest, the most inappropriate and heavy. This afternoon, Huamantica inspired Raul Acosta. The political career of this Arequipa artisan was already finished – his heavy party machinery could not sustain the pressures of the world crisis of socialism. A few days later, in Lima, a lawyer ... Saturnine Paredes was publicly presented as the General Secretary of Acosta’s party. In Cuzco, then, I heard his political testament. He appealed, almost implored, for unity. That was all. The peasants looked at him, disconcerted ... Who, finally, inherited Huamantica’s place? This would be equivalent to knowing who commanded in Cuzco. No one completely. Those who spoke over his remains dwelt on the differences among Trotskyists, Communists in the party and out of it, Castroists and others. The Trotskyists associated their positions with the prestige of Chaupimayo, the region where Hugo Blanco demonstrated the advantages and also the defects of direct action. Thus when Luis Zarate, from Chaupimayo, spoke that afternoon, there was a rustling among the crowd.”
This big demonstration of mourning was, in the final analysis, nothing but an opening expression of the fundamental situation reigning in that part of Peru:
“Because of the meeting, alarm arose among the hacendados [rich land owners]. This could be seen the following day. They were fear-stricken. From the neighboring valleys men began to arrive whose names were synonomous with wealth, permanent power and haciendas [big land holdings]. They did not pause at the Cathedral or any office. With long strides they went to the Perfectura [the authorities]. Their aim: to demand guarantees. Or, which comes down to the same, to solicit the dispatch of detachments of assault guards to their haciendas threatened by invasions.
“The situation was tense. The Prefect lacked orders to unleash police reprisals. The peasant leaders had thrown into the scales this multitude who had gathered together to say farewell to Huamantica. If they were looking for a sounding board, they had found it. It is difficult to imagine that the owners would remain impassive in face of an indigenous movement that publicly asked for their heads. Surreptitiously, they were arming two armies. One of owners. Another of invaders. It was a crafty way of waging war under a government that was inert or in complicity and which had decided not to take sides. Social war.
“Something had happened much more serious than an earthquake – the ownership of the land was being discussed. One invasion followed another. The peasants did not call them that. They gave them a different name: ‘recuperation of the land’.”
 
Occupation of the Land
Against this general background, Neira describes with vigor the development of the drama in its various aspects – from occupation of the land to more “peaceful” confrontations, which nevertheless disclose the depth of the crisis.
Here is a page on the occupation of the land:
“The invasions are peaceful. A crowd composed of peasants from neighboring localities, invades, almost always at dawn, the fields of a hacienda. But the ranch-house or neighboring home, and the servants of the bosses are left alone. Nothing is further from the character of the indigenous masses than to run wild. To invade, then, is not to sack, steal, burn or rape. It is simply to enter on the prohibited land of the hacienda. From their wooden balconies, the hacendados can see how their holdings change hands. But their lives are safe ...
“They invade when the police are away. For the custodians of the law and order of the owners the game varies between boredom and the terrible. In places where the police wait, nothing happens. But the peasants invade other places. The Federation is more extensive than the steel helmets. There are more union locals than police garrisons ...
“The invaders wait for the authorities to become aware of the deed and to give it a form of lawfulness. The hacienda then has already been invaded. Thousands of peasants have installed themselves in a semicircle. They are an imposing force. More than a political party, they are a people on the march ...”
It is scarcely necessary to state that sometimes these occupations end up in a bloody repression and the authorities, naturally, blame it all on “ Communist agitators.” Neira does not fail to emphasize, as against the official lies, the real logic of the phenomenon.
“It is not true, then, that the peasant masses are inspired by ‘Communist extremists.’ This is the most stupid accusation that can be made and it shows the most serious lack of understanding of the Cuzco events.
“The extremists are the masses themselves. They are tired of waiting. To imagine the opposite is to maintain that the Indian is incapable of thinking. It means believing once again in racial inferiority ... A new human condition is appearing. It is called intransigeance and desperation ... In Cuzco there is no militia; there are assemblies. And in these everyone is both the mass and the command at the same time, governors and governed in this Andean pattern of direct democracy.
“The whole Sunday I scouted around in the provinces and districts surrounding Cuzco. In every village I found assemblies in which people were voting to continue the struggle for the land. In any other place in the Republic, among any other social classes is there more equality in reaching decisions than here? In any other level of our society is there an equal capacity for sacrifice?”
The pressure of the peasant mobilization and the power of the union organization were such that the landlords were compelled to go to the union if they wanted to negotiate an agreement. Sometimes they even had to let the leaders of the Federation decide on their differences with the peasants.
“In Recoleta street there is a house with flimsy green balconies ... It is the headquarters of the powerful Federacion de Campesinos of Cuzco.
“Men and women come here from all corners of the Department. They talk to the leaders in Quechau ...
“And the hacendados themselves go there.
“It is the best way to reach a quick agreement. The peasants won’t budge an inch unless they are told to by their local, affiliated to the Federation ...
 
The Federation
“Because of this the hacendados come to Recoleta. They go to discuss with them. In this way they avoid judges, loss of time, invasions, hostilities, etc. The Federation is the true Ministry of Indigenous Affairs.”
The correspondent of Expreso seeks to understand not only the fundamental significance but also certain specific characteristics of the essentially revolutionary process of which he was a witness. Two short chapters appear to us especially worthy of attention.
In the chapter, The Peasant Enters the Peruvian Scene, he writes:
“We have here an evident fact: the peasant unions are organizing under banners carrying the slogan ‘Land or Death, We Will Win.’ Yes, this is the influence of Cuba, let us then recognize this reality. Is it perhaps a case of better penetration of the Communist party in this region? Not necessarily. Besides, everybody knows what a headache Cuba and the innumerable Castroists – the example of the violent road and guerrilla warfare – are for the bureaucratic Communist cadres of Latin America. We face a genuinely radical phenomenon. We live in a smaller universe. The geographical frontiers are enormous. But the evils of Peruvian society are even more enormous ... And the radio reaches the most remote hamlets. In the cold of the jalca [high Andean tableland] or in the hot, malarial valley bottoms, between loneliness and hunger, the peasants listen.
“‘Land or death.’ Up to now, only death.”
As for the more properly political lineaments of the movement, Neira states in another chapter:
“This peasant movement is bringing together new multitudes. We should not fool ourselves: under the old poncho, in the midst of an apparently traditional or routine scene, these people have learned and consequently have changed. Unionism is a mutation. A spark can set fire to the whole sierra.
“For the moment no party as yet holds a monopoly on this network of realities. The leaders come from various groups. It seems that those with the most weight are from the FIR [Frente de Izquierda Revolucionario – Front of the Revolutionary Left], the MIR [Movimiento de Izquierda Revolucionaria – Movement of the Revolutionary Left], Trotskyist people. But there are also peasant leaders of great capacity linked to the PCP ...
“Whether Valer is a Trotskyist, Sumire a Communist doesn’t interest the peasants much. The peasant brushes these things aside. He only knows that these men are his leaders. As in the Gospel, only deeds count – the revolutionists are the ones who are with them physically in their demands to take the land from the usurpating hacendados ...
“And his allies are only those who speak to him – and in Quechua. Thus the peasants only respect those who understand that the land must be theirs, here and now, without delay ...”
 
Peasant Leaders
Sketches of a number of union and peasant leaders appear in Neira’s pages. Emiliano Huamantica, a Communist who represents “the prudent left,” Saturnine Huilca, “the new Indian,” Manuel Concha Llerena, embodiment of the “fighting spirit” of the Federacion of Convencion, Angel Baca, “the reformist.” Among the Trotskyists, the most outstanding figure is Vladimiro Valer.
“Vladimiro Valer spoke. Like almost all the Cuzqueno leaders, he is very young. A thick mustache, still thicker glasses, the bearing of a serious university student. And he is. But not in an academic way. He has studied the living reality of the peasant, and he discovered a weapon that no custom house can confiscate because it is more in the consciousness of men than in any thing or object – the weapon of union organization. This is what he calls, paying tribute to his brother-in-law Hugo Blanco, the spirit of Chaupimayo ...
“Valer spoke calmly. They had told me that he is a Trotskyist. I asked him and he replied frankly:
“‘Certainly, I am a Trotskyist. Our party is the FIR, and its chairman is Hugo Blanco.’ And he added: ‘What is important for us is that the leadership should be unionist, revolutionary.’
“‘And if it happens to involve members of the Communist party?’ I asked him.
“‘We hold discussions on theory. But the peasant movement is unifying the left.’”
As we have said before, Neira’s report covers a period six to nine months after the arrest of Hugo Blanco. But Hugo Blanco, whose name appears almost everywhere on the walls of the houses in Cuzco, and is even painted on the Inca ruins, astonishing the few American tourists, dominates the scene everywhere as the main inspirer, the genuine leader of the revolutionary peasant movement. The Indians acclaim him in their meetings and are waiting for him to resume his place. In the Cuzco prison, the prisoners told a journalist who was questioning them. “He is our union leader.” “He is the leader of the peasants.”
Here are some more quotations from the book:
“Fought by the right, his image distorted by prestige due to erroneous reports about him being a guerrilla fighter, injured by the silence, if not sabotage, of the traditional, bureaucratic groups of Communism, extolled by the FIR, feared and hated by the unorganized yanaconas [Indians bound to personal service to the landlords] and the hacendados, admired by the union ranks, Hugo Blanco looms over the whole South.
 
Hugo Blanco
“This is the straight truth, without falsification, of what this man, who is a prisoner today in Arequipa, means to the peasant masses ... ‘We owe him everything,’ say the peasants. In fact every change in Convencion and elsewhere in the country, was accelerated due to the danger they saw in the peasants having no hope other than hope in the revolutionary unionism of Blanco.
“Devotion to Blanco is total; they don’t dare bring him to trial. I am referring to the unionized peasants. ‘ He is our chief,’ they say ... And in every peasant’s home there is an empty bed. It’s the one that was waiting hopefully for the leader when he was going around the region organizing or when he was passing during the night, under the stars, fleeing from the police ...
“In the Plaza de Armas in Cuzco, the evening came, dressed in red, flaming. The meeting of the peasants was languishing. The crowd, disciplined, standing, listened, applauded, laughed or yawned.
“Then a student came forward. It could have been Valer or Fausto Cornejo. He took the mike and shouted in Quechua:
“Causachu companero cuna. Hugo Blanco ...
“The crowd awoke and responded with great shouts:
“Causachu, causachu, causachu.
“Long live! Long live! Long live!
“I saw this repeated throughout the South. No other name arouses greater fervor among the men in striped ponchos who speak the euphonious Quechua. The shadow of Hugo Blanco was present at all the interviews I conducted in the South.
“I am not exaggerating: the unity of this agrarian movement that has no limits, like an immense ocean, whether in ideology or comportment, which can just as well turn peaceful and co-operative as explode in blood and gunfire, has, nevertheless, a name that unites the people of the mountains and the valleys, of the hacienda and the community – Hugo Blanco ...
“The peasant hasn’t forgotten and he is waiting. The persecution, the anemia and troubles suffered by Blanco have converted him, perhaps more than his political theories, into a man whom the South will not forget.”
During the period covered by Neira and immediately after, the police repression came down violently on the Cuzco movement and on its main leaders. Almost all of them were imprisoned or deported. When I visited Cuzco at the end of November, its frightful prison still held almost two hundred peasant leaders of the region, including some forty Trotskyists. And of course Blanco, along with Molina, Cartolin and Huallpa – all Trotskyists – were still held in Arequipa. This massive repression created grave difficulties for the Federation and inspired terror throughout the region.
Nevertheless, the government and the landlords cannot delude themselves. The movement described by Neira in his magnificent account has profound roots and has already attained such a level of consciousness and organization that any “success” for the repression will prove quite ephemeral.
 
Footnotes
1. Problemas de Hoy, Lima. 1964. Available in Spanish only.
2. Hugo Neira was correspondent of the Lima Expreso, and part of the book consists of his articles. The first two editions, although rather sumptuous with their evocative photographs, were quickly sold out. A more popular new edition was issued in mid November.






Livio Maitan is a correspondent for World Outlook, a news service in Paris and of Quatrième Internationale, official organ of the United Secretariat of the Fourth International. He has recently concluded a extensive tour of Latin America.





LA PAZ, Nov. 20 – The commentaries in the world press on the events of recent weeks in Bolivia have played up a number of contradictory themes, talking about a victory of the gorillas [reactionary officer caste], of “Nasserite” tendencies in the army, of conflicts between the miners, the students and the peasant militia, of defeats suffered by the miners, etc. As for the Bolivian press, it speaks of a revolucion restauradora [restorative revolution] and there has been a flowering of publications, resolutions, communiques, declarations of positions. Bolivia is undoubtedly enjoying a period of “democratic liberties” which has few precedents in the history of the country and one quickly becomes aware of the relief everybody feels at being able to go home without finding the police there, without feeling that they are being followed, or that they must think twice before voicing their opinions in public.
However, it would be a serious mistake to go by surface appearances and pass things off by drawing an analogy with other situations in Latin-American countries in the past (despite the actual existence of certain analogies). In reality the process under way is specific and new for Bolivia itself.
It is necessary first of all to cite the essential facts (all the more so since the major press services gave very partial and tendentious reports).
 
Opposition to the MNR
The erosion of the MNR [Movimiento Nacionalista Revolucionario], headed by Victor Paz Estenssoro, had been going on for some years. Last year it reached an extreme degree with the December events, the split with Juan Lechin, and the foundation of the PRIN [Partido Revolucionario de Izquierda Nacionalista]. (The MNR had already suffered a split to the right under the leadership of Walter Guevara Arze.) The elections of last May 31 were completely fraudulent and Paz was elected for the third time in face of open opposition from the miners and the urban petty-bourgeoisie and the indifference of the peasants.
His days were numbered. Paz had no popular support whatsoever, having become in reality the symbol of open acquiescence to American imperialist domination of the country. Even the peasants, to whom the MNR regime had – partially – given the land could not forget the very limited character of the agrarian reform and the inescapable fact that their standard of living had undergone no actual improvement.
In the final analysis, Paz based himself exclusively on the support of the American embassy and a repressive apparatus whose unbelievable extent, organization, and cruel and barbarous character were disclosed by the recent events. Given the country’s constantly worsening economic conditions and the impossibility for the regime to grant any concessions, even if only to certain sectors of the population, a profound ground swell became inevitable.
Beginning with September, in fact, this surge took on concrete expression, marking, it can be said, the beginning of a new rise in the mass movement in Bolivia. It is significant that the urban petty-bourgeoisie were the first to mobilize.
The first struggle of some scope was the teachers strike which lasted almost a month. (The teachers demanded an increase in their miserable salary which amounts to approximately $40 [US] a month.) The government took drastic measures, proclaiming a “stage of siege.” (The strike was accompanied by frequent demonstrations in the streets of La Paz and serious conflicts with the police.) A part of the national leadership of the unions, directed by the MNR, then decided to capitulate, signing a contract that was a sellout. Nevertheless, the strike continued in some cities.
Almost immediately after, the students in the secondary schools opened a struggle in protest against an increase in the price of notebooks. Again the streets of the country’s main city became the scene of demonstrations and struggles against the repressive forces.
At the same time, the government – which had already taken notorious measures against leaders of the political opposition, compelling them to go into exile or underground – took another grave step by establishing censorship of the press.
This provoked another wave of protest, including protests from conservative newspapers who decided to temporarily suspend publication. At the University of La Paz, demonstrations began that were to spread to all the principal towns of the country and culminate in the setting up of barricades on the La Paz campus by students and vanguard workers; and in the brutal occupation of the university by forces made up of the police, the special militia of the MNR (including women), and contingents of the army.
Clearly something more was at the bottom of all these demonstrations than the incidental reasons cited above. In truth, the whole movement had a very clear oppositional political significance of increasingly violent nature against the Paz regime, which now came under attack not only from the left but also from the center-right and the right.
 
Intervention of the Miners
The student demonstrations at Oruro inevitably brought in the miners. Casualties in these demonstrations included dead and wounded and the repression was brutal even during the funerals that were held for the victims.
The army decided to move against “San Jose,” the mine center in the outskirts of Oruro where the miners have a radio station. Thanks to a relation of forces in its favor, the army came out on top. But meanwhile the decisive miners’ centers of Siglo Veinte, Catavi and Huanuni were drawn into the struggle. The miners’ forces from these centers met a contingent of the army close to the small village of Sora-Sora. The encounter ended in the complete rout of the army and the capture of arms and even some prisoners [see interview below]. The miners then decided to draw back to their bases before the army could open a counteroffensive.
 
The Military Junta
The significant and symptomatic occurrence at Sora-Sora, together with the progressive deterioration of the situation in La Paz, were without doubt the decisive factors that determined the attitude of the military, above all Alfredo Ovando Candia, the chief of staff, and Rene Barrientos Ortuno, chief of the air force and vice president of the republic. According to sources here in La Paz who are in position to know, a meeting had already been held a few days before in which representatives of the army and a representative of the American embassy met with Paz Estenssoro himself. They came to the conclusion that Paz had to go and that Guevara Arze would be the candidate to succeed him. However, events did not permit such a well-calculated operation and it Was under pressure of the situation which was precipitated that Barrientos turned to open rebellion at Cochabamba. A little later, despite the fact that Barrientos’ rebellion was limited to this city, the army decided to bring down Paz (probably with his agreement) and to name a military junta.
At La Paz, crowds poured into the streets and then marched toward the government palace with Juan Lechin, who came out of the underground. Shots were fired at the crowd in fear that Lechin would be installed in the palace as the new president. Upon the arrival of Barrientos from Cochabamba, it was announced that two presidents had been named, Ovando and Barrientos. But the crowd displayed its hostility to Ovando, considering him to be a military chief of the MNR, and after two hours Barrientos announced the resignation of his colleague.
Thus began the rule of the junta headed by Barrientos. To a large extent they depended for the time being on the old personnel of the MNR and Barrientos named as ambassadors to Washington and Paris figures of the days of the rosca [the tin barons].
However, the situation remained fluid and the junta resorted to a policy of balancing between the contending forces. Barrientos began touring the country, making interminable speeches. He listened to everybody, offering guarantees in all directions (promising above all to hold an “honest” election in the relatively near future), including overtures in the direction of the miners. He offered verbal assurances that he was inclined to examine the possibility of re-establishing workers’ control with the right of veto – which Paz had cancelled – and one of his ministers went so far as to come out flatly for restoring workers’ control. In reality the junta has not followed a settled line up to now. The situation, as we said, remains fluid. The new government has no important base – at least at this stage – outside of the army, which also is not altogether sure (it must not be forgotten that with the exception of a contingent the Bolivian army is not composed of mercenaries and that the soldiers are in the great majority the sons of peasants and workers). Barrientos and those with him are compelled to operate in a context characterized by the fact that all the anti-MNR currents developed a convergent action, symbolized by the establishment of the Revolutionary Committee of the People which includes all political formations from the extreme right to Lechin’s PRIN (only the Trotskyist POR [Partido Obrero Revolucionario] and the Communist party being excluded).
 
“Democratic” Period
At present, all the classes and all the social layers – all sectors – are utilizing the “democracy” to state their respective demands, to press their claims; and it goes without saying that the ghosts of the old regime, the rosca, don’t want the same things as the miners or the radicalized petty-bourgeoisie and the political currents that are taking shape and announcing themselves. Even old reactionary parties, the rosqueros, are reappearing such as the Liberal party and the PURS [Partido Unido Republicano Socialista]. Some parties are speaking up which claim to be new, calling themselves “movements” which did not exist in the past. Barrientos can only tack according to the wind and insist above all on his guarantee of a “democratic” election.
It is clear that various maneuvers are being prepared and projected of which it is difficult to foresee whether they will actually be carried out or not. However, their present meaning can be deciphered.
One of these maneuvers is the business of rightist or center-right parties talking about mobilizing under the Christian Democratic banner (particularly the Social Christian party and the Falange [Falange Socialista Boliviano]). They are trying to present the Christian Democracy as a new, revolutionary experiment, in the Chilean style, calmly forgetting the specific Bolivian context.
For his part, the former president Siles Suazo – who was exiled by Paz Estenssoro last September – is seeking to reorganize the MNR by cleaning out Paz and his group. He is advocating the reunification of the forces that left the MNR because of the policies of the former leadership, particularly the PRA [Partido Revolucionario Autentico] of Guevara Arze and the PRIN of Jaun Lechin.
As for the military, their political inexperience is glaring. In addition it is probable that there are two different tendencies. If the reactionaries are, without the least doubt, predominant, certain “Nasserite” aspirations unquestionably also exist. Barrientos, in the final analysis, may seek to play the bonapartist role and, along this road, stake out his political future. At bottom, his speeches and his tours imply that he has a perspective of this kind.
In general, everybody is trying to gain time and, in the final analysis, the junta is maintaining itself because none of the major currents are actually struggling against it, not even those holding the biggest reservations concerning it. The PRIN has a very equivocal position of waiting in relation to the junta and of collaborating to a certain degree with even rightist currents in the Revolutionary Committee of the People. Up to now Lechin has far from repulsed the advances made by Siles about a new edition of the MNR. The Communist party is divided at present into two branches. The right wing, led by Kolle, flatly pro-Soviet, is waiting for the junta to provide “democratic” elections. In the left wing, certain leaders, including Escobar of the Siglo Veinte mine, have invited Barrientos to visit the mine centers.
 
Basic Social Forces
Behind all these groups and parties, behind all these operations, what are the real social forces involved and what are their present postures?
The miners came out of the recent battles with the conviction that they made an essential contribution to the downfall of the MNR. They are more resolute, more politically conscious, better armed than ever. They have withdrawn to their strongholds where the central government power does not exist and where the only authority – even it is sometimes challenged – is that of the unions. Siglo Veinte and Catavi justifiably consider themselves to be “free territory.” The left organizations – PRIN, the CP and the POR – are by far the most dominant. Guevara now has a small base, particularly at Huanuni; the Falange and the Social Christians are very weak. In some of the less politically sophisticated sectors there is some expectancy that the junta might actually organize elections and some are asking if Barrientos won’t take the road followed by Colonel German Bush and Major Gualberto Villaroel.
Deep unrest is apparent among the urban petty-bourgeoisie and they are struggling with great energy. There is no doubt, however, that a considerable sector – the majority of students – are following the Falange. This clearly implies a very grave danger in view of the character of leadership of this party and its completely reactionary components. But among the petty-bourgeoisie the support to the Falange is, by and large, of a “Peronist” nature. The students particularly seek democratic liberties and emancipation from the imperialist tutelage.
The bourgeoisie as such is extremely limited, not representing an appreciable social and political force. It is nourishing hopes in the junta and would support any possible shift offering a guarantee of success. The “landholders” – a good part of them dispossessed of their land – are more dynamic and aggressive. They support the Falange above all and they hope that the hour of their rescue has sounded. They can wield influence in bourgeois and petty-bourgeois sectors, particularly in certain towns.
The big unknown is the peasants. Much has been made of their allegedly siding with Paz Estenssoro in the October struggle. In reality, this occurred only in exceptional instances. At Sucre where it assumed some proportions, the evident explanation is that in this rampart of the reaction, the students are under the influence of the Falange. Elsewhere it was not the peasant militias that were involved in the battles but the mercenary militia and the MNR shock forces. The truth is that the peasants stood largely aside (minority forces helped the miners) and they are now waiting expectantly. It is true that they are aware that the landlords raised their heads and they are distrustful of the new regime. In any case they cannot be considered to be partisans of the junta. They may follow either a new MNR or become allied with the left, if it is able to develop a clear, concrete and audacious policy.
This, in sum, is the alignment of forces. It can be added that everybody is trying to exploit to the maximum the present “democratic” pause in order to organize or reorganize their respective forces. What exists at present in Bolivia is a pause, an interval, a highly transitional phase, even if it cannot be said whether it will last for weeks or months.
 
Symptoms of Conflict
The first signs of the coming conflicts are already apparent. Barrientos has raised the question, evidently a major one for him, of turning over all arms to the army. When he visited the mine districts, the union representatives replied by presenting the demands of the workers and explicitly stating that the arms will not be given up. Miners at the Siglo Veinte mine told me that they would sooner give up their wives and children than their arms.
In the countryside, reactionary Falangist elements have begun to vigorously demand that the land should be returned to its former owners (in the Potosi region) and they have even gone into action in the Sud Yungas region. The heads of the department of agrarian reform have found it necessary to issue a press release declaring that the titles granted under the reform still remain in effect.
It is clear that the present situation cannot extend for a long period. Instead there will soon be new developments, new dramatic battles.
In general, the relationship of forces is quite favorable to the revolutionary sector. But an element of considerable weakness persists. If one probes the causes which made it possible, despite the rise in the mass movement, for the preventive coup d’etat to succeed (it has unquestionably dammed and interrupted the process for the time being), and for the army to remain intact as a whole, to which should be added the passivity of the peasants, it is necessary without the slightest doubt to single out the absence of a centralizing leadership capable of setting a clear unifying aim.
If, for example, the struggle at the university of La Paz is considered, it is to be noted that it had no precise aim whatever except to voice vehement protest against the regime of the MNR. Even the combat at Sora-Sora, which was of such importance, had no other aim but to express solidarity with the demonstrators at Oruro.
This lack of leadership persists. Lechin is proving to be more centrist than ever. The CP has no line, and even the program advanced by the COB [Central Obrera Boliviano] which reveals Trotskyist influence, has remained theoretical up to now. The POR, despite its important ties and its degree of influence in the decisive sectors, has not yet had the opportunity of proceeding as the actual direct leadership on a national scale.
It is probable that a relative prolonging of the present situation would favor the attempt to set up a new MNR – whatever its name; that is, the rightist course of Lechin, the PRIN and the COB itself. Conservative or reactionary pressure – for example the success of the junta’s campaign for arms to be given up or a generalized attack by the landlords against the peasants – could precipitate sharp outbursts by pushing into struggle not only the miners but the broad masses who are at present hesitant.
Bolivia can again become the central revolutionary hotbed of Latin America in the coming months. It is objectively possible that a new breach will be opened in the system of imperialist capitalism in this continent which keeps on boiling despite the gains of reaction, particularly in Brazil. More than ever the outcome will depend, in the final analysis, on the role which a revolutionary leadership of the Bolivian masses can play.
 

