e Phelan: Raids on 'Hooded Ones' Stir France; P.O.I. Calls for Workers Militias (December 1937)







Sherry Mangan Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Terence Phelan
Raids on ‘Hooded Ones’ Stir France;
P.O.I. Calls for Workers Militias
(December 1937)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. 1 No. 18, 11 December 1937, p. 5.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Spectacular charges and counter-charges in the inter-Fascist libel suit, paralleled by even more spectacular police raids upon Fascist arms-caches, have for the last month kept France in ferment. LaRocque has used court proceedings, ostensibly brought for libel against 17 persons and newspapers ranging from the Stalinist Humanité to the Royalist Action Française, as a base for attacking rival fascist groups, particularly those under Pozzo di Borgo and General Duseigneur, of which the theatrical French Ku-Kluxers, the Cagoulards or “hooded ones,” are the fanciest.
 
Sudden Raids
With a remarkable promptitude, the Popular Front police suddenly discovered a revolt plot, involving LaRocque’s rivals: two Paris raids, for example, uncovered 1,480 hand-grenades, 45 machine-guns, large stocks of ammunition, subterranean forts and arsenals, and elaborate military organizational plans leading throughout France. Duseigneur, who evidently fancied himself as the French Franco, and DiBorgo himself were jailed. DiBorgo’s allies, the Monarchists, counter-attacked from Switzerland with elaborate proclamations by the royalist pretenders (which fell flat). The government of the Front Populaire, slowly tapering off the raids, issued communiqués which for their exaggeration of the importance of the affair and for their self-congratulatory complacency, are theatrical masterpieces.
This performance has received an excellent official press; but the applause of the truly advanced workers has been more polite than enthusiastic. Regarding with well-founded cynicism the suddenness of the police discovery of the arms-caches of LaRocque’s momentary political adversaries, they point out the significant fact that somehow none of LaRocque’s far more numerous and well stocked arms-depots were discovered; and though they have been treated to exciting detective-story reports of complete membership lists found, and of great figures involved, they note that the arrests have been extremely few in number, and involve, apart from DiBorgo and Duseigneur, no one of any note; and that, furthermore, most have been released again.
 
The Fascist Danger
This is far from meaning that French Fascism is not to be taken seriously. Quite the contrary. Staged and limited as the raids were, their revelations are a symptomatic warning of the sort of which Spain had plenty prior to July 1936. They show once more that, just as in Spain, the Fascists are preparing, right under the nose of the Popular Front government, their eventual armed insurrection. The arms seized are only a drop in the bucket. Just as in Spain, the army officers are overwhelmingly Rightist in sympathy: the French counterparts of Sanjurjo, Franco, Goded, and Mola only await the signal. Just as in Spain, the Popular Front government takes only feeble half-measures that, on the one hand, are a positive provocation to the Fascists, and, on the other, tend to lull the workers to a false sense of security.
Summed up, the Front Populaire’s whole behavior, in a situation that obviously precedes either revolution or counter-revolution, leads inevitably, not as in 1917 Russia, to the former but as in 1936 Spain, to the latter.
 
P.O.I. Calls for Struggle
Against the false and fatal policies of the Popular Front, only the French section of the Fourth International, the Parti Ouvrier Internationaliste, raises the slogans that can prevent France’s becoming another Spain. Against the provocations and plots of the Fascist gangs, and equally against the feeble and treacherous policy of the Front Populaire toward those gangs, the Bolshevik-Leninists call for workers’ militias. Against the increasingly violent attacks by the nationally organized bosses against what few remnants are left of the workers’ gains in the great strike of May-June 1936, and equally against the suicidal policies of class peace, legality, and merely “symbolic” 4-hour strikes foisted upon the aroused workers by the reformists, the Bolshevik-Leninists raise the slogan of “generalized mass-occupation of the factories, as in June ’36!” – for nation-wide wage contracts, for a sliding-scale of wages based on the cost-of-living index, for complete workers’ control over hiring and firing. Against the P.F.-Stalinist line of compromise and retreat, they raise the cry that the only real defense is “attack and workers’ victory – direct mass action” – “for mass occupations, for workers’ militias, for the general strike.”
 
Congress Prepares for Action
These are outstanding among the militant slogans adopted by the Second Annual Congress of the POI, held, despite LaRocque’s protests to the Front Populaire, October 30–31 and November 1 in Paris. No adventurism, they are backed by a carefully planned practical program of organization leading through the dual power to a workers’ state. The Convention, looking also outside France, pledged its continued defense of the conquests of October in the USSR, its solidarity with the Spanish workers and peasants in their fight against Franco, and their aid to the world proletariat, whether under democratic, fascist, or colonial domination, in its struggle against the real enemy, capitalism, and its Stalinist and other reformist lackeys. Cheered by a great organizational growth in the last year, the POI turns its face to the masses, to give them true revolutionary counsel in the most critical year the French workers have had to face since the last imperialist war.
 

e Phelan: LaRocque Calls for Ban on National Congress of 4th International (November 1937)







Sherry Mangan Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Terence Phelan
LaRocque Calls for Ban on
National Congress of 4th International
(November 1937)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. 1 No. 16, 27 November 1937, p. 5.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Though the increasingly militant French workers still hope that the anti-communist actions of the Stalinists are only maneuvres (the CP increased its General Council seats in the cantonal elections, completed October 17, from 10 to 41), the Fascists, LaRocque, Doriot, deKérillis & Co. know better where lies the real threat to their gangs and plots. Galling upon the Popular Front government which has already seven times suppressed the Bolshevik-Leninist newspaper, La Lutte Ouvrière, LaRocque now publicly demands in Le Petit Journal, organ of his Croix de Feu fascist league (now thinly disguised as the Parti Social Français) that the government forbid the annual congress of the French section of the Fourth International, the Parti Ouvrier Internationaliste.
His grounds are significant: because only the POI has on its order-of-the-day the question of mass occupation of factories to defend the 40-hour week, which is at present under savage attack, both frontal and sniping, by the tricksters of the Popular Front. LaRocque feels and fears the ground-swell of the workers’ renewed militancy, born of an angry disillusion with a government under which wages are frozen at 1933 levels though the cost of living has gone up 51% in the last year, under which all strikes are outlawed, and their trade-union and reformist political fakers give no reply to their outcries beyond ‘’Patience, patience.”
When, in mid-March, the Front Populaire was still prating patience. it was the aroused though leaderless workers who bodily heaved LaRocque’s fascist agents out of their factories, ‘not without a few caresses’. It is workers’ militancy he fears; but how much more does he fear lest these workers find the truly revolutionary leadership of the Bolskevik-Leninist POI! Hence his rejoicing when the Popular Front suppresses the POI’s paper; hence his demand that the P.F. ban its congress.
 
Tardieu’s Revelations
The French workers have recently had a signal opportunity to learn that capitalist democracy, far from being the antithesis of fascism, is its nurturer and trail-blazer, in the revelations made on October 26 by former Premier André Tardieu as a witness in the libel suit brought by Duke Pozzo di Borgo, a co-founder with LaRocque of the fascist Croix de Feu – for when thieves fall out, honest men get interesting information. Under oath, Tardieu testified that as Premier aad Minister in several cabinets from 1926 to 1932 he paid LaRocque secret government subsides, to the tune of from 220,000 to 256,000 francs, for services rendered the government by LaRocque’s fascist gangs. Thus, under “democratic” capitalism, the taxes drawn from the workers are spent to prepare their further bloody suppression and enslavement.
Revelations of this sort, combined with the united front appeals by the Stalinists to the Doriot fascist youth (see Challenge of Youth, October 1) are giving advanced workers food for serious thought on the real nature of Popular Frontism, as a form of “democratic” capitalism.
 
The New Upsurge
France remains in a pre-revolutionary situation amid a sharpening crisis which will soon put an end to the ‘pause’ which has existed since the Matignon agreements of last year. The new keynote was struck by the government communiqué of October 2, and the explanatory ministerial speeches that followed it. The Radical-Socialist Premier Chautemps piously appealed to both capital and labor to make “equal sacrifices’’ for the solution of the production crisis.
What is meant by equal sacrifices? Well, labor must return from a 40 to a 45 hour week. And capital? Capital must also help, by “rationalizing its production.” Pressed to define just what “rationalization” specifically means, messieurs the ministers frankly define it as “increase of labor-saving machinery,” more overtime, and a “higher tempo of work.’’ Such are the ‘sacrifices’ demanded of French capital!
But the French worker can stomach just so much. Though the conventions of the parties composing the Front Populaire have duly voted continuance of the coalition government, the sharpening of the political situation is shown not only by serious revolts within those conventions, but also by the results of the cantonal elections, in which the “extremist” parties gained at the expense of the “centre” parties. The North African colonies are in increasingly open revolt – so serious that the “government of socialist direction,” as Blum calls it, has had to despatch a fleet of 78 army bombing planes to overawe and terrorize the wretched Algerians; while daily clashes between the starved and brutalized natives and the police produce their scarcely reported but regular toll of dead and wounded.
Most significantly, the groundswell of a new militant labor upsurge, such as produced the revolutionary factory-occupations of May–June 1936, is increasingly to be felt, especially among the metal and building workers. Despite compulsory arbitration, despite the “illegality” of strikes, despite the increasingly noisome Stalinist sell-outs, the fury of the General Federation of Labor fakers, and savage police repressions, fierce sporadic outbursts of “unauthorized” strikes and factory occupations increase daily, and spread.
The miserably paid government employees, after interminable patient waiting at the behest of their union leaders and promises of the P.F. ministers, have just been fobbed off by Finance Minister Bonnet with a “compromise settlement” that is a positive insult. Even the reformist socialists, the SFIO ministers, had to protest against it.
 
Bolsheviks Provide Leadership
Thus French labor learns the bitter lesson of Popular Frontism. The “pause” in the class struggle, demanded by the P.F. government and its Stalinist supporters, is about over. The French worker has had about enough of compulsory arbitration boards, of slogans of patience and patriotism, of government leniency with the fascist gangs coupled with savage repression of militant workers. Bitter personal experience is proving to him the frivolity of the Stalinist explanations that it isn’t capitalism as a system, but the wicked “200 families,” who are responsible for his misery; shows him that “his” Popular Front government differs from other capitalist governments only in that it asks him to like and approve the way it crushes him.
A new strike-wave is beginning to rise. The advanced workers, fed up with the betrayals of the Front Populaire and its Stalinist supporters, look for true revolutionary leadership. That leadership is offered them by the Bolshevik-Leninists of the POI, with the slogans of direct class action, of workers militias to smash the bullies of LaRocque and prevent another Spain, of workers’ control of factories through the extension and amalgamation of the existing workers’ shop committees; and its courageous and open goal – the French workers’ state.
 

e Phelan: France Under Daladier Moves Toward National 'Sacred Union' Gov't (June 1938)







Sherry Mangan Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Terence Phelan
France Under Daladier Moves Toward
National ‘Sacred Union’ Gov’t
Political Course of Bpurgeoisie Is Influenced by
Growing Isolation of the Soviet Union;
Socialist Party ‘Left’ Expelled
(June 1938)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. II No. 28, 9 July 1938, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

PARIS, June 21. – The shift to the Daladier government, a longtime stop-gap while the heads of all the parties from the Stalinists on the left to the Fascists on the right horse-trade and jockey toward the ultimate goal of a “Government of Sacred Union” including all parliamentary parties, has made no essential change in France’s foreign policy, which still follows the plans of British imperialism.
Started last fall by Halifax’s Berlin visit, followed by Chautemps’ and Delbos’ London visit, confirmed by English and French behaviour when Hitler seized Austria, and increasingly unconcealable with each new move in the continuing Czechoslovakian crisis and the conversations with Mussolini, Chamberlain’s plan is nothing less than buying off Hitler in the West by giving him a free hand in the East against the U.S.S.R., while Britain, and to a lesser extent France, feverishly rush armament programs which they hope will permit them at the proper moment to snatch their imperialist spoils at the expense of both exhausted adversaries.
 
Fascist Orbit Extends
Rumania has swung largely into the fascist orbit; Austria is actually incorporated into the Third Reich; Czechoslovakia, though unlikely to be territorially occupied by Hitler, is being rapidly bullied into a governmental realignment which will make it either decentralized and impotent or actually pro-Hitler; and Poland, long on the fence, is plainly revealed by the recent terrorization of Lithuania to be playing the anti-Soviet game. A look at the map will show more plainly than any words what these shifts mean to the Soviet Union. Herein is grimly foreshadowed the tragic end of the un-Marxian Stalinist policy of “socialism in one country” (with its vicious concomitant of “no socialism anywhere else”), its reliance upon the “democracies,” and that wholesale deception of the international working-class, than which only the distrust that motivated it is more contemptible.
Yet in France the Stalinists continue to check the militancy of the working class, to pin all their hopes on class peace and the Franco-Soviet pact, unembarrassed by their new allies, the de la Rocque Fascists, whose spokesman Ybarnegaray has recently come out strongly in favor of it – this at the behest of those elements in the French General Staff whose technical military distrust of the Red Army, following the purge of the generals, has been somewhat offset by the similar shake-up in the Reichswehr, and by a close study of the military side of the occupation of Austria, which, practically successful because of the lack of resistance by Austrian clerico-fascism, was technically far from perfect.
 
Workers Mark Time
Deeply discouraged by the severe set-backs suffered in the spring strike wave through the misleadership of the Stalinists and the C.G.T. bureaucracy, French workers en masse have recoiled to nurse their wounds and take stock. It is, on the whole, a time when general militancy has for a moment ebbed; to pretend otherwise would be wishful thinking. The Stalinist treachery has thus a double edge: not only did it canalize militant strike action back into compromise settlements that were essentially defeats; but by that very betrayal convinced many workers under its ideological influence of the hopelessness of militant action – a vicious circle.
Yet other workers, quite on the contrary, draw the opposite and correct conclusion: they move away from the cesspool of betrayal and gropingly seek a true revolutionary leadership. Here and there – among the technicians, department store employees, postal and telegraph workers, and numerous crafts – sporadically violent revolts against further class collaboration, against Daladier’s anti-labor decree laws, against the sacred union for war, burst significantly forth, are with more or less difficulty quashed by the bureaucracy.
 
Seine Federation Revolts
Symptomatic of this latent fire of militancy under the ashes of temporary calm was the recent revolt of the whole Socialist Federation of the Seine (Paris and its workers’ suburbs) against the Blum-Faure leadership of the S.F.I.O. (Second International Socialists). This Federation, ideologically dominated by the “Revolutionary Left” led by Marceau Pivert, a manoeuvring centrist of the Tyler-Zam stamp, had had the courage, remembering the police-murder of the Clichy workers under the “Socialist” minister Marx Dormoy, to protest energetically against the Sacred Union and its war plans, and both to issue internal bulletins and lead public manifestations against continuance of the party’s class-collaborationist policies.
It goes without saying that the whole federation was simply pelled en masse from the an expulsion confirmed last week by the S.F.I.O.’s annual convention, which, in a disgusting display, underwrote the Bonapartist Daladier decree government, approved in advance the coming nationalist government, and prepared to follow its Macdonald, Leon Blum, anywhere he may lead.
 
New Party Formed
Pivert’s Revolutionary Left is now reconstituted as an independent party under the name of the P.S.O.P. (Socialist Workers’ and Peasants’ Party), predictably about 5,000 strong.
The new P.S.O.P. has in its rank-and-file valuable militant elements whom the Bolshevik-Leninists gladly welcome as comrades in the heavy tasks ahead.
 

e Phelan: Labor Militancy Rises Anew in France; Progressives Gain Strength in Unions (July 1938)







Sherry Mangan Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Terence Phelan
Labor Militancy Rises Anew in France;
Progressives Gain Strength in Unions
Reject People’s Frontism at Left Socialist Convention;
New Awakening Seen in Political Trends
(July 1938)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. II No. 31, 30 July 1938, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

PARIS, July 19. – While bourgeois Paris gawps at the dummy sovereigns of England amid expensive decorations whose principal motif is the fasces, and whose featured entertainment is the display at Versailles of French imperialism’s armed might, proletarian Paris wonders rather what were the exact contents of the “letters” exchanged between the French and British premiers on the eve of the visit, unconfirmedly rumored to be the final sealing of the Franco-British alliance.
For the French working class is justifiably jumpy. In recent weeks it has seen Daladier-laGuerre’s Radical-Socialist government release the last of the fascist “cagoulards,” while at the same time imposing crushing jail sentences on the aroused workers and students of Tunisia, France’s martial-law colony in North Africa – 200 years of prison sentences in one month. (So severe is the repression that even the reformist-socialist newspapers have been suppressed – and Blum & Co., heretofore deaf to the appeals of the miserably exploited worker natives, suddenly howl to high heaven themselves.
 
Franco Welcomes Doriot
The French worker has just read of Franco’s triumphal reception of the renegade communist Doriot, most dangerous of French fascist leaders, while the Stalinists push ahead for unity with anyone, including fascists, who will help them build up France’s imperialist war-machine.
Bosses simply scorn the decisions of governmental arbitrators when not overwhelmingly in their favor; they snipe off any militant who protests; and they proceed, with the help of the “explanations” of Stalinist intermediaries, to the most bare-faced sabotage of the hard-won 40-hour week. And the cost of living inexorably rises.
 
Strikes Increasing
But the workers begin to grow not only jumpy but angry. And impatient. Strikes (characteristically sit-downs that the union leaders are hard put to turn into evacuations) again increase: the whole building-trades in the Isere; 700 metal-workers at Marseilles; other strikes in Guingamp, Venisseux, Prouvy – significantly including war industries, which infuriates the war-mongering Stalinist Humanité. Equally infuriated is the big-bourgeois Temps, at the Marseilles dock workers, who have found their own way to enforce the 40-hour week, i.e. to work 40 hours and then go home, leaving Le Temps to tear its hair all it wants to. It is still a long way from June 1936, yet workers’ militancy seems to have passed the low ebb. In June the conference of trade union minorities issued a powerful appeal throughout the national trade union federation, the C.G.T. Its program, condemning the fatal class-collaboration policies of the Popular Front, calling for a return to the class-struggle policies of 1936, met an immediate response, spread rapidly through the C.G.T., and continues to win increasingly impressive support. The bureaucrats at the top are feeling the pressure, are being driven to the left.
 
Statement Causes Flurry
On July 17, Leon Jouhaux, reformist head of the C.G.T., announced that the interrupted reforms must be completed. “And that day,” he added, “may be near: October or November may call us to action. We are prepared for it. The fascists will not pass in October 1938 any more than they passed in February 1934.”
Le Temps immediately threw front-page fits: this was not the language it had expected from the tame Green-like Jouhaux – especially since as recently as June 25, when at the Rassemblement du Front Populaire the Radical-Socialists, by flinging back in their faces the Socialist and Communist propositions, had proved the political death of the Popular Front, Le Temps had permitted itself some pompous gloating over the “impotence” of the Left. Jouhaux is certainly no firebrand, and if he speaks as above, the rank-and-file must be putting some uncomfortable iron in his soul.
 
“Left Socialist” Convention
Also significant are some of the decisions of the constitutional convention of the new “left socialist” party, the P.S.O.P., on July 16–18. It is still ideologically a muddled grouping (e.g. in one committee of 12, there were five distinct and warring tendencies); yet although it refused to receive a delegation from the revolutionary socialist party, the P.O.I., and mildly condemned the Fourth International as having insufficient internal democracy (this from some of the bureaucratic ex-wheel-horses of the Socialist Party!), yet many of its positions were progressive.
Its supposed ideological leader, Marceau Pivert was so soundly trounced on a motion to affiliate with the Popular Front that he thought it prudent not even to bring up his pet project of affiliation with the London Bureau; and the P.S.O.P., after roundly condemning the Second and the Third International for their notorious betrayals, remains for the time internationally unattached. It sent a strong protest to the Spanish Loyalist Government for its suspicious imprisonment of POUMists and other militants; and protested equally strongly to its own government against the savage repressions in all French colonies. The party rejecting the term “revolutionary defeatism,” it nevertheless called for revolutionary defeatism in other terms. And lastly, significant in view of Pivert’s notorious affiliations, it sent to referendum a vote to expel all Freemasons, a politically active and class-collaborationist fraternal organization in France.
 
Party Direction Undecided
Those whom the fatal role of the POUM, which herded into a suicidal centrism the left-moving workers, has made, with much justification, suspicious, warn that the P.S.O.P. gives birth to a similar danger, especially should the Pivert group retain complete control. To them it can
be recalled that the POUM was a left-wing organization that moved right, whereas the P.S.O.P. is a right-wing organization moving left. There are furthermore signs that the maneuvering Pivertists are unsteady in the saddle. It is not yet excluded that the pressure of rank-and-file militants, pushing the party policies from the centre to the left, may make it true revolutionary party. Meanwhile the Fourth Internationalists give it their friendly criticism, and make every effort to establish with it united fronts – against capitalism and its social lackeys, for the workers’ revolution.
 

e Phelan: Daladier Regime Is Leading France Swiftly to Fascism (November 1938)







Sherry Mangan Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Terence Phelan
Daladier Regime Is Leading France
Swiftly to Fascism
(November 1938)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. II No. 51, 26 November 1938, p. 6.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

PARIS, Nov. 9 – French reaction pushes steadily on toward Fascism through the Bonapartism of Daladier.
French capitalism is determined to compete with fascist Germany’s “efficiency,” i.e. its ability to drive its workers a practically unlimited number of hours a week. It can do so, it claims, only by having an equally free hand in extending production-hours. And that means it must once and for all smash the last remaining workers’ gains won in the great 1936 strikes and half lost already by the treachery of People’s Frontism.
The question of fascism in France is no longer “Whether” but “How soon?” For how long a time still will Daladier’s Bonapartism be sufficient?
 
Daladier Declares War
Last month at the Marseille Congress of his Radical Socialist Party, Daladier, with hypocrisy rivalling that of Roosevelt, “defended” the social legislation in words and actually declared implacable war on the gains won by the workers in June, 1936.
This was Stalinism’s reward for its years of support to French imperialism, for its frenzied propagation of the slogan, “Daladier to Power!”
Daladier made savagely ironic use of the demagogy of the Stalinists of the past few years, with which they held the workers’ support by pretending to be concerned for their demands, while actually enslaving them to the French war machine which the Stalinists regarded as a firm ally of the Stalinist bureaucracy in Russia.
 
Stalinists Kicked Downstairs
Daladier repaid them with the Munich pact and at the congress he sarcastically asked the Stalinists why, if they preferred war to the “diktat” of Munich, they could not get the workers under their influence to work more than 45 hours a week for the national defense!
French capitalism no longer needs the People’s Front and with loud guffaws simply has kicked it downstairs. The Stalinists themselves have been among the first to feel the impact of the new situation. Two important Stalinist mass meetings have been flatly prohibited and broken up by police.
Fascism’s path to power has differed in each country. In Italy it was gangsterism, in Germany the parliamentary road, in Spain, revolt by the army. Bonapartism is a French invention and it may very well hand power over to Fascism more smoothly than Bruening cleared the way for Hitler in Germany.
 
Comrades Imprisoned
But French Bonapartism already yields little to Fascism in the mounting brutality of its repressions. It has already sentenced to one year in prison our comrade S. Charpy, editor of Révolution, the Fourth Internationalist Youth paper, for “provoking the military to disobedience.” It is bringing Duvernet and Jourdain to trial for articles appearing in the trade-union paper Reveil Syndicaliste; as well as the anarchist comrades Schek (already imprisoned in the Santé) and Leclerc; and others. During the great building-trades strike at Lyon, which has just gone down to bitter defeat, the government imprisoned 80 workers for picketing, 20 of whom it has already sentenced to from three months to a year. For mere picketing, these crushing sentences! Among the last arrests was Labrousse himself, Federal Secretary of the Building Trades Union. And this government pretends to be impartial.
 
To Resist Is “Treason”
Daladier frankly threatens the munitions workers that any struggle to retain the 40-hour week will render them liable not only to being fired, but to undergoing criminal prosecution. Workers’ rights are being redefined as treason. Meanwhile the radical Mistier, that one-time stalwart of the People’s Front, calls for the formation of “semi-voluntary” labor-camps and the muzzling of “demagogues” (i.e. protesting workers).
Now come home to roost the compulsory-arbitration and strike-illegality laws which the workers let the People’s Front put over on them in late ’36 and early ’37.
These “legalities” provide Daladier and the bosses with perfect pretexts for their increasingly smashing counter-attack. Lockouts, small and isolated strikes deliberately provoked by the bosses the more surely and finally to smash them, become the order of the day. With increasing intensity and thoroughness the daily police roundups drag into jail anti-fascist refugees whose “papers” are not in order. Only last week, under pretext of sanitary regulations, a hospital-train of wounded international anti-fascist fighters was turned back at the French-Spanish border by the government of this “great democracy.”
 
Creeping Technique
Noticeable is the creeping technique of Daladier Bonapartism. With each new repression it has skilfully taken the workers’ temperature, watched hawk-eyed for a real mass counter-attack. And then smashed on another repression. And again watched.
And how do the workers answer? What is their spirit? How are they fighting against this creeping fascisization?
An off-hand answer is difficult. The Communist Party is undergoing a fierce internal crisis. Not only rank-and-filers but district and regional leaders are tearing up their party cards in disgust and rage. Munich was the last straw. Throughout the working class spreads a black brooding anger; but also a discouragement, puzzlement, depression. But if they can find the way, they will fight with a fierce courage.
 
Our Tasks
The Fourth International in France is faced with an immense opportunity and an immense task. The workers are ready. Symptomatic was the war-crisis action of the Lille District Central Local of the General Confederation of Labor, representing 250,000 militant workers: not under telegraphed warning from the C.G.T. Paris Headquarters, nor under threats of mass arrests by the “socialist” mayor of Lille, would they take down their smashing anti-war posters. Such incidents are significant. The P.O.I., French section of the Fourth International is utilizing every opportunity for powerful united-front action.
A constantly rising cost-of-living, new taxes, fiercer and fiercer boss-attacks on the few remaining 1936 gains, are forcing the workers to turn to the only way – the Bolshevik-Leninist Marxism of the Fourth International. But time presses desperately; fascism creeps on; will the French workers find the only way in time? – break with the reformist and Stalinist parties of betrayal, return to revolutionary mass action?
They must, and the Fourth International must show them how!
 

e Phelan: Popular Front Breaks French Sit-Downs; Gov't Calls Troops (January 1938)







Sherry Mangan Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Terence Phelan
Popular Front Breaks French Sit-Downs;
Gov’t Calls Troops
(January 1938)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. II No. 2, 8 January 1938, p. 7.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

French labor was given another bitter and illuminating lesson in the real nature of Popular Frontism last week when their P.F. Government smashed within 24 hours the general strike of Paris municipal workers.
Opposed by the trade-union bonzes, and only tardily supported by the band-wagon Stalinists, the strike was forced by the militant pressure of a rank and file fed up with the failure of protracted class-collaborationist ‘negotiations’. More than 120,000 responded to the strike call: all transport service, by subway, by bus, and tram, was completely stopped; gas, electricity, and sanitary services were cut to the minimum; and only skeleton service was maintained in street lighting, water, etc.
 
Savage Threats
The answer of that great friend of labor, the People’s Front Government, was instantaneous and savage: it called out the Mobile Guards, brought in 1,000 troops ready to break the strike (as they were already doing in the truck-drivers’ strike), and to cap all, threatened to call the striking workers (who are army reservists) to the colors for strike duty, so that, as French soldiers, they had either to act as their own strike-breakers or face court-martial for desertion or mutiny – a method of repression which marks a new low in the hypocritical cynicism of class-collaborationist reformism.
But a strike is a strike. The superiority of genuine class-struggle mass action over round-table deals is shown by the fact that fear forced the P.F. to couple to its military threats a half-way concession – it is reported that they offered the Paris workers between 50 and 70 francs (1.85 to 2.31) a month instead of the demanded minimum of between 100 and 150 francs as a special high-cost-of-living grant (the French price-index has increased 50 per cent in the last year). But the reports are conflicting; and, as matters stand in France, even this wretched amelioration may well be stolen from the workers, now they have returned to work, in the final negotiations.
 
Stalinist ‘Explanations’
French labor will not soon forget this lesson, following immediately upon the government’s use of the army as strike-breakers in the walkout of grocery workers and truck drivers. Even the Paris council of the C.G.T. (French equivalent of the A.F. of L.) has sharply protested against the Popular Front’s fascist threat to mobilize the workers into the army to break their own strike. The Stalinist newspaper 1’Humanité, however, makes the following statement under the heading “People’s Front Victory”:
“The workers’ victory is a victory of the People’s Front. Doriot, de la Rocque, the trusts and the newspapers all urged the government to use force, to throw itself into the arms of reaction.
“But the government, reflecting the extent of the movement, its echoes and realizations, realized this must not be done.”
Do these bland liars think the French working class is deaf, dumb, blind, and feeble-minded? The Popular Front government mobilized the Gardes Mobiles and 1,000 troops against the strike, prepared for even heavier army repression; and these cynical Stalinist editors proclaim ‘the government ... realized this must not be done.’ ‘A People’s Front Victory’ alas it was – a victory over the Paris municipal workers by French capital acting through its Popular Front lackeys; that even a compromise settlement has been precariously obtained is because the government of the Front Populaire, though promising its finance-capital masters that it would ‘use the utmost vigor ...’ ‘and despite all resistance ensure the resumption of public service’ etc., was afraid both of provoking the militancy of the aroused workers too far and of revealing too plainly to its deceived working-class following the mailed fist within the famous ‘outstretched hand’.
 
The Lesson
The hammer-blows of these facts are reforming the militancy and class-consciousness of the French workers. The government they elected and re-elected to protect parliamentarily the gains won in the revolutionary struggles of May–June 1936 has given them the diametric opposite results: the vicious law of December 30, 1936 which established the fascist principle of compulsory arbitration and outlawing of strikes; the devaluation of the franc and the unchecked skyrocketing of the cost of living; leniency to the fascist gangs coupled with savage repression of workers’ mass action. The lesson is simple: class struggle won the gains; class-collaboration lost them.
Tragically, however, the uninformed worker turned naturally to the powerful C.P., which to him represented the extreme left; and here the Stalinist bureaucracy, prostituting the prestige of the October Revolution it is now liquidating, again tried to canalize the worker’s revolt into class-collaboration with its tactic of what the French worker calls ‘headstuffing’, bourrage de crane. But that even this will not any longer hold back the indignant French worker is demonstrated these days, as predicted in these columns, by a rising strike-wave.
As soon as the department store sit-ins win their gains, the truck-drivers and warehousemen strike in Paris; then the transport workers in Valenciennes. No sooner have these been ‘settled’ by the army than the coal-miners are out at Anzin. As we write, the ship-strike at Rouen goes on; the food-handlers walk out at Grand-Combe; the powerfully organized metal-trades vibrate with rank-and-file pressure for real strike-action following, singularly provocative lock-outs. The opportunist Stalinist tops and their trained seals in the trade-unions alternately soothe, sabotage, or jump on the bandwagon; government arbitrators hastily throw clean collars and assorted sell-out plans into their suitcase and entrain for troubled points; the Popular Front talks of its love for labor and democracy, and calls out the troops.
 
Leadership Needed
The wave is yet a ground-swell only, but it surges and mounts. Whether it will be flattened again by the disillusion of repeated betrayals, or sweep up into a triumphant wave like that of May–June 1936, depends above all upon the workers’ finding true revolutionary leadership. In factories and mines where the Bolshevik-Leninists of the IV International have not even been heard of save through the filthy slanders of the Stalinist press, the workers, kicking over the traces of their reformist leadership, are instinctively carrying out the precise slogans of the rapidly growing but still small Bolshevik-Leninist party, the P.O.I. (Workers Internationalist Party). Only the monstrous incubus of Stalinism stands between, slandering, betraying, defeating.
Time is short. French finance capital, though it still hopes to retain its choking grasp on French economy through its left hand, the Radical-Socialist Party and the Popular Front, before venturing on the more expensive and risky expedient of rule through its right hand, Fascism of both Hitler and Franco varieties, will yet inevitably, by the very nature of capitalism, be forced to go fascist. The French workers must be ready: ready with workers’ militias, with naturally linked factory and soldiers’ committees, ready above all this time to carry through to the end, the socialist revolution.
Time is shortening, but there is yet time to save France from the fate of Spain. P.O.I. led, or, gropingly, self-led or leaderless, the French workers are beginning to find the way.
 

e Phelan: French Worker Grow Restive Under Deepening Crisis; Strikes Break Out (September 1938)







Sherry Mangan Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Terence Phelan
French Worker Grow Restive Under
Deepening Crisis; Strikes Break Out
Militancy Checked by “Loyal” CGT Bureaucrats
(September 1938)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. II No. 36, 3 September 1938, p. 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

PARIS, August 18. – Under the calm of the August vacations, premonitory rumblings presage an uneasy autumn. Just prior to the opening of the disquieting German maneuvers, the franc reached the lowest point permitted under its new stabilization. The weakness of its subsequent recovery, coupled with the visit of Morgenthau, U.S. Secretary of the Treasury, suggests the possibility of another devaluation, but even more the probability of France’s first trying some special form of exchange control.
After the boastful self-congratulations of French imperialism on the success of its first pre-war war-loan, it is significant that after three whole weeks there have not been issued any figures whatsoever on the public acceptance of the second, the National Defense Bonds. French capitalism continues to be sick. And whoever has not temporarily escaped to the forgetfulness of vacationing is nervous. No sooner is the Nippon-Soviet incident settled than Italy closes its French frontier. Just when lenient judges had freed the last of the C.S.A.R., 140 tubes of cheddite are found in a Cagoulard’s garden near Clermont-Ferrand. And though wholesale price indices soften slightly, the retail cost of living inexorably rises.
Marseilles labor, always militant, now increasingly active, holds attention on the strike front. After 24 days, the strike of the metal workers, sabotaged by its own national federation in the C.G.T. went down to bitter and angry defeat. But no sooner had the bosses permitted themselves a little too-public gloating than the strike burst out again. A temporary truce and resumption of work was arranged on August 17, but the situation smolders angrily.
 
Dock Workers Strike
Meanwhile the dock workers become an increasingly irritating thorn in the bosses’ sides. Demanding 64 francs a day instead of 55½ (the franc is quoted this week at 2.73 cents), the dockers refused to work any supplemntary hours beyond the statutory 40 unless they were given good overtime percentages above the regular hourly rate, and enforced their demandjs by direct action. Now the shipping company bosses are about the most reactionary in France, demonstrably behind two important fascist factions, the C.S.A.R. and de la Rocque’s P.S.P. They have unleashed a furious campaign against the dockers. First they demanded that the government as it had threatened to do in the Paris transport strike, declare a state of emergency and call the dockers (who are army reservists) to the colors for strike duty; then, under threat of the army penalties for mutiny and desertion, make them work the boats and break their own strike.
[Since this was written, Senegalese troops were used last week-end to move cargo that the Marseilles dock workers refused to handle after they had worked their 40-hour week. – Ed.]
When the government showed it was afraid to do this, the shipowners started a wild agitation in Algeria among the fruit and vegetable growers, some of whose shipments have been partly spoiled in the port of Marseilles by the dockers’ refusal to break the 40 hours. Mediators sent by the French capitalist state have, on not very plausible technicalities, decided invariably against the workers. But worst of all, the C.G.T., the national labor federation, is doing absolutely nothing to help this strike of one of its own unions, and the trade-union bureaucrats have to date succeeded in holding back the other
Marseilles workers from any solidarizing action with the dockers. No accident, but policy, this sabotage by the C.G.T. of the strikes of its own component organizations is deeply significant. The Marseilles struggle looks to be long-drawn-out, a war of attrition (though at present writing the Marseillais may succeed in getting a general strike of stevedores in all French Mediterranean ports). And, with the sabotaging attitude of the C.G.T. tops, the prognosis is not very favorable. The situation should be underlined, however, as symptomatic of the situation of French labor today: a basic militancy, kept carefully localized and canalized by the trade-union bureaucracy, and sabotaged if it gets out of hand.
 
Teachers Show Militancy
The other side of the picture is more cheering. Preparatory to the annual convention of the C.G.T. in November, its component federations are holding each its own. Among these the pacesetter has always been the teachers’ union, outstanding for being almost unanimously representative of the teachers of France (110,000 members out of 130,000 teachers). This union has just held (August 3-6), at Nantes, an exciting congress. The directing majority under Delmas, straight syndicalist rather than political, submitted a majority general report smashingly condemning Popular Frontism as a sell-out and a failure, frankly telling the Stalinist party to keep its tyrannical hands off the teachers’ union, and demanding militant action in the autumn for the demands of the teachers and all the other government functionaries.
This program the Stalinists, swallowing their rage as best they might, had to support with all their weight, because the minority program, put forward by the revolutionary left under Valliere, went ten times as far in the same direction, and the serious danger of its passage had conditioned the leftness of the majority resolutions. The vote, 862 to 238, with 38 abstentions, gives some idea of the leavening force of the revolutionary left. Finance-capital’s organ, Le Temps, which has lately been getting more and more jittery about labor, rushed out a front-page editorial, raving about ‘a state within a state,’ hinted treason, and generally acted hysterical. But more was to come.
 
Jouhaux Booed
The next day, following the enthusiastic singing of The International, Jouhaux, the William Green of France, attempted to address the convention. Half the delegates and all the audience (over a thousand non-delegate teachers) whistled and booed him into silence. It was necessary to clear the hall and severely warn the delegates before Jouhaux could purr his hurt and honeyed words to the still sullen and often angrily interrupting congress. (One may imagine the embarrassment of the Stalinists, who hope by giving Jouhaux a post in their international trade-union organization to get as a swap high posts for themselves in the C.G.T..)
The teachers’ convention is as significant as the Marseilles dockers’ struggle. If the other C.G.T. union congresses, taking this keynote, will renew the class-struggle militancy they had in 1936, the November Convention of the C.G.T. will relaunch French labor on that revolutionary path from which the will-o’-the-wisp of Popular Frontism lured it so tragically away.
 

e Phelan: Chilean Trotskyists Unite (June 1941)







Sherry Mangan Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Terence Phelan
Chilean Trotskyists Unite
Strengthened Proletarian Party Maps Program of Action
(June 1941)

From The Militant, Vol. V No. 26, 28 June 1941, p. 5.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.

Santiago-de-Chile, June 17 (by mail) – While Roosevelt, under the mask of “continental solidarity”, prepares to drag the semi-colonial nations of South America behind the war-chariot of Yankee imperialism, there was triumphantly forged here this week an important link in the real chain of continental solidarity – the solidarity of the exploited working masses of the U.S.A. with the super-exploited colonial masses of Latin America.
In a Fusion Congress remarkable for the extremely high level both of political discussion and mass enthusiasm, the two Chilean groups of the Fourth International, the Partido Obrero Revolucionario and the Partido Obrero Internacionalista, united under the name of the former. The outstanding significance of the fusion lies in its having converted the two agitation-propaganda groups into a genuine Bolshevik party, already well-rooted among the Chilean workers, with excellent perspectives of soon becoming a mass party. The fusion, fruit of a thorough, democratic, principled discussion in both former organizations, was made on no mere bloc basis; but included an exhaustive criticism and examination of past policy, culminating in a principled denunciation of certain past centrist errors committed by the P.O.I., passed almost unanimously by the delegates.
 
Party of Workers
The new united party has forces which, in a country of Chile’s population, are already considerable. Seventy-five percent of them are workers, each a fighting trade-unionist. The growth of the party in the immediate future is soundly expected to be very rapid, the previous division having artificially retarded the development of the Chilean movement because of the uncertainty of worker-sympathizers as to which group to join.
Both symptomatic and encouraging was the last-minute arrival at the Congress of a delegate from three large mining-district branches of the Partido Socialistade Trabajadores, which had been stimulated by the news of fusion into breaking with their misleaders and applying for membership in the new united organization.
The Partido Socialista de Trabajadores is a left-reformist workers’ party which split off from the official Socialist Party because of its reformism and its capitulation to Yankee imperialism. It has 4,000 members, and polled 11,000 votes in the March elections. At present it is in full crisis, a left wing tending sharply to the left and Trotskyism; a right wing preparing to collapse back into the Socialist Party. It is certain that, with the new gravitational pull of the united P.O.R., this influx of workers to the new party is only the first of many.
 
SWP Delegate Present
Friday night, in a semi-public inaugural session attended by the 34 official delegates and some 60 guests from other working-class organizations, members, and sympathizers, the leaders of the P.O.R. and P.O.I, related the historic struggle of Trotskyism in Chile and reported on the negotiations which had led to unity.
Scores of cables, telegrams, letters, and phonograph recordings of greetings from other sections of the International and from sympathizing organizations were read and played; followed by speeches of solidarity and congratulations by the fraternal delegates of the Liga Obrero Revolucionario of Argentina and the Socialist Workers Party (U.S.A.).
 
For Defense of USSR
Saturday morning, the Congress settled down to three packed days of strict business. Its international resolution, reaffirming the correctness and event-proved timeliness of the basic documents of the Fourth International, recorded itself unanimously and enthusiastically in favor of unconditional defense of the Soviet Union, defining it as a degenerated workers’ state, and calling simultaneously for the defense of the conquests of October against the Stalinist bureaucracy.
The national political thesis was the center of Congress interest, and gave rise to a discussion whose amplitude (one-and-one-half days), and high political level exemplified the recognition by the delegates of the crucial importance of correct evaluations and a correct policy in semi-colonial Latin-America.
Particular attention was given to the problem of “national liberation,” of the combined development and interrelation between the problems of the democratic and of the socialist revolution in semi-colonial Chile, in accordance with Trotsky’s brilliant theory of permanent revolution.
 
Trade Union Unity
Scarcely less important was the trade-union resolution which, apart from calling for an ever-increasing penetration of the party in the life of the unions, called for a unification of the badly split Chilean union movement, whose internal differences are being used by the bosses and their lackeys in the labor movement to the grave disadvantage of Chilean workers.
 
Launch Weekly Paper
The important problem of the press was equally seriously considered. Each group had previously maintained a four-page monthly newspaper. After a responsible evaluation of the party’s financial resources, the Congress voted to issue a weekly, thus permitting the newspaper not only as in the past to treat general problems but, by its frequency of issue, to become a real workers’ paper, treating in up-to-the-minute detail the specific day-by-day problems facing the Chilean workers, and in this way to concretize the principles of the Fourth International in workers’ terms.
Arrangements were also made to prepare, in conjunction with the Argentine and other sections, a monthly theoretical organ in Spanish for the southern portion of the continent whose absence has been much felt heretofore.
 
A Bolshevik Organization
Theses on organization and finances, exhaustively and democratically discussed, reaffirmed the Bolshevik principle of democratic centralism against any and all petty-bourgeois’ centrist organizational tendencies; and, in detail that again demonstrated the anti-dilettante and healthy proletarian seriousness of the Chilean comrades, laid but the methods of work in the next period, especially concentrated in the work in the trade-unions and in the creation of a United Proletarian Front, in contradistinction to the treacherous Popular Frontism which has in recent years disorientated and betrayed the Chilean workers.
A general Program of Action again discussed with an earnestness and concrete detail which showed how intense was the delegates’ determination to push forward in practical growth and influence, was approved in its basic objectives; and in order that every militant might participate in the forging of the program of the party’s day-by-day tasks, the Congress voted that immediate internal discussion bulletin should concretize the general program even as it is carried out.
By amicable prior agreement, the two groups had settled upon a joint ticket for the new National Executive Committee, the proportions of six former P.O.R. and three former P.O.I. leaders loyally reflecting the numerical relation of forces of the former groups, and utilizing the best leadership calibre from both.
 
Importance of Fusion
The importance of this Congress transcends the national plane. It was not only a smashing reply to those malicious wiseacres who contend, that Trotskyism is by nature centrifugal and propagates itself only by splits; it was also a splendid challenge and a brilliant precedent to those other Trotskyist groups in Latin-America who, though [in agreement] on the political position of the Fourth International, have not as yet succeeded in surmounting the organizational differences which keep them in separate groups. It is certain that the fine example of the Chilean comrades will accelerate the processes of fusion already visible throughout South America.
But above all the Congress drove home once again the lesson of international solidarity of the working-class in a vivid and unforgettable way. As one by one the frontiers are closed, and the war-bent bourgeoisie hammers with ever-increasing pressure to turn the workers against their brothers in other countries – the Chilean congress, for this observer-delegate, concretized in a simple and moving way the meaning of workers’ internationalism.
A trucker hammering over the road to Akron tonight can have the heart-warming assurance that six thousand miles away to the southeast some unknown comrade on the night-shift of a Chilean Coppermine is – despite Roosevelt’s war, despite closed frontiers and censored communications – thinking the same thoughts, working and planning with the same principled purpose, setting his jaw in the same Bolshevik determination – for the world socialist revolution, for the Soviet United States of the Americas.
 

e Phelan: Bolshevik Leninists Tell of the City's Fall (March 1939)







Sherry Mangan Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index   |   ETOL Main Page

Terence Phelan
Spanish Militants Describe Escape From Barcelona
Bolshevik Leninists Tell of the City’s Fall
Escape With Gorkin and Other P.O.U.M. Leaders;
Stalinist Police Left Them To Be Slaughtered
Say Fight Will Go On
(March 1939)

From Socialist Appeal, Vol. III No. 12, 3 March 1939, pp. 1 & 3.
Transcribed & marked up by Einde O’Callaghan for ETOL.





Terence Phelan, special correspondent in France of the Socialist Appeal, met and talked to leaders of the Spanish Bolshevik-Leninists and the P.O.U.M. (Workers’ Party of Marxist Unification) who managed to make a miraculous escape from Barcelona a few hours before the Fascists entered the city. Having barely escaped the executioners of Franco, these Spanish militants now face the constant menace of arrest by the police of Daladier, erstwhile hero of the French People’s Front who has recognized Franco’s government.





PERPIGNAN (near the Spanish Frontier), Feb. 16 – Deliberately left locked up in prison, at the mercy of Franco’s bombers and executioners, and saved only by a daring escape that reads like the wildest adventure story, the POUM leadership and part of the leadership of the Fourth Internationalist Bolshevik-Leninists are temporarily safe in France. They are scattering rapidly for cover before the police bloodhounds of French capitalism, which persecutes them as ruthlessly as did the Stalino-bourgeois government of Spain.
Moving with the greatest caution, this correspondent of the Socialist Appeal was able to interview Julian Gorkin, General Secretary of the POUM, and Casanova, courageous Bolshevik-Leninist leader who, since the frame-up arrest of the entire previous leadership of the Spanish section of the Fourth International, has directed the underground work of our Spanish organization.
From comrades Casanova and Gorkin, it was possible to determine that among the known saved are: Manuel Fernandez Grand-izo (Muniz), General Secretary of the Spanish Bolshevik-Leninists; “Casanova,” his successor; Julian Gorkin, General Secretary of the POUM; Juan Andrade, of the PCM UM Executive Committee; Pedro Bonet, POUM Trade Union Secretary; “Gironella,” POUM Propaganda Secretary (already arrested by the French Police and now in Senlis prison); Wilebaldo Solano, General Secretary of the POUM Youth; Juan Farre, Secretary of the Lerida Province POUM Organization ; Jose Rodes, former POUM “Governor” of Lerida Province; Juan Guer, Secretary of the Gerona Province POUM Organization.
 
Bolshevik-Leninists Still Missing
Still missing, among others, are: Adolfo Carlini, member of the Bolshevik-Leninist Executive Committee, and Luis Zanon, the young Bolshevik-Leninist comrade who courageously revealed how Stalinist torture had been applied to obtain a bogus confession from him, and was thereupon taken back to worse torture.
* * * *
Within the State Prison in Barcelona lay 24 of the POUM leadership, condemned to long years of imprisonment; two leaders of the Spanish Bolshevik-Leninists, whose much-postponed trial on a similar frame-up charge was scheduled by a historic irony for the following day (a week before, the unbreakable Bolshevik-Leninist leader Muniz, because he had organized a hunger strike among the revolutionary prisoners, had been removed to the fortress of Montjuich); 250 members of the International Brigade arrested on various protests; and a great mass of convicted fascists, whose known presence was all that protected the jail from bombardment.
On that last wild night, certain that the fascists would enter Barcelona on the morrow, the conscientious Prison Director, an Austrian Socialist, Vicente de Vincente, telephoned to demand of SIM – Servicio de Informacion Militar (Spanish G.P.U.) – in official charge of jails, a truck to transport his anti-fascist prisoners farther north.
 
“Let Fascists Finish Off the POUM Bastards”
On the other end of the wire, the SIM Director, a Stalinist, Garces, snarled: “No trucks for the POUM leadership: let the fascists finish the bastards off.”
Vicente was indignant. He had the strictest orders that, whomever else he had to let go, he must hold on to the POUM prisoners. He was prepared to follow these orders faithfully, but certainly not to leave his prisoners to be butchered by the fascists.
He set out on his own and at last found, at about 2 a.m., a small open truck, and had it brought to the prison gate. Knowing that the fascist prisoners would be released anyway by the entering troops, he paid no attention to them, but hastened to turn loose the International Brigadiers and to get his special prize prisoners off to some jail farther north.
Suddenly the POUMists realized that the two Bolshevik-Leninists were not with them and demanded that they also should be transferred north. Vincente replied that another truck was coming in a few minutes, on which Carlini and Zanon would be placed together with other anti-fascists. It was later learned that, almost immediately after the first trucks departure, fascist elements seized the jail.
 
Andres Nin’s Widow Saved at Last Moment
Perhaps in the general disorder, Carlini and Zanon escaped anyway. This happened in other prisons. Commandant Rovira of the 29th Division, POUM leader, for whom the Stalinists had demanded the death penalty a week before, miraculously managed to escape in the general wild yelling confusion when the fascists opened the Model Prison. The widow of the murdered Andres Nin, arrested ten days before for bravely continuing the issue of the POUM’S illegal bulletins, escaped from nothing less that a G.P.U. secret prison. When the young G.P.U. prison officers fled that midnight, an old non-political prison functionary, his simple logic untouched by the fancier Stalinist slanders, released her with the words: “You’re a genuine anti-fascist; and these soldiers that are coming here are genuine fascists; so I think maybe I better let you out, eh?”
Northward rumbled, the truck with its mixed load of prisoners and guards.
“It was a strange relationship on that ride,” said Gorkin with a tight-lipped smile. “The guards were armed to the teeth, and we well knew that if we attempted to run for it, they’d shoot us down without a tremor. Yet we were all jammed up together, man against man.”
Next day this strange load was deposited in the tiny isolated coastal town of Cadaques.
But Franco’s troops were rolling inexorably north; it was obvious that the village of Cadaques would be cut off in a day or so. Their conscientious jailor again started phoning government headquarters in the next town to get a truck for their transport further north.
Again the answer from the SIM was the same: “Leave the bastards to be finished off by the fascists.”
Three times Vicente made a personal telephone appeal to Negrin himself. Negrin’s final remark in hanging up was: “Forget your truck. Keep them there. I don’t want even to hear about the POUMists.” The situation seemed desperate, for Vicente was equally determined not to free them.
At that moment, on the afternoon of the 28th, there marched up to the improvised prison, in defiance of their officers, the Loyalist garrison of Cadaques, led by a corporal.
“Is it true,” their spokesman asked, “that your prisoners are the POUM leadership?”
“It is.”
“What can we do to help them?” the soldiers cried.
“Because,” specified the corporal, “they are the real revolutionists.” And he added, after a pause, “Ah, if they had taken power during those days in May, we wouldn’t have been smashed and defeated now.”
Those simple words, spoken by that rank-and-file militiaman, are deeply true summary, and an unanswerable accusation – an accusation that cuts both ways. It will be long engraven on the memory of those POUM leaders; it deserves to be equally engraven on many another memory.
Learning that a truck was the immediate need, the soldiers rushed back to quarters and brought round the garrison truck. Again the strange load crept off to the north.
In the dark just before dawn, under a cold penetrating rain, the open truck reached its goal, the small town of Agullana, 6 miles from the French frontier. Shortly after, the guards found the town jail, and duly locked their prisoners up.
This village contained, they discovered next morning, not only the Soviet embassy, but also the GPU headquarters, the Communist Party Military General Staff, and the temporary office of Premier Negrin.
“That was a pretty nerve-racking discovery,’’ said Gorkin. “Had they had time to learn of our presence and identity, they’d certainly have sent their killers right over to wipe us out.”
But the various Stalinist organizations cleared out almost immediately; as Franco’s bombers began to demolish the town.
 
A Friendly Prison Doctor Helps Liberate Them!
The evening of the 31st, as the bombardment got worse and worse, their jailor Vicente set doggedly out to obtain further instructions wherever he could find them. He left behind him in the jail office his brief-case, containing his official seal and blank forms of various sorts.
Aided by the sympathetic prison doctor, Gorkin got hold of this treasure, and by the light of a candle in his cell, with cool daring filled out and officially stamped liberation orders for himself and his 23 companions. The guards presented with these documents were puzzled but persuaded: the papers were certainly official. So at midnight, the 24 revolutionary leaders walked out of the jail and set off through the night for the French frontier.
The French Gardes Mobiles expelled them back over the border again, where by this time, Spanish Republican Guards had already started a man-hunt after them.
Hiding for days without food or shelter in the mountains, first from these and then from the even more dangerous man-hunters, they finally succeeded, in one group of ten and smaller knot of two or three, in getting secretly over the frontier into France.
A last meeting at Perpignan to settle methods of communication and these two dozen men, over whom the Damoclean sword of Stalinist assassination (on Nin it had fallen already) had hung for 21 months of imprisonment, scattered to temporary hiding all over France.
Fourth Internationalists have grave political differences with the centrists of the POUM; but when they are ruthlessly hunted by the bloodhounds of French imperialism at the very time it is making friends with the butcher Franco, it is not these political differences, but our class solidarity which is uppermost in our minds.
“Our plans?” echoed Gorkin as we separated. “Well, for one thing, we are determined not to be a futile emigre party. Only about one hundred of the most publicly recognizable have left Spain; and even they,” he added with a narrowing of the eyes, “only temporarily. Most deliberately chose to remain in Spain, invisible but present, working already on the long hard task of rebuilding a revolutionary party. Our day will come again. We must be readier next time.”
 
Collapse of Morale Main Cause of Defeat
So much for the story of their escape. Now for their description of the collapse of Catalonia’s defenses.
Stalinist Russia had sent no arms whatsoever since April 1938. But it was not overwhelming military supremacy that won for Franco.
“Though our inferiority in armament did not enable us to carry out a sustained offensive policy,” a non-political technician on the Loyalist Army Staff admitted to this correspondent yesterday, “there were nevertheless plenty of arms for the defense of unlimited duration. No, it just suddenly fell apart.”
What actually caused the rout was the final collapse of morale under the pressure of hunger and counter-revolutionary repression.
During the last year the food shipments from the Soviet Union had been cut down to a mere trickle consisting mostly of wretched canned milk and half-bad bully beef, paid for, like all Russian aid, not only in gold in advance but also in concessions to Stalin’s demand that the Spanish revolution be ruthlessly crushed. Food from other quarters grew less and less.
 
“Liberals,” Bureaucrats, Feasted While Masses Hungered
The masses might have borne this, as did Petrograd workers during the civil war in Russia, but recurrent and increasingly noisesome food scandals, proving that the “liberal” bourgeoisie, the bureaucracy and military leaders were greedily banqueting while workers and women and children came closer and closer to the line dividing hunger from starvation, became a major factor in breaking down waning morale.
An even more important factor in breaking down morale was the steady, savage repression of all workers’ organizations.
In the Stalinist concentration camps, to take one vivid and characteristic example, all revolutionary prisoners were divided into groups of five.
If one man out of such a group managed to escape, the Stalinists immediately executed the other four and the two groups nearest them: 14 murders to punsh one escape. “That’s to encourage the others to try it,” was the coldly sneering explanation of Assault-Guard-Lieutenant-Colonel Astorga in one of these camps at Omells de Nagaya in Lerida Province.
Thousands upon thousands of revolutionary fighters, who asked only the chance to get back to the struggle against Franco, were thus immobilized, terrorized, and slaughtered, lest their fight for socialism should compromize the Loyalist government in its mad clamor for the support of Anglo-French imperialism, which is at this very hour, of course, completing its work of strangling Loyalist Spain for the benefit of its own investors and Franco fascism. Such is the end-product of the Stalinist policy of “realism”.
Over 80% of these imprisoned workers had never even had a formal charge preferred against them. Four or five months passed before they could even get themselves brought before a judge for interrogation. And even when the judge and prosecutors had to admit that they didn’t know why they were being held, they were kept imprisoned. How this could occur is now being revealed by the escaped comrades. GPU terrorist pressure was equally exercised against the examining magistrates, who knew it was tantamount to suicide to issue an order for the release of revolutionary anti-fascists. This was the “democracy” being defended against fascism.
 
Signs of Capitulation Break Mass Morale
The last stage of degeneration of morale essentially began with the publication of Negrin’s famous 13 points which definitely pointed to capitulation to Franco. Like Negrin’s latest terms for “peace,” the 13 points asked only such empty formulas as “national independence,” and no reprisals. Those who were among the troops report that these fell like a bombshell among the last illusions of the Loyalist soldiers. In helpless rage, they stormed furiously, “What the hell are we fighting for? For those damn 13 points? Why, they might as well have been written by Franco! What’s the real difference between them and Franco’s program? No! No! No! We’ve been tricked and betrayed!” On the one hand, mutinies broke out; on the other hand despair set in. And the censorship smothered all.
It was in vain that such sadistic martinets as the notoriously brutal Stalinist General, “El Campesino,” tried to maintain discipline by terror, shooting his men by hundreds. Speeches about “democracy” were booed or received in stony silence. The tough veterans who had grimly stuck out two and a half years of a bloody and losing fight weren’t fighting for any abstract concept of democracy, and even less for the maintenance of capitalism as they had experienced it. Tricked into grudgingly accepting the abandonment of the struggle for socialism “until the war is won,” hoping blindly that it would somehow come out all right, they suddenly saw at last how they had been trapped and tricked into fighting the battle of their class enemies, and realized that whoever won, the Spanish workers had lost. And the heart and the fight went out of them.
Ever since the Negrin “Government of Victory” had been formed, it had been Stalinist practice to assassinate officers who would not follow out in complete detail the Stalinist military policy. For an officer to let his men, for example, dynamite a town’s armament and other factories before making a forced retreat from it was to sign his own death warrant; a shot in the back from some Stalinist planted in his regiment. At the last National Council of the Socialist Party, the situation had grown too horrible even for Prieto, who presented a list of more than 200 Socialist officers who had been thus assassinated. The CNT had an even longer list of well-documented cases. But the facts heretofore had never leaked out of well-censored Spain.
 
Revolt in International Brigade
Even in the Stalinist-dominated International Brigades, with their fierce discipline, a feeling of revolt mounted and mutinies broke out. The military observer mentioned above estimated that at least 50% of these internationals were in either secret or open revolt against the Stalino-bourgeois policy of crushing the workers’ revolution and supporting Spanish capitalism. Nearly 500 of them who had mutinied in favor of a workers’ revolution were in a prison camp under his immediate jurisdiction at Castel del Fels, near Sitges. Hundreds of others were scattered in concentration camps and prisons elsewhere in Loyalist Spain: there were 250, for example, in the State Prison at Barcelona, with the POUMists.
It was a moving and vivid picture that comrades Casanova and Gorkin painted of the feelings of rage and indignation of these revolutionary fighters at the counter-revolutionary uses to which the Stalinists put them. They had come from all over the world to fight for the socialist revolution against fascism! In the light of these revelations, it is easier to understand Premier Negrin’s “idealistic” haste to get these internationals out of Spain before they all began to wake up.
 
Destruction of Workers’ Gains
Nor has the terror ended. In Central Spain, thousands of revolutionary militants still languish in the prisons of Valencia and the concentration camps of Almeria province. In Valencia, for example, sentenced to 15 years, is Luis Portela, Secretary of the Valencia Province POUM organization, the man who, with Andres Nin (murdered by the GPU), Juan Andrade, and Julian Gorkin, was one of the founders, in 1921, of the Communist Party of Spain. Also imprisoned in Valencia are approximately 450 agricultural workers, representing 46 out of the 47 committees that in the early days of the war collectivized orange growing and other large-scale farming in Valencia Province. Long before the war, grouped in the UGT union, the Federacion de Trabajadores de la Tierra, they had fought against the reactionary large-estate owners belonging to Lerroux’s Partido Radical or the Derecha Regional Valenciana, affiliated with Gil Robles’ CEDA. After the farmers’ federation had collectivized the farms, the reactionary elements were rallied together again by the Stalinists to form a rival “union,” the Federacion Campesina. Aided by their private army, the Stalinists gradually smashed collectivization, jailed the collectivizing committees, and re-established the old bosses.
The final destruction of all the gains made by the workers – the Stalino-bourgeois return of property to even such self-avowed fascists as Portela Valladares – these facts filtering through to the front, finally sapped away the militancy and courage of the Republican Army. Hence although, as a matter of historic record, it was the inexplicable collapse of sections of the Stalinist Fifth Regiment which was responsible for the loss of Tarragona (involving such bad faith, not to use any harsher term, on the part of the Stalinist officers Lieutenant-Colonel Galan and Commandant Vega that they had to be removed), the real reason for the military defeat was not merely the fascists’ overwhelming material superiority, but the total collapse of Loyalist morale. The bravest men, if they finally don’t know for whom and what they’re fighting, sink into fatalism, apathy, and defeat.
When the Franco military juggernaut started to roll, the bourgeois ministers called on the workers to defend every inch with their lives, shouted that the “very stones of Barcelona will rise to defend it” – and rented apartments in the chic quarters of Paris.
So fierce was the Stalinist terror in the army that it was worse feared than that of the Fascists. This had sharp military effects. Voluntary enlistment fell to nothing. The severest military coercion was necessary to enforce conscription measures. Thousands of young workers, who were eager to enlist in the forbidden militia formations of the anarchist youth to fight against Franco for the revolution, simply hid from the draft into a republican army where shooting in the back seemed even more likely than in the front.
More and more panicky grew the bourgeois government as the defense disintegrated. It called desperately on the faithful anarchist hack, Garcia Oliver, to turn on again the faucet of militancy and confidence which he had so many times before turned on and off at the behest of his capitalist masters. It was useless.
Closer and closer pressed the fascists; and for Barcelona, long bombed at intervals from Majorca, there began the hell of constant uninterrupted bombardment, the Italian vultures shuttling back and forth from nearby Reus like commuting trains.
 
Retaliation Refused by Negrin
Revolutionaries demanded that Negrin take the only measure which even the fascists admit would have lessened the bombardments: retaliation on the bourgeois business and residential quarters of Salamanca, Burgos, and Sevilla. Bourgeois to the end, he refused; and the infernal rain poured down its steady death. Every bombing objective was known like the palm of a hand. For while the SIM (Stalinist-controlled intelligence service) was spending all its time and money on the persecution of the revolutionaries, the fascist espionage service flourished unchecked, even high in the government ministries, communicating with impunity with the enemy.
Having by its counter-revolutionary repressions imprisoned and murdered the most sincere and most intransigent fighters against fascism and drained the spirit of resistance from the rest, the government was finally reduced to summoning aid out of its own raving imagination. Comrade Casanova reports on the different wild rumors the government deliberately set afoot in the doomed city: “Three French divisions have just crossed the frontier.” “The British Navy is steaming at forced draft to bombard Ceuta.” “War between the democracies and the dictatorships is only a few days off.” “100 French Air Force planes have just landed, will take the air again immediately upon refueling.” “French tanks are at this moment rumbling through Figueras.”
The Barcelona population listened in silence and distrust. True news, filtering through, told them that the fascists were advancing 15 to 20 kilometers a day; that the fortifications, on which eight months’ effort has been expended, at Balaguer, the Segre, Las Borgas Blancas, had fallen almost without a struggle. On the last Monday night the “Government of Victory” met. It called on the CNT militants whom for 19 months it had been murdering and imprisoning, to fight to the last drop of blood, established a “state of war”, swore to stay in Barcelona to lead the resistance, and hastened home to pack valises and warm up automobiles. That night the governmental exodus began: high functionaries rolling north in their high-powered cars past the plodding thousands they had betrayed and led to disaster. On Tuesday, they did not even bother to get out the press; the radio grew spasmodic, broadcast more and more dance music and less and less news, dried up.
The doomed city, these eye-witnesses report, was curiously quiet, fatalistic, hopeless. As comrade Casanova grimly stated it, with a fierce, cold anger, “Barcelona, the city of barricades, died without a barricade being raised.”
For the departing government had not overlooked this point: by its last orders, Assault Guards patrolled the streets to prevent the raising of barricades, to protect private property, and to see that anarchists did not destroy arms stocks or munition works. This task – a dastardly act of treachery to the Central Front was carefully carried out: all Barcelona’s arms and munitions works were perfectly protected by the Assault Guards till they could fall intact into Franco’s hands.
Frente Rojo, organ of the Stalinist P.S.U.C., shouted speciously for resistance, for barricades, while the Stalinists saw to it that there were none. Those of its own International Brigaders who wanted to make a stand like that at Madrid, mobilizing every quarter, cleaning out sniping fascists, and making every house a defensible fortress, were publicly treated as “Trotskyite irreconcilables” and “scum of the Fifth Column.”
Tragic Scenes During Flight
“The roads, that night of the 28th,” said one of the eyewitnesses, “were something I shall never forget. I have been through various kinds of hell in my time, but never have I seen such a tragic sight. The bourgeois press has characterized it to the best or the literary powers of its star correspondents, but no words can even approximate it. If I could only convey to you somehow – well, things like the look on the faces of the plodding civilian refugees caught in the ghastly half-dimmed headlights as, in response to an arrogant horn, they stumbled deeper into the ditch to let pass a Hispano-Suiza containing some fleeing functionaries of ‘their’ government. But ...” he raised his hands hopelessly – “it’s just beyond words.”
It is equally impossible to convey in words the dismal, tragic, heart-rending spirit that pervades the whole area of the concentration camps, where, shattered and shelterless, the hundreds of thousands of refugee Loyalist soldiers lie coughing on the bare ground under the fine, cold, piercing rain their teeth chattering in the icy winds that sweep down from the snow-clad Pyrenees, their hearts heavy with defeat, their thoughts grim with the probability that “democratic” France will shortly send them back to Franco’s executioners. Towns like Perpignan and Bourg-Madame swarm with spies (both of the French police, of the Stalinists, and of Franco), and with a miserable half-world of harpies who batten on the misery of the internees, bartering for example a few hunks of bad meat for a treasured family gold watch. Here are infuriatingly and dramatically visible some of the final bitter fruits of the “Government of Victory,” which proposed to beat Franco by smashing the Spanish workers who were leading the fight against fascism.
 

