

A History of Political Thought in the English Revolution
Perez Zagorin
Thoemmes Press £12.99
‘If in time, as in place, there are degrees of high and low,’ wrote the philosopher Hobbes in the 1660s, ‘I verily believe that the highest time would be that which passed between the years of 1640 and 1660.’
It was indeed ‘the highest time’ in the history of political thought. It is difficult to find another period which brought forth such a range and depth of political thinking. This was the result of the acute political conflicts and social struggles of the time. It gave voices for the first time to people of the subject classes, ‘… the beastly Laws of the World, opens the mouth wide, for those that have a large purse to plead their Cause, whilst the poor are sent empty away’, but ‘… the Laws of God sayes, Open thy mouth wide for the dumb ... and plead the Cause of the poor and needy.’
It is, therefore, very welcome that this book by Perez Zagorin, which was first published in 1954 but remains one of the best accounts of political thought in the English Revolution, has been reprinted in a series of Key Texts: Classic Studies in the History of Ideas. It is a clear, succinct and penetrating study, written with passion. It is not the conventional survey of ‘great thinkers’, although it contains powerful essays on Hobbes, Harrington and Milton, but it embraces Levellers and Diggers, as well as a seminal analysis of republicanism and a sympathetic account of the Fifth Monarchists (millenarians who expected the Second Coming of Jesus Christ to establish his kingdom on earth).
The structure of the book is interesting, because it passes over the debates between royalist and parliamentarian propagandists during the civil war, and begins with the Levellers and Diggers, thus locating the English Revolution in the great radical outbursts of 1647–49.
Zagorin interprets the revolution as the seedbed of democracy. His starting point means that he places political ideas in the social context and in relation to demands for social reforms. It is uncertain how far the failure of the radical revolution was due to the imprisonment of the people in a world of inherited ideas and habits, and an inability to believe that they could change the world. Or as Zagorin argues, was it due to the failure of the Commonwealth and Protectorate in the 1650s to implement the social reforms demanded by the radicals to remove the bias of legal proceedings in favour of the rich; to abolish tithes (the tax which supported the established church); and to convert copyhold land tenures into freeholds?
In the end it became a pertinent question whether military rule or government by a small oligarchy of self seeking politicians was preferable to a Stuart restoration.
The political thinking forged on the anvil of revolution remains highly relevant today. It was class conscious. ‘Who are the oppressors, but the Nobility and Gentry; who are oppressed, is not the Yeoman, the Farmer, the Tradesman, and the Labourer?’ asked Laurence Clarkson, addressing the people in 1647. Adding, ‘Your slavery is their liberty, your poverty is their prosperity.’
The Levellers explained the various oppressions and different forms of exploitation experienced in isolation by individuals, small groups, particular localities, by relating them all to an unjust political system which gave power to wealthy landlords, rich merchants, and their attendant lawyers and clergy. They sought to decentralise political power and bring it under popular control.
But the Diggers recognised that political democracy was impossible without economic democracy, and what Zagorin calls ‘the eternal inseparability of political liberty and economic equality’.
Fifth Monarchists and others called for a redistribution of wealth: ‘to redeeme again the Vineyard of the poor, which the Ahabs of the earth have taken away; to take away an house from them that have many and a field from them who have plenty of more, to appoint them for a Portion to supply them that have none, until ... he that hath most, hath nothing too much, and he that hath least, have nothing lacking, that so ... the Land may grow up towards her true Sabbath, where she shall no more bring forth her children to Oppression and Bondage.’
Of course, there were limitations to the Levellers’ conceptions of democracy – they excluded the poorest in their society and they gave insufficient attention to agrarian questions; the Diggers’ condemnation of private property in land ran counter to the aspirations of the peasant majority; and the Fifth Monarchists relied on divine intervention to bring about the social revolution and looked to give power to a self appointed oligarchy of religious fundamentalists.
But together, as Zagorin makes clear, they broke the mould of inherited political ideas, which was one of the things that made the English Revolution, as he says, a decisive event in history. In the 1650s the democratic impulses were diluted, distorted, abandoned. The legacy includes undemocratic principles, which were implemented, and democratic principles which have yet to be accomplished.
 



The Last Days of Charles I
Graham Edwards
Sutton Publishing £19.99
Oliver Cromwell
Roy Sherwood
Sutton Publishing £18.99
These two books, beautifully printed and lavishly illustrated, are designed (I hope) for people without a serious interest in the English Revolution. It is true that Charles I and Oliver Cromwell were fairly important characters in the revolution, but, with the subject being narrowed in the first book to a day by day narrative of the final weeks in the king’s life, and in the second to the ceremonial of the Protector’s court, almost all connection with the revolution is lost.
Roy Sherwood’s book is the more scholarly and does demonstrate that Cromwell as Protector was surrounded increasingly with traditional regal ceremonial. There is some mildly interesting information on the iconography of the Protectorate and some tedious details about costumes worn on state occasions. But the reader should not look here for information about the policies of Cromwell’s rule, or his treatment of Ireland and Scotland.
Graham Edwards does introduce his subject with some desultory chapters on the period from the defeat of the royalists to the death of the king, but his account is superficial, sometimes chronologically confusing, and often marred by factual errors. Both these books, however, do allow thoughts to be raised about one of the central concerns in the revolution – kingship.
The public trial and execution of Charles I was intended to establish that kings were responsible to those over whom they ruled rather than only to god. The king himself in his speech from the scaffold showed clearly enough what was the issue: ‘For the people, truly I desire their liberty and freedom as much as anybody whatsoever; but I must tell you that their liberty and their freedom consists in having government, those laws by which their lives and their goods may be most their own. It is not their having a share in government; that is nothing appertaining unto them. A subject and a sovereign are clean different things.’
Charles was a hereditary monarch. Sherwood shows that Cromwell became a ‘king in all but name’, but he does not consider that before the civil war, despite his aristocratic connections and his status as a ‘gentleman’, his economic position, as John Morrill shows in The Nature of the English Revolution, ‘was essentially that of a yeoman, a working farmer’: ‘Cromwell’s economic status was much closer to that of the "middling sort" and urban merchants than to that of the county gentry and governors. He always lived in towns, not in a country manor house; and he worked for his living. He held no important local offices and had no tenants or others dependent upon him beyond a few household servants.’
His rise to being in effect a king was a supreme example of ‘the world turned upside down’, the phrase which during the revolution summed up what the ruling class feared and what some of the lower classes hoped.
Cromwell was well placed to lead the most dynamic element in the parliamentarian party – the radical section of the ‘middling sort’. Poised uneasily between the old ruling class and the aspiring ‘middling sort’, Cromwell could move from association with radical forces in the 1640s to identification with conservative elements in the 1650s, compassing the transition in the revolution from demolition to consolidation. Few then or since deny that he rose by virtue of his talents. As against the men who had power only because they inherited high social status and great wealth, Cromwell epitomised the radical notion of power being earned by ability and merit (the latter included religious zeal). The trial and execution of the king and the elevation of Cromwell both happened because there was a revolution: they were consequences, not causes, of that revolution.
Karl Kautsky pointed out that the role of ‘great men’ in history should be related to the group or class which they represented or symbolised. In the English Civil War Charles I defended aristocracy and episcopacy, and his strength came from his party. Sherwood should have asked who made Cromwell ‘king in all but name’. He should have considered the power hungry politicians, the seedy financiers, and the sycophantic journalists who pushed him forward and, more broadly, the lords of manors who rightly trusted him to defend their rank and property, the clergy who successfully pressed him not to abolish their tithes (the tax which supported them), and the lawyers who managed to keep him from reforms of the legal system that would have reduced their profits.
Cromwell’s power in the last resort, however, rested on the army. A consistent theme in his career was that when by persuasion, intimidation and bribery he could not manipulate the soldiers, he gave way to them, though often then seeking to evade or circumvent the consequences. It was the soldiers who pushed him into accepting the purge of parliament and the execution of the king, and it was the soldiers who prevented him from accepting the crown offered by parliament in 1657.
As many had predicted when civil war broke out in 1642, power lay with the victorious army and its commander. But it was not the commander in chief, Sir Thomas Fairfax, who came out on top, but the second in command, Oliver Cromwell, and as Engels observed, if it had not been Cromwell, it would have been another general. It was not Cromwell who was the decisive influence, it was military power, which itself arose from the revolutionary struggles.
 



Norah Carlin
The Causes of the English Civil War
Basil Blackwell 1999, £9.99
Norah Carlin’s new book is designed as an introduction for students. It includes a useful chronological table of events, a glossary of technical terms, and a guide to further reading. It is distinguished from the usual run of such books by its attention to theory in its opening and concluding chapters – the general problem of causation in history, and of the role of individuals, of ideas, and of social conflicts. In successive chapters on politics, religion, and economic and social change, she explains clearly and fairly the ‘Whig’, ‘revisionist’, and ‘post-revisionist’ interpretations of the causes of the English Civil War. For those who have been fed on a diet of revisionism, the book provides an informative and insightful corrective. Norah Carlin steers between the excesses of Whiggism and revisionism and incorporates their researches into a broad and balanced post-revisionist perspective.
Her philosophical approach is perhaps well illustrated by the following passage:
It is as difficult to talk of disproving suggested causes of historical events as it is to talk of proving them. Existing arguments for a theory can be criticised, but it is always possible that better arguments could be put forward, or the theory itself developed and improved. That the testing of a theory may lead to its being modified rather than abandoned is evident from the whole history of natural and social science. That is why it is wrong, for example, to claim that the theory of history as class struggle has been ‘disproved’, though to say that this or any other explanation of the civil war is unproven would merely be stating the obvious.
On this note class and class struggle disappear from the book.
The book is structured on a similar model to Lawrence Stone’s The Causes of the English Revolution (1972), which begins with theory and then proceeds to arrange causes in three categories – ‘preconditions’, ‘precipitants’, and ‘triggers’. Norah Carlin proceeds from a chapter on The Crisis of 1637–42, which approximates to Stone’s ‘triggers’ (it contains a helpful critique of the fashionable ‘three kingdoms’ interpretation – the interrelationships between events in Scotland, Ireland and England). Next there are two chapters on the political and religious tensions since 1603, which are similar to Stone’s ‘precipitants’ (including useful discussions of whether there were conflicts between ‘absolute monarchy’ and ‘limited monarchy’, and whether the Puritans were ‘revolutionaries’ or ‘conservatives’). And then a chapter on long term economic and social changes, which may be likened to Stone’s ‘preconditions’ (it involves a discussion of ‘backwardness’ and ‘modernisation’). Of course, the contents and conclusions of Norah Carlin’s chapters are very different from Stone’s because she is dealing with historical literature written since his account was published.
The revisionists revealed broad similarities of views on the fundamentals of politics and religion across the ruling class but this is not very surprising, because that is what one might expect in a ruling class. Nevertheless, there were divisions in the ruling class, and revisionist explanations in terms of struggles for place, profit and power, intertwined with differences over policies to be pursued in particular and immediate situations – practical and tactical rather than ideological – seem plausible because ruling classes are like that. The basic inadequacy of revisionism is that its preoccupation with the ruling class makes it difficult to explain why there was a civil war.
Two features in Norah Carlin’s account stand out: one is her attention to the ‘middle ground’ and the other is her rejection of ‘baronial revolt’. The somewhat baffling and often neglected period between the flight of the king from London in the face of hostile popular demonstrations in January 1642, and the first battle of the civil war in October 1642, gains sense from being seen in terms of a ‘battle for public opinion’ between the king and the two houses of parliament. Each side sought to mobilise the support of ‘moderates’ and to gain ‘as much of the middle ground as possible’. The ‘tone of moderation and the language of consensus’ in the petitions from counties and towns during 1642 helps to explain the adoption by both royalist and parliamentarian leaders of more moderate and cautious stances. But the pressure to appeal to the moderate middle ground did not prevent the outbreak of civil war, which began with riots in the streets before there were any battles between armies, and the emphasis on the ‘middle ground’ may savour too much of commentaries on present day English politics.
At the heart of Norah Carlin’s interpretation is the view that the civil war is inexplicable as merely a conflict between aristocratic factions. As she explains, ‘Petitions and other forms of popular participation in the crisis of 1640–42 must be taken into account in any explanation of the civil war, which was the first conflict of its kind to involve more than a tiny minority of the population in national issues: this is what made it different from the baronial wars of the late middle ages.’ She notes that when an arch-revisionist, the earl-historian Conrad Russell, announced in 1973 in The Origins of the English Civil War that ‘social change explanation of the English civil war must be regarded as having broken down’, he added that if a new social change explanation did appear, it would be likely to be based, not on the gentry, but on the ‘middling sort’ – larger farmers and more substantial craftsmen. Revisionists adopted the first part of the statement but many, including Russell himself, ignored the second part. However, by getting away from the fruitless disputes about rising and declining gentry, Russell had put his finger on the new social development which made the English Civil War different from medieval baronial conflicts.
Norah Carlin focuses on the ‘village and small town elites’ consisting of big farmers, traders and substantial craftsmen, who dominated local communities as jurymen, constables, churchwardens and overseers of the poor. This ‘middling sort’, as they were called at the time, ‘had become accustomed to regarding themselves as participants in government rather than the dependants of feudal overlords.’ In her conclusion she says that ‘it is no accident – though I have to say it was not fully planned in advance – that each of the preceding chapters of the book tends towards one thesis more than any other, that of the importance of the middling sort as a catalyst which polarised the divisions over religion, politics and government in 1641–42’. The independent role of the middling sort provides the basis for the new social change explanation, but Norah Carlin recognises that the middling sort were themselves divided, that they were not all parliamentarians, that many were royalists or neutrals. And there remain questions about the origins of the class hostility between sections of the middling sort and the aristocracy, and about the causes of the divisions amongst the middling sort when it comes to the parties in the civil war, but that is beyond the scope of this book.
Norah Carlin ends her book as follows:
If explanations of the English Civil War in terms of social change are worth pursuing – even for revisionists – it is not because they can reduce the complex question of causality to a simple, agreed formula of bourgeois revolution ... but because they can still attempt to bring together the different strands of explanation; to mediate, in effect, between long-term changes in the economy and short-term political events, and even to aim at that ‘integrating or totalising role’ towards which social history has frequently aspired, and repair the breach between the history of society and the history of the state.
This is an important statement and should set the agenda for historians of the English Revolution. I would add, however, that it was the Marxist theory of bourgeois revolution that placed the development of the modern economy, society and state at the centre of historical investigation. Revisionism rejects a key role for the English Revolution in the emergence of modern society, but that is a continuation of a debate, and the question remains, although the answer keeps changing: what did the English Revolution contribute to the development of capitalism? Norah Carlin may be right to reject the answers previously suggested by Marxists, but her book clears the ground of much of the triviality and parochialism of revisionism for renewed efforts to find answers to questions about the role of the English Revolution in the development of the modern economy, society and state – questions central not only to the study of English history but also to the study of world history.
 



A Trumpet of Sedition
Ellen Meiksins Wood & Neal Wood
Pluto Press £9.99
The rise of capitalism shattered the social fabric of England in the 16th and 17th centuries. All classes were affected profoundly. Ellen Meiksins Wood and Neal Wood make an important point by placing their study of political theory in the context of the rise of capitalism. The economic struggles of artisans and peasants were reflected in theories, such as those of the Levellers, which sought to make government accountable to ‘the people’ (or at least to male heads of households). The evolution of the ideas of political democracy took place in part in response to the economic and social changes and dislocations caused by the development of capitalism. But, as the Woods conclude, subsequent history has shown ‘democracy in a purely political sense’ to be incapable of controlling capitalism.
There are problems, however, about the methods of the authors in presenting the political theories, and in explaining the great political upheavals of the 17th century associated with the rise of capitalism. They chose to structure their book around a succession of ‘great political thinkers’ – More, Hooker, Hobbes, Locke – rather than thematically around dominant ideas of the period.
Their approach does produce some significant insights. They reveal the importance of Thomas Smith’s definition of society in the 16th century as being composed of individual people rather than corporate entities, as in the traditional view, such as the peerage, the lawyers, the municipal governments. This leads to radical ideas in the 17th century based on the rights of the individual and that government should be founded on the consent of ‘the people’, who have the right to resist it if it betrays the purposes for which they entrusted it with power. The Woods show how Hobbes sought to counter the radicals’ ideas by adopting their starting point and then arguing that when the people agreed to the foundation of government they gave up their right to resist it subsequently. The authors bring out how Locke’s defence of private property, which appeared to take over radical ideas on limiting the amount any one individual could own, nevertheless turned into a justification for unlimited accumulation. In many ways the radicals set the agenda for political theory.
But the method adopted by the Woods means that, despite sections on the Levellers and Diggers, most of the book is history from above. It does not focus on the relationships between the theorising of an elite of thinkers and common ideas and assumptions among the mass of the people. And the objective of relating political theory to the rise of capitalism would be achieved more directly and fully by structuring the book thematically around ideas which may be linked to capitalism specifically, such as attitudes to the market, economic ‘improvement’, wage labour, and relations by contract.
The English Revolution of 1640–60 is central to the book. The Woods accept the view that ‘well before the civil war’ the ruling class – an aristocracy composed of great landlords – had ceased to be a feudal class, because it had become increasingly dependent for its wealth on the rents of capitalist farmers who employed wage labour to produce for a national market. They see the revolution as a conflict between the king and the ruling class.
There is inconsistency in their treatment of the state. On the one hand, they say that ‘monarchy and aristocracy were fundamentally united in joint control of state power’, but conflict occurred because Charles I infringed the role of his partner in state power. On the other hand, they divorce the aristocrats from the state and say that they became less tolerant of ‘a state that continued to act in the traditional ways of a feudal monarchy’, and conflict occurred because ‘the political development of the monarchical state lagged behind the economic development of the ruling class.’
But over large areas of the country the ruling class did not derive rents and dues from capitalist farms but from ‘traditional family subsistence farms’. The aristocracy was still substantially tied into a feudal state. The monarchy and its court served as a mechanism for redistributing wealth from the taxpayers to at least a quarter of the peers, who themselves paid little in taxes. Tithes were compulsory levies for the support of the clergy of the state church and they fell most heavily on the middling and poorer peasants. Since the Reformation, 30 to 40 percent of tithes had passed into the ownership of laymen, and thus many of the ruling class got a substantial part of their income from tithes, which meant appropriating by ‘extra-economic coercion the surplus labour of peasants’. Revolutionaries in the 1640s attacked the monarchy and aristocracy as parasitic, and tithes as forcing from the peasants the fruits of their labour. When it came to the civil war most of the ruling class supported the king.
Viewing the revolution in terms of the relations between the king and the aristocracy is history from the top downwards. Viewing the aristocracy as already a capitalist class before the revolution is too simple. It diverts attention from where capitalism was actual developing – among large farmers and elements in manufacturing – and how that relates to the revolution. And it leaves little room for assessing the ways in which the revolution actually did facilitate the development of capitalism.
The Woods provide lucid and enlightening analyses of some political theories, and also striking accounts of aspects of the rising of capitalism, but the two do not fit well together.
 



Christopher Hill
Liberty Against the Law: Some Seventeenth-Century Controversies
Penguin press 1996, £25
There was much talk of ‘law’ and ‘liberty’ during the English Revolution of 1640–60, but Christopher Hill in his new book asks the questions ‘whose law?’ and ‘whose liberty?’ The law was made in parliament by big landowners, with a few wealthy merchants; it was administered by judges and lawyers drawn from well-to-do families, themselves landowners, and by juries composed of lesser property owners. But most of the population owned little or no property. During the 16th and 17th centuries in England ‘the poor’ included more than ‘the casual victims of misfortune or old age’. ‘The poor’ became ‘a substantial proportion of the population’ and ‘a permanent class with no hope of escape from their poverty’. Driven from access to the land and its resources they became paupers, vagabonds or wage labourers: ‘By the end of the 17th century life-long wage labourers were probably a majority of the population.’ ‘The poor’ were not represented in parliament, they had no share in making legislation but ‘were legislated against’, and the function of the law was to protect property, secure liberty for property owners and keep ‘the poor’ in order. The law was not their law, nor was liberty their liberty.
’The poor’ are the subject of Hill’s book. He seeks to recover from the literature of the period – plays, ballads, pamphlets – what may have been their views and attitudes. He maintains that playwrights may occasionally give accurate expression to the outlook of the lower classes, that ballads may ‘give us the history which commoners knew, history from the commoners’ point of view’, and that during the revolution ‘pamphlets written by people with no university education – by women even’, may make public for the first time the opinions of some of the populace.
This is a highly desirable enterprise and it is executed ingeniously and deftly. Hill shows his great skill in finding hitherto unsuspected relationships between different phenomena and in drawing out new meanings by cross-referencing numerous writings. Nevertheless, his evidence is inevitably drawn to a large extent from people who were outside the groups whose views he seeks to recover. Some historians will query the validity of his method and whether his sources do reveal the outlook of what he agrees to be an ‘inarticulate’ and ‘silent’ majority. This attitude gives such historians an excuse to avoid the questions which Hill asks, and it is worth noting that all he claims for his book is that it raises some questions. His provisional answers give a voice to ‘the poor’ of 17th century England, and I am persuaded that it is an authentic voice.
Hill’s hypothesis is that various groups among ‘the poor’, some small, others large, saw ‘the law’ as the enemy of ‘freedom’, and sought freedom from ‘the law’. Vagabonds (estimated to number 80,000 in the early 17th century) were ‘masterless men’ – and women – of no settled abode, following the open road, living by begging and stealing, outside society and its settled family and household structures, free from control by the church and the state – until they were caught and punished. They had an independence and a freedom of sorts, more than the landless peasants who remained in their villages. Some literature romanticised them, but Hill comments:
In real life I do not suppose that many people chose to be beggars, then as now. But the open road and the greenwood offered more romantic possibilities than today’s city pavements. Politicians and pamphleteers who had themselves never to face beggary, then as now, portrayed them as idle scroungers. Those whose unemployment and begging had been forced upon them had to make the best of a bad job. I suspect that plays and ballads in praise of a beggar’s life were not often composed by beggars.
Pirates and highwaymen carved out areas of freedom from and against the law, and could achieve heroic status in popular eyes. Hill gives a fascinating account of pirate crews as partners in co-operative enterprises. They were not wage earners under a hierarchic structure of authority, but shared the risks and the profits in an egalitarian and democratic milieu: ‘Captains were often elected, and were answerable to their crews; decisions on policy and disciplinary punishments were democratically taken.’
Whereas pirates operated in collectives, highwaymen were individuals, often ex-soldiers and runaway apprentices (there were also highwaywomen). The literature which depicted them as ‘gentlemen of the road’ taking from the rich and giving to the poor, as in the popular legend of Robin Hood, may have reflected or influenced their behaviour. Smugglers and poachers provided valued services for their neighbours, who did not respect the laws against their activities. Piracy, highway robbery, smuggling and poaching were all strategies developed by the impoverished to survive without submitting to the discipline of full time wage labour increasingly being imposed by the advance of capitalism.
The main arena of conflict, however, was between the law imposed by the ruling class and the customs of traditional rural communities. ‘Freedom’ for the mass of poor peasants ‘meant living according to traditional customary rules, accepted unquestioningly from time immemorial’. Struggles occurred over enclosures, which were pushed through by landlords and the bigger peasant farmers, and backed by the law. Customary rights to access to common lands, forests and wastes were extinguished. The poorest were thus deprived of ancient rights to have pasture for a few sheep or cows, to dig peat or take wood, and to collect nuts and berries. They lost an important part of their subsistence, which had enabled them to be at least partly free from dependence on wage labour. Now they were forced to become full time wage workers: ‘The law in the 17th century aimed at turning the mass of the peasantry off the soil and forcing them into wage labour to produce wealth for their employers and their country, though not for themselves.’ The series of game laws passed by parliaments from the 14th to the 18th century also exemplified the conflict between law and custom. Villagers were deprived of what they regarded as traditional customary rights and hunting was made a monopoly of the landowners and a badge of their class. Resistance by means of poaching was an aspect of class struggle between peasants and landowners.
Hill regards the English Revolution as ‘a turning point’. He illustrates this by reference to the abolition of feudal tenures and the Court of Wards by the victorious parliamentarians at the end of the civil war, an act confirmed after the Restoration of the monarchy in 1660. He rightly says that the importance of this has been ‘unaccountably neglected by historians’. It relieved large landowners from costs to their estates when the heir was a minor and from dependence on royal favour to avoid the worst consequences of such a minority; it made them absolute owners, less dependent on the crown, and more disposed to make long term capital investments to integrate their estates into the growing capitalist market economy. He notes the increased severity of the game laws after the Restoration and the taming of the religious dissenters who had been at the heart of the defeated radical revolution. He describes the struggles against enclosures, the dispossession of poorer peasants and the growth of full time wage labour, as central to the transition to capitalism. However, he does not consider whether the Revolution removed obstacles to these developments and accelerated them. His study is confined largely to the poor and how they coped during the period of transition; it is not intended to be a study of the Revolution as a turning point. However, struggles for freedom from the law do impinge upon the Revolution, a point which Hill occasionally makes clear but does not explore.
In several previous works Hill has explained the failure and defeat of the radicals in the Revolution; now he turns to the mass of the poor and their defeat by the ruling class in their struggles for freedom from the law. On this his conclusion is important:
Potential supporters of freedom from the law, or those whose self-interest should have led them to support freedom, were almost certainly a majority of the population. But they were unorganised outside their communities, perhaps unorganisable except in moments of extreme crisis; and they had no conception of politics apart from what had traditionally existed, and myths of a freer past.
Some of them fall into the categories of Eric Hobsbawm’s ‘primitive rebels’ and ‘social bandits’.
Hill’s social framework is loose, but the fluidity in the social structure at the time of his study provides some justification for this. Sometimes he speaks of ‘the permanent poor’, sometimes of an ‘underclass’, also sometimes of a ‘sub-class’, and sometimes of a ‘proletariat’. He extends his social framework upwards by including separatists from the Church of England, who ‘felt that the worship enjoined by the state church was contrary to the Gospel’ and broke the law ‘in order to be free to worship as they believed God demanded’. These people do not fit easily with the other groups which impress me as forming the main thrust of his study because they were not driven by want or seeking to preserve customary rights, and they were ideologically more sophisticated. However, in view of my earlier comments I cannot object to them being there because they had the clearest link with the revolutionary struggles of the mid-17th century.
Christopher Hill always relates the past to the present. His refrain ‘liberty for whom to do what?’ resonates from the 17th century to the end of the 20th, and remains the key to unlocking the class nature of the state and society. A main theme of his book is the struggle against wage labour, and although some historians may think that he exaggerates popular hostility to wage labour, I think he has made his case. He notes that the wage earners eventually found protection by creating trade unions, but this was also the end of the struggle against wage labour, for it ‘marked an acceptance of the permanence of wage labour’ and of capitalism. This also meant accepting reform rather than revolution. He believes that the law is no longer as ‘blatantly and unashamedly class-slanted’ as it was in the 17th century: ‘Democratisation has made the law seem less alien’ and ‘the ideal of a law which represents the wishes of the community has changed attitudes’. ‘When we don’t like laws today we organise to try to get them changed.’
Who but Christopher Hill would delight at least this reader by concluding a major study of 17th century English history with the following paragraph:
The law, like the doors of the Ritz Hotel, has long been open to rich and poor alike: only the poor don’t often think of mentioning it publicly because the Ritz Hotel is beyond their reach. Today we glamorise train-robbers rather than pirates. As I write these words London traffic is blocked by crowds observing the semi-state funeral of the gangster Ronnie Kray. Always the streets of our cities are lined with homeless people sleeping rough; but no less a person than our Prime Minister reassures us that there is no justification for anyone to offend the delicate sensibilities of well-housed, well-paid and well-fed citizens by indulging in begging. Beggars may even discourage foreign tourists from visiting London, he moans. In the national interest they must disappear – to somewhere where they will not be visible. Some may see evidence of progress in the fact that we no longer flog the impotent poor out of town.
 



History has always been a battlefield. With the tragic death of Brian Manning while on holiday in Italy, the left has lost its most formidable champion of a Marxist understanding of the English Revolution of 1640–1660.
Brian Manning studied under Christopher Hill at Oxford University. Hill was a socialist historian who developed a path-breaking revolutionary understanding of the 17th century. But in many ways it was Brian Manning whose work most effectively defended that Marxist account of the revolution from its right wing critics.
By the time Manning’s key work, The English People and the English Revolution, was published in 1976 these critics were in full flow. In the climate of retreat from the highly politicised early 1970s, the radical understanding of the era would have been swept aside but for the stubborn, precise, powerful work of Manning.
It helped that Brian Manning was a very convincing speaker. His students from his time at Manchester University remember his lectures as extraordinarily lucid. The excitement of his themes drew non-history students to Manning’s classes and helped nurture a tradition of radical historians.
At the heart of Brian Manning’s work was his desire to challenge the view that the English Civil War was no more than a conflict within the ruling class. He showed that at key turning points it was popular activity of the masses that shaped events.
Much of his work is necessarily technical, with detailed dissections of the social forces at work in England at the time. But his vivid portrayal of the intervention of the revolutionary London crowds in the 1640s makes The English People a classic work of Marxist history. Politically Brian Manning was formed by the New Left in the late 1950s. This was a movement of people looking for an alternative to both the Labour and the Communist parties. He was part of the CND movement and served on the editorial board of the journal Past and Present, which became the key voice of Christopher Hill and Communist historians.
Although supportive of Communist historians, Manning was as opposed to Russian imperialism as US imperialism. This allowed him to appreciate the work of Karl Marx without having to distort that work to apologise for dictatorial Eastern European regimes.
After a spell in the Labour Party, in 1980 Manning moved to teach at the University of Ulster, where he later joined the Irish Socialist Workers Party. Throughout his career he supported the annual Marxism conferences in London and Dublin, and made several important contributions to the International Socialism journal.
He also regularly attended and spoke at the London Socialist Historians Group. Retirement from teaching, as so often with historians, allowed Manning to focus on his writing.
His Revolution and Counter-Revolution in England, Ireland and Scotland 1658–1660, published last year, showed that he was at the peak of his powers. His loss is all the more cruel for this, although the strength of his work provides an unshakeable basis for the revolutionary interpretation of the 17th century to grow and flourish.
 



Brian Manning, who has died aged 76, was a teacher who urged his students not to take notes, but to listen and think. As a historian, he applied ideas from the new left of the 1950s to the English civil war, exploring the English revolution to its roots. His career took him from Balliol College, Oxford, through King’s College London and Manchester University to a professorship at the University of Ulster.
Manning’s first major book, The English People and the English Revolution (1976), was, above all, a critique of that history which portrayed the revolution of the 1640s as a fluke, an ill-consequence of courtly intrigue. In later years, as 17th-century history came to be dominated by self-styled revisionists, fiercely hostile to explanations based on social theory, he had to campaign just to get his message heard. Yet he had also been sceptical of leftwing interpretations that stressed impersonal social forces, suggesting a “spirit of capitalism” waiting to be born.
Instead, Manning drew attention to what he saw as a recognisable social class – the “middling sort” of artisans, farmers and merchants – who became local powers in the 1650s and were potentially at odds with more radical supporters of the revolution, such as army agitators, the Levellers and Diggers and the dissenting sects. He showed that the unity implied in such republican terms as “the good old cause” masked continuing structures of inequality, from which plebeians had lost.
A second study, 1649: The Crisis of the English Revolution (1992), focused on the revolution at its height, the processes which culminated in the execution of Charles I, and their obverse, the defeat of the Leveller-led mutinies. Aristocrats, Plebeians and Revolution in England 1640–1660 (1996) and The Far Left and the English Revolution (1999) set out the intellectual origins upon which his history was based.
English socialist historians of the last half-century, like Manning’s mentor at Balliol, Christopher Hill (obituary, February 26 2003) had generally refrained from examining explicit Marxist concepts, such as accumulation, surplus or class. Manning returned to the theoretical sources, not from a desire to fit history into boxes, but to challenge the assumptions at the back of his own mind.
His father, Lionel, was a sports correspondent, and his half-brother, J.L. Manning, was to pursue the same career on the Daily Mail. After prep school in Chichester, Sussex, Manning himself went to Lancing College, winning the prestigious Brackenbury scholarship to Balliol. He was appointed to a lectureship at Manchester in 1959, and, in 1980, became professor at the University of Ulster, becoming emeritus upon his retirement in 1992.
From its foundation until his move to Manchester, Manning served on the editorial board of the journal Past and Present, which been set up in 1952, largely by Communist party historians, to elaborate “history from below” – the past as the story of generations of workers and peasants, women and men, struggling to make themselves and their world.
In a group dominated by Hill and his fellow communists, Manning was an odd man out, eschewing the CP and embracing instead the emerging new left. In one 1957 essay, he commented that “there can be no more coexistence between British socialism and American capitalism than there can be between British socialism and Soviet communism.”
By the mid-1960s, his activism was primarily expressed in support for CND, and it was within that milieu that he met his future wife, Noreen. Their son, Toby, was born in 1966, although Manning and Noreen separated before his move to Ulster.
To his study of the English revolution, Manning brought patient scholarship. His sources were drawn from the record of printed papers, petitions, pamphlets and newspapers. He let those sources speak to him with the optimism of their times. “I’ve reached December 1659 [just weeks before the return of Charles II],” he joked, “and I still can’t believe that the Restoration happened.”
Revolution and Counter-Revolution in England, Ireland and Scotland, 1658–1660 (2003) ended with the defeat of the revolution and the monarchy back in place. Yet this was a demystified monarchy, aware of its limitations and unable to return to absolutism.
Following Manning’s move to Ulster, he began lecturing at the Socialist Workers’ party’s annual Marxism summer schools in London. A frequent visitor to Italy, he took pleasure in pubs, cigars and the company of friends, and, in retirement, continued to address meetings of the London Socialist Historians’ Group. His son survives him.

Brian Manning, historian, born May 21 1927; died April 24 2004

 



Brian Manning looks back at the life of the distinguished historian Rodney Hilton
This is an occasion to mourn the passing of Rodney Hilton on 7 June 2002, but it is also an occasion to celebrate a life devoted to Marxist history.
Rodney Hilton was concerned that Marxist theories of English feudalism were based on a few secondary authorities which were written by non-Marxists. His aim was to base a Marxist interpretation of English feudalism on research in the archives on the primary sources. This he did with great success.
He was suspicious of theory divorced from practice. He observed that British Marxist historians did not often make explicit the theories that inspired their work. ‘As one who accepts the basic principles of historical materialism,’ he said of himself, ‘I am nevertheless not so much concerned with debates located purely within its theoretical constructs as with the explanation of the actual historical process.’
He accepted that the Marxist concept of the mode of production was crucial to understanding the moving forces of history. He held that it was essential to recognise feudalism as a mode of production. This was the mode in which the ruling class of landowners/landlords exploited a class of peasants. The latter possessed their own means of subsistence but paid part of the fruits of their labour to their landlord in labour services, or rent in kind in money.
He made an important contribution in arguing that the peasants were a class, devoting the first chapter of his book The English Peasantry in the Later Middle Ages to this:
‘(i) They possess, even if they do not own, the means of agricultural production by which they subsist.
(ii) They work their holdings essentially as a family unit, primarily with family labour.
(iii) They are normally associated in larger units than the family, that is villages or hamlets, with greater or lesser elements of common property and collective rights according to the character of the economy.
(iv) Ancillary workers, such as agricultural labourers, artisans or building workers, are derived from their own ranks and are therefore part of the peasantry.
(v) They support superimposed classes and institutions such as landlords, church, state, towns, by producing more than is necessary for their own subsistence and economic reproduction.’



Hilton was
a historian of the peasantry
and sought to establish
their centrality in history



Rodney Hilton was a historian of the peasantry and sought to establish their centrality in history: ‘The exploitation of servile peasants by a landowning class is widespread in world history, from Asia to the Americas, from ancient to modern times.’ His experiences taught him of contemporary societies where the majority of the population were peasants, and of the problems of decolonisation and of countries seeking to industrialise. He protested against Eurocentric biases, and against divisions of history into ancient, medieval and modern epochs, which obscured the ubiquity of peasantries and their relevance to the present. And he did not ignore women peasants, including them in his essays in Class Conflict and the Crisis of Feudalism.
He addressed the debate about The Transition from Feudalism to Capitalism, writing the introduction to this 1976 reprint of the essays of the 1950s, which had been sparked off by the controversy between the US economist Paul Sweezy and the English economist Maurice Dobb. This was a debate between Marxists. But he also wrote the introduction to The Brenner Debate in 1985, which was a debate between Marxists and non-Marxists. As one of the founders of the journal Past and Present in 1952, professor of medieval social history at Birmingham University from 1963, Ford lecturer at Oxford University in 1973, and fellow of the British Academy, recognition of his scholarly achievements did much to bring British Marxist history into the mainstream from its isolation and ostracism in the 1950s.
The debate to which he was central was whether the forces of production (‘new technology, new means by which labour is organised, the economic success of new social classes’) or the relations of production (class conflict) were the motor of change in the feudal mode of production, leading towards the emergence of the capitalist mode. His starting point was the relations of production – class conflict between peasants and lords – while recognising that ‘the forces of production set limits to – or on the contrary opened possibilities to – development in the nature of production relationships’. He rejected the assumption of some Marxists ‘of a one-way determination by the economic base of all other aspects of a particular mode’, but also an overemphasis by other Marxists on class conflict at the expense of economic factors: ‘There is an interdependence between the different aspects of a social formation – economic base, class relations of production, legal, political and ideological superstructures. The working Marxist historian is careful not to assume one-way determination within the complexities of a social formation based on a mode of production, but does assume interconnections. And in insisting on these interconnections he/she, as a materialist, will give long term priority to the material foundations of social class relations.’
He said that the weight he gave to class struggle was because he wanted to emphasise ‘the positive and creative role of the exploited’. This gave him plenty of room for original and insightful explorations of peasant ideas.
He was a good companion and an unwavering Marxist.

Brian Manning is a well known historian whose books include The Far Left and the English Revolution and The English People and the English Revolution
 



Brian Manning pays tribute to Christopher Hill, an outstanding historian of the English Revolution.
‘The object of this article is to suggest an interpretation of the events of the 17th century different from that which most of us were taught at school ... This interpretation is that the English Revolution of 1640–60 was a great social movement like the French Revolution of 1789.’ These are the opening words of Christopher Hill’s essay on the English Revolution published in 1940. To a schoolboy like myself at the time, they were a sudden flash of lightning that lit a dark landscape. Later in life Christopher Hill apologised that this essay was the work of ‘a very angry young man’ – angry at the failures of capitalism and the rise of fascism – who thought that he might be killed in the Second World War. There was no need to apologise – emotional commitment guided by wide learning and scrupulous scholarship shaped the work of Christopher Hill.
 
Hill’s century
Christopher Hill and the English Revolution are synonymous – as 1540–1640 was called ‘Tawney’s century’ so the 17th century became ‘Hill’s century’. But he did not invent the term ‘English Revolution’. In 1826 Guizot, French historian and politician, published History of the English Revolution of 1640 in the preface to which he wrote ‘Previous to the French Revolution, this was the greatest event which Europe had to narrate.’
The undoubted dominance of Christopher Hill in the history of the English Revolution may be attributed to his prolific record of books and articles, and his continuous engagement in debate with other historians; to the breadth of his learning, embracing the history of literature, the law, science, as well as religion and economics; to the fact that his work set the agenda and the standard to which all historians of the period had to address themselves, whether in support of or opposition to his methods and interpretations; but above all to the inspiration he drew from Marxism. The English Revolution took place in a culture dominated by religious ideas and religious language, and Christopher Hill recognised that he had to uncover the social context of religion in order to find the key to understanding the English Revolution, and as a Marxist to ascertain the interrelationships between the intellectual and social aspects of the period.
Among an enormous number of books and articles, I would single out three essays, because they penetrated to the reality behind what was said at the time, and because they extended beyond the revolution itself to analyse what might be called the prehistory of the working class. The terms ‘the poor’ and ‘the people’ were constantly employed during the revolution (Charles I was tried and executed in the name of ‘the people’) and Christopher Hill brilliantly exposed what such terms really meant, in his article on The Poor and the People in Seventeenth Century England (in Frederick Krantz (ed.), History from Below, 1988). He focused on the significance of attitudes to wage labour in his essay Pottage for Freeborn Englishmen (in Change and Continuity in Seventeenth Century England, 1974) and he pioneered the reconstruction of the radical ideology known as ‘Anti-Normanism’, which attributed the oppressions of class rule to the Norman Conquest of 1066, in Democracy and the Labour Movement (John Savile (ed.), 1954). These essays, and his book Liberty Against the Law (1996), are indispensable for grasping the heritage of the English working class.
There was a fundamental shift from the statement in the 1940 essay: ‘The state power protecting an old order that was essentially feudal was violently overthrown, power passed into the hands of a new class, and so the freer development of capitalism was made possible. The civil war was a class war,’ to the statement in 1980, rejecting the agency of the bourgeoisie and focusing on the outcome of the revolution as unforeseen by the revolutionaries: ‘The English Revolution was brought about neither by the wishes of the bourgeoisie, nor by the leaders of the Long Parliament, but its outcome was the establishment of conditions far more favourable to the development of capitalism than those which prevailed before 1640.’ A bourgeois revolution is therefore not one made by the bourgeoisie but one which in effect allows the creation of conditions for the development of capitalism. (A Bourgeois Revolution, in J.G.A. Pocock (ed.), Three British Revolutions, 1980). This interpretation leaves many problems unsolved.
What was the outcome of the English Revolution? It was of great consequence to the history of the country. Access to common lands to pasture a few animals and to collect wood and fuel was vital to keeping many poor peasants and rural artisans from total dependence on wages. Enclosures involved the dividing of common lands into private properties and ‘the appropriation to one person of land which had previously been at the disposal of the whole community’. Despite popular hopes at the start of the revolution that parliament would oppose enclosures, the revolutionary regimes came down in favour of them. The revolution put no obstacle in the way of the development of agrarian capitalism. The criterion shifted during the revolution from what was for the good of the community to what was for the profit of the individual.
A decisive consequence of the revolution was that a single, universal church to which all subjects were obliged by law to belong could not be restored after 1660, as a result of the experience and legacy of the revolution. Against fierce resistance from the ruling class, people won alternatives and choices in religion, in place of the monopoly of a single church, in what amounted to ‘free market Christianity’.
Feudal dues were abolished during the revolution and not revived after 1660. The Cromwellian conquest of Ireland, and the replacement of Irish Catholic landowners by English Protestant landowners was not reversed at the Restoration. During the revolution black slave labour was introduced into capitalist enterprises in British colonies, the slave trade was established, as was the belief in white supremacy. This was confirmed at the Restoration.
During the civil wars and revolution parliament mobilised fiscal and naval resources which were bequeathed to the state of the restored monarchy, and laid the foundations for Britain’s commercial, naval and colonial development, which transformed the country from a comparatively minor power to one of the great powers of Europe
Christopher Hill spent his life seeking to persuade people that the English Revolution was a decisive event or, as he titled his last book, England’s Turning Point (1998), and he succeeded.
A brilliant, often sardonic wit, an incisive mind, and a deeply compassionate person, he was the finest product of the British radical tradition, and he did more than anybody to establish Marxism as central to that tradition. It is hard to accept that there will no longer, year by year, be a new book by Christopher Hill, enlightening, stimulating new thoughts, and no doubt something to quarrel with.
 



Christopher Hill was especially conscious of the interaction between past and present. Attitudes towards the past and interpretations of history alter as a result of changes in contemporary society. [1] For him the most dramatic and far-reaching examples of the revolutionising of historical studies by present day politics were ‘women’s history’ and ‘history from below’.
‘Women’s history, I suppose, is the best advertisement for the beneficial result of asking of the past questions which arise from the present ... One of the things I am most ashamed of is that for decades I ... somehow assumed that’ political demands being made only in the name of men ‘had to be taken for granted in 17th century England. But if we are to understand that society we have to ask why it was taken for granted ... Once we ask the question, other questions are opened up’ and there has to be a huge rethinking about the past. [2]
‘The most fruitful change in historical attitudes in my time’, he wrote, ‘I think has been the emergence of "history from below" – the realisation that ordinary people have a history, that they may have played a greater part in determining the shape of the historical process, whether for change or for continuity, than we have thought’. [3] Attention had to shift from nobles, gentry, merchants and clergy to peasants, artisans and ‘the poor’, and their significant roles in the English Revolution. This was the product of a growing sense in the present that ‘ordinary people’ (I dislike the term) can change the world, and take inspiration from the history of popular movements.
Christopher Hill was opposed to the ‘departmentalisation of history’ and chopping it up into bits labelled ‘constitutional history’, ‘political history’, ‘economic history’, ‘religious history’, ‘literary history’, ‘women’s history’, and ‘people’s history’. [4]
The historian should not stay on the surface of events; his or her interest should not be limited to State Papers, Acts and Ordinances, decisions of judges and local magistrates ... He or she should listen – carefully and critically – to ballads, plays, pamphlets, newspapers, tracts ... to every source that can help him or her to get the feel of how people lived and in what ways their sensitivity differed from ours ... The historian must listen to alchemists and astrologers no less than to bishops, to demands of London crowds; and he or she must try to understand the motivation of rioters, whether they are labelled anti-Catholic or anti-enclosure rioters or simply food rioters. [5]
Whatever his starting point, Hill’s stress was always on the interconnectedness of different aspects of history, whether religion and society, or literature and politics. [6] This may be regarded as a chief aim of the Marxist interpretation of history. In his economic history of early modern England he said, ‘My aim has been all through to emphasise interaction between politics and economics, seeing neither as a sufficient cause in itself.’ Political revolution has economic causes, and political revolution transforms social and economic life. [7]
In the 1930s and 1940s he thought that the pendulum of historical studies had swung too far towards economic interpretations and he set himself to revive ‘interest in the ideas that motivated the 17th century revolutionaries’. [8] He recognised that the English Revolution took place in a world very different from our own – a world dominated by religion and religious idioms. He sought to dissociate Marxist history from economic determinism, and condemned the ‘crude’ belief that ‘the material conflicts are the only ones deserving serious analysis’. [9] ‘Marx himself did not fall into the error of thinking that men’s ideas were merely a pale reflection of economic needs ...’ [10] ‘Any adequate interpretation of the English Revolution must give full place to questions of religion and church government, must help us to grasp the political and social implications of theological heresy.’ [11]
He devoted a great deal of his historical work to the history of ideas. In his view this was essential for the study of revolution: ‘Men...do not break lightly with the past: if they are to challenge conventionally accepted standards they must have an alternative body of ideas to support them ... Almost by definition, a great revolution cannot take place without ideas’. [12] ‘Shifts in ideas are therefore necessary if a revolution is to take place’. [13] This is as relevant to present day as to past politics.
‘What mattered in the English Revolution’, wrote Hill, ‘was that the ruling class was deeply divided at a time when there was much combustible material among the lower classes usually excluded from politics.’ [14] The ruling class was split over constitutional and ecclesiastical matters, but some artisans, apprentices and women demanded voices in questions of church and state. Hill suggested that there were two revolutions in mid-17th century England: one was a struggle for power between two sections of the ruling class, and the other was a struggle for a share in power by plebeian elements, often linked with demands for reform of the legal system and for the abolition of tithes (taxes for payment of the clergy), and sometimes expressing hostility to the ruling class. The latter frightened the propertied classes to reunite in order to reassert their dominance and settled the final outcome of the revolutions. [15]
Hill’s preliminary interpretation of the English Revolution was put forward in 1940 [16], and elaborated in a volume of documents, edited with Edmund Dell (a future Labour minister) in 1949, in which the introduction declared:
Our subject here is the story of how one social class was driven from power by another, and how the form of state power appropriate to the needs of the first was replaced by one appropriate to those of the second. The first class, the ruling class in England in the first decades of the 17th century, was a semi-feudal landed aristocracy ... The new class which grew up inside English feudal society ... was the bourgeoisie – merchants, industrialists, and landowners regarding their estates primarily as a source of money profits rather than as a means of maintaining feudal followers. [17]
Intensive research into the parties of the civil war rendered this interpretation unsustainable, and the struggle could not be demonstrated as having been between a ‘bourgeoisie’ and a ‘semi-feudal landed aristocracy’. In the 1960s and 1970s Hill abandoned the bourgeoisie.
‘The Marxist conception of a bourgeois revolution, which I find the most helpful model for understanding the English Revolution,’ he wrote, ‘does not mean a revolution made by the bourgeoisie.’ [18] There was no self conscious bourgeoisie which planned and willed the revolution. But the English Revolution was a bourgeois revolution because its outcome, though glimpsed by few of its participants, ‘was the establishment of conditions far more favourable to the development of capitalism than those which prevailed before 1640’. [19]
In the conjuncture of upheavals in the 1640s and 1650s, social forces and ideas were juxtaposed to each other, sometimes unrelated to the development of capitalism, sometimes assimilating with the development of capitalism. This conjuncture included ‘not only the individualism of those who wished to make money by doing what they wanted with their own, but also the individualism of those who wished to follow their own consciences in worshipping god, and whose consciences led them to challenge the institutions of a stratified hierarchical society’. [20] Among the outcomes stressed by Hill was the overthrow by popular resistance of the monopoly of the state church, to which all subjects were obliged by law to belong, and the creation of space for people to have alternatives and choices in religion, in what has been described as ‘free market Christianity’. The expropriation of poor peasants was not prevented by popular resistance during the revolution, and the process continued by which more and more people became landless and dependent on working as wage labourers. During the revolution black slave labour was imposed in British colonies, the slave trade was established, and white supremacy was asserted. This was confirmed and extended after 1660. Hill argued powerfully that the outcome of the revolution facilitated the development of capitalism. This was not the objective of the revolution but the result of social forces drawn in the wake of the revolution. [21]

Notes
1. C. Hill, Change and Continuity in 17th Century England (London 1974), p. 284.
2. C. Hill, History and the Present, in A Nation of Change and Novelty (London 1990), pp. 245–246.
3. Ibid., p. 245.
4. C. Hill, Intellectual Origins of the English Revolution (Oxford 1965), p. 300.
5. C. Hill, The English Bible and the Seventeenth Century Revolution (London 1993), pp. 436–437.
6. C. Hill, Milton and the English Revolution (London 1977).
7. C. Hill, Reformation to Industrial Revolution 1530–1780 (London 1969), p. 14.
8. C. Hill, Intellectual Origins of the English Revolution, op. cit., p. 6.
9. C. Hill, Economic Problems of the Church (Oxford 1956), pp. x, xiii–xiv.
10. C. Hill, Intellectual Origins of the English Revolution, op. cit., p. 3.
11. C. Hill, Puritanism and Revolution (London 1958), p. 29.
12. C. Hill, Intellectual Origins of the English Revolution, op. cit., pp. 1, 5–6.
13. C. Hill, Change and Continuity in 17th Century England, op. cit., p. 282.
14. C. Hill, A Bourgeois Revolution?, in J.G.A. Pocock (ed.), Three British Revolutions: 1641, 1688, 1776 (Princeton 1980), p. 124.
15. C. Hill, The Century of Revolution 1603–1714 (Edinburgh 1961), p. 188; C. Hill, The World Turned Upside Down (London 1972), p. 12.
16. C. Hill, The English Revolution, 1640 (London 1940).
17. C. Hill and E. Dell (eds.), The Good Old Cause: The English Revolution of 1640–60 (London 1949), pp. 20–21.
18. C. Hill, Change and Continuity in 17th Century England, op. cit., pp. 279–280.
19. C. Hill, A Bourgeois Revolution?, op. cit., pp. 110, 111, 115, 134.
20. Ibid., p. 112.
21. Ibid.; C. Hill, The Place of the 17th Century Revolution in English History, in A Nation of Change and Novelty, op. cit.
 



R. Brenner
Merchants and Revolution: Commercial Change, Political Conflict and London’s Overseas Traders, 1550–1653
Cambridge University Press 1993, £40
The first great debate on the transition from feudalism to capitalism was started by the publication in 1946 of Maurice Dobb’s Studies in the Development of Capitalism [1], and the second was begun by Robert Brenner’s article on Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development in Pre-Industrial Europe in Past And Present (1976). [2] These debates provide for Marxists a framework within which to interpret the English Revolution of 1640 to 1660. Brenner’s important new book is a major contribution to the latter. It is concerned with the role of the London merchants in the revolution, but a Postscript of 78 pages places his subject in the context of a general interpretation of the revolution.
In 1961 Valerie Pearl made the first detailed attempt to establish the allegiances of London merchants in the civil war. She found that most of the biggest merchants who dominated the great chartered overseas trading companies and the government of the city were royalists, while the parliamentarians were ‘merchants of the middle rank’, ‘... wealthy, but not the wealthiest men in the city ...’, ‘... important traders but not directors of the chartered companies ...’ [3] Brenner carried this research further in an article in 1973 which was the embryo of the present book. [4]
A serious problem in analysing the parties is that even among well documented groups like gentry and merchants there are substantial numbers about whom no information can be found of their allegiances in the civil war. Brenner has examined 274 of the London merchant elite, but for about half of them there is no evidence about which side they supported, and this must be borne in mind when drawing conclusions. Of 130 merchants who can be allocated to the parties, 78 were royalists, 43 were parliamentarians, and nine were side changers. Breaking these figures down, he finds that the leading merchants of the Levant and the East India companies, which controlled the city government before the revolution, were overwhelmingly royalists, while the Merchant Adventurers, who were now less dominant than they had been in the 16th century, were more evenly divided. [5]
Independently of each other, Robert Brenner and Keith Lindley have analysed the signatories of party forming petitions from Londoners in 1641-2 and reached broadly the same conclusions. Lindley’s fuller account shows that the royalist citizens were ‘the men of wealth and superior standing, the city’s traditional rulers ...’ Twice as many overseas merchants were royalists as were parliamentarians. The typical parliamentarian ‘was the more modestly prosperous domestic tradesman with his own house and shop, and sometimes other city property, who was engaged in the retailing of textile and other goods’. He was a citizen of substance but ‘generally less prosperous, well-connected and powerful’ than the typical royalist. ‘It was this kind of London citizen, working with fellow militants in his parish, ward and livery company, and ready to exert a radical influence in the city’s and kingdom’s affairs, who provided much of the dynamism in the English Revolution.’ [6]
It is thus now well established that the merchant elite of London – the richest and most powerful citizens – were mostly royalists in the civil war. This substantiates the Marxist thesis, as advanced by Dobb, that the great merchants were tied into feudal society, their wealth and power were derived from royal and aristocratic grants and favours, and they were not agents of the transition from feudalism to capitalism. [7] Brenner notes that the ability of these merchants to make a profit depended on buying cheap and selling dear, and so on their power to prevent overtrading in their markets and to restrict the number of traders, which could be achieved only by political assistance from the feudal monarchy and aristocracy in granting them monopolies, such as those of the Levant and the East India companies:
Far from transforming the old system economically or subverting it politically, the merchant class thus tended to live off the old socio-economic order and to constitute one of its main bulwarks. As Marx concluded, ‘commerce imparts to production a character directed more and more towards exchange value’, nevertheless, ‘its development [and that of merchant’s capital] ... is incapable by itself of promoting and explaining the transition from one mode of production to another. [8]
The merchants were, however, part of the bourgeoisie which, in Dobb’s phrases, ‘compromised with feudal society’ and were ‘essentially parasites on the old economic order’. At the same time the great merchants were the ruling elite of London and defended not only their economic privileges but also the king’s cause, because that was the defence of the existing political and social hierarchy in which they ranked close to the top.
While the big merchants involved in trade with Europe, the Mediterranean and the East through the monopoly companies were predominantly royalist, there were new traders overseas who were different. Brenner’s major contribution is the discovery of the role of colonisation in North America and the Caribbean in shaping the English Revolution:
Unlike commerce to Europe or to the East, trade to America was dependent upon the prior development of colonial production. Without staple-producing plantations, there could be no colonial exports or markets. In the great colonising companies, the natural suppliers of investment funds for plantation development were London’s greater merchants. But the city’s commercial elite was unwilling to make the long-term fixed capital expenditures on plantations which were required. Their participation in colonial development petered out during the second decade of the seventeenth century ... [9]
The crucial point is that colonial merchants were involved in production as well as exchange.
Virginia (including Maryland) and the Caribbean Islands (including Bermuda) became the chief production centres in British America. Before 1640 they produced mainly tobacco, which was shipped to England, and from there to the rest of Europe and the Near East. ‘In the years between 1622 and 1638, tobacco imports from the American colonies leaped from about £61,000 to £2,000,000 a year ...’ The men who provided ‘the crucial input of capital and entrepreneurship for colonial developments’ did not come from the established elite of merchants in the chartered overseas trading companies. Some of them began by emigrating to the colonies and starting up plantations, and they often used the profits of their plantations to return to London and set up as overseas merchants, but continuing to be involved with the colonial economy. Others started as domestic traders, sea captains or shopkeepers in London, and extended their business by exporting provisions to the colonies and importing tobacco. From a mass of small traders engaged in this commerce there emerged an elite which ‘provided the most important source of motivation, capital and organisation for the whole colonisation movement ... They were behind almost every important colonial adventure of the period and controlled a disproportionate share of the trade ... They dominated the rapidly developing tobacco trades with Virginia and the West Indies, which formed the heart of the new American commercial economy.’ They are the subject of this book.
During the revolution sugar planting was introduced into the West Indies and was more profitable than tobacco. The elite group, which already dominated American enterprise, ‘provided much of the energy and capital’ behind this ‘commercial-industrial’ development. Tobacco was produced on small plots by yeoman farmers but sugar was produced on large plantations by black slaves. ‘It opened the way for the decline of small-scale production, the replacement of free white by black slave labour, and the concentration of land and capital in the hands of a relatively small number of businessmen who could afford to invest and innovate.’ ‘The sugar plantation was a factory set in a field.’ [10]
Brenner demonstrates that the colonial merchants, or ‘new merchants’ as he terms them, were overwhelmingly parliamentarians in the civil war. Of the small number of merchants in the Levant and East India companies who opted for parliament, most were involved in the colonial trades with the Americas. Very few royalist merchants were involved in the colonial trades. [11]
What Brenner has to say about the origins of the ‘new merchants’ is of great interest and adds support to the view that ‘middle sort of people’ provided the dynamic core of the parliamentarian party. [12] Few of the ‘new merchants’
had been members of the great London trading companies, or overseas merchants of any kind. Nor did they come from the upper ranks of either London or county society. Originally men of the ‘middling sort’, they were mostly born outside London and were, in many cases, the younger sons of minor gentry or prosperous yeomen. A few came from borough commercial families.
They began as domestic traders, shopkeepers and ship captains, and many of them combined colonial trade with domestic trade from their London shops, and so ‘they were closely related to that loosely defined middle layer of London shopkeepers, ship captains, and domestic traders ...’
The new merchants’ social origins and their continuing participation in domestic commercial activities gave them strong and extensive ties to that broad layer of city shopkeepers, mariners, and artisans who largely made up the city radical movement. The majority of new merchants could, in fact, in 1640, be properly regarded as belonging to that layer. [13]
This leads to another issue in the revolution to which Brenner’s work draws attention – the conflict between domestic traders and overseas merchants:
The aim of the chartered companies was not merely to keep out poorer, badly connected traders so as to restrict the numbers participating in the trade; it was, especially, to prevent entry into overseas commerce by the city’s shopkeepers, small producers, and ship captains, whatever their wealth ... Moreover, many of them were by no means poor, and an important minority ... undoubtedly possessed sufficient wealth to pursue overseas trade ...
Company charters confined overseas trade to ‘mere merchants’ and excluded people who continued to work as retailers or craftsmen, and the latter opposed this ban:
Indeed, the conflict between company merchants and the city’s domestic tradesmen, above all those shopkeeper and mariner elements that had gravitated toward overseas commerce, either legally in the open areas of Spain and the Americas or illegally via interloping, was to constitute an important underlying basis for the political and ideological struggles in London during the civil war. [14]
This helps to explain the parliamentarianism and radicalism of shopkeepers and craftsmen, and throws new light on the reasons for ‘middle sort of people’ to be anti-royalist. The Levellers’ constituency is revealed by their persistent campaigning against the monopoly companies and demands for the opening of overseas trade to all who wanted to take part. [15]
Brenner’s thesis has subsequently found support in the work of David Sacks, who extends it to the provinces. For at least a century before the revolution there was controversy in Bristol over the claim of the city’s major overseas merchants to an exclusive right to trade with foreign markets from that port. The Society of Merchant Venturers of Bristol, by political and jurisdictional means, excluded retailers and craftsmen from overseas trade. By 1640 there was a long history of antagonism towards the Merchant Venturers among the retailers and craftsmen of Bristol, whose aim was that all citizens should be free to engage in overseas trade if they wished. It became one of the bases of the division into parties in the civil war, when, as a contemporary puritan minister recorded, the king’s cause in Bristol was favoured by ‘the wealthy and powerful men ... but disgusted by the middle rank ...’
... The rapid rise of colonial enterprise in the 1640s and 5Os had provided new openings for small shopkeepers and artisans to enter into overseas commerce. In the early 1650s, hundreds of townsmen, some of them not even sworn burgesses of the city, engaged freely in dealings with the Chesapeake region and the West Indies, shipping small wares and indentured servants in return for the tobacco and sugar their overseas customers produced. A number of these figures had a history of political support for parliament and the New Model Army; many too were members of the sects. [16]
The exclusion of shopkeepers and artisans from engaging in the profession of a merchant not only maximised the profits of the latter, but also upheld the concept of hierarchy, which as it separated the status and function of gentlemen from that of plebeians, so it separated the status and function of merchants from that of shopkeepers and artisans. Challenge to the ecclesiastical hierarchy by the ‘middle sort’ radicals – demand for abolition of episcopacy – correlated with challenge to the secular hierarchy; rights were located in the community rather than in the status or function of a particular group, and as the radical religious sects regarded liberty of conscience as a natural right, so they regarded liberty to trade as a natural right. The Levellers said that it was the ‘birthright’ of ‘every Englishman’ who ‘hath propriety of goods, wares, and merchandise’ ‘to transport the same to any place beyond the seas, and there to convert them to his own profit’. They argued that it was contrary to the native rights of Englishmen and the fundamental laws of the land to prevent a man from trading to certain parts of the world because he did not belong to a company. [17]
Brenner says that in London the parliamentarian party
... was dominated by rank-and-file citizens drawn heavily from among shopkeepers, mariners, artisans, and craftsmen, with new merchants making up one (though only one) crucial element of its leadership ... These men were largely cut off from the sources of commercial, political, and ecclesiastical power by the privileged merchant companies that controlled much of foreign trade, by the aldermanic oligarchy that dominated city government, and by the crown and the ecclesiastical hierarchy, which exerted a stranglehold over the official parish churches of London. They were, in consequence, open to religio-political courses of action ...
They shifted the parliamentarian cause in 1641–2 to
a struggle to revolutionise the city’s constitution and to abolish episcopacy root and branch as the prelude to the introduction of a Presbyterian or Independent order in the church. This was a political conflict that had a clear social character, as the forces of order drew the core of their strength from the privileged overseas company merchants of London and the forces of revolt drew theirs primarily from non-merchant citizens outside the ranks of London’s wholesalers. [18]
How does Brenner’s thesis in this book relate to his general interpretation of the transition from feudalism to capitalism and of the English Revolution? Two points of debate are central: who were the agents of transition and how far had the transition proceeded by 1640?
Brenner explains the transition from feudalism to capitalism in terms of ‘... the rise of a capitalist aristocracy which was presiding over an agricultural revolution’. [19] While the peasants possessed the means of production – land – the feudal class could appropriate part of their production only by juridical and political power, backed by force. The weakening of that power, as a result of peasant resistance, caused a crisis from which the feudal class recovered by shifting from claims to power over people to claims to power over land. Smaller holdings were consolidated into larger farms, which were cultivated not for subsistence but for the market, by means of wage labour. Landlords entered into ‘contractual relations with free, market-dependent commercial tenants (who increasingly hired wage workers) ...’ Thus they came to rely on economic means – the market forces that determined land values and rents – rather than political and jurisdictional means to appropriate part of production, and so they became capitalists:
... Capitalism developed in England from the end of the medieval period by means of the self-transformation of the old structure, specifically the self-transformation of the landed classes. As a result, the rise of capitalism took place within the shell of landlord property and thus, in the long run, not in contradiction with and to the detriment of, but rather to the benefit of the landed aristocracy.
Thus Brenner rules out conflict between the aristocracy and an emerging capitalist class. By 1640 he thinks that the old ruling class ‘was by and large – though not of course uniformly – capitalist, in the sense of depending on commercial farmers paying competitive rents ...’ [20]
In contrast to Brenner’s focus upon the aristocrats transforming themselves from feudal lords to capitalist landowners, Dobb’s focus was on small producers rising to become capitalists. Dobb followed closely Marx’s chapter on Primary Accumulation in Volume One of Capital, where the first stage of the development of capitalism was the emergence of richer peasants who expanded their holdings and employed wage labour, so that ‘... at the close of the 16th century, England had a class of capitalist farmers ...’ Also ‘... many small guild masters, and yet more independent petty artisans or even wage workers, developed into small capitalists; and later (extending by degrees the scale of the exploitation of wage labour, and thus extending accumulation) some of them developed into full-blown capitalists.’
Dobb dwelt on the process of differentiation among the peasantry in medieval England, which led to a strata of richer and poorer peasants. He pointed to ‘the rise of relatively well-to-do peasant-farmers in the village’, who, by taking advantage of local trade and local markets, accumulated small amounts of capital, improved their lands and enlarged their holdings, and hired the services of their poorer neighbours. The 16th century
... saw a considerable growth of independent peasant farming by tenants who rented land as enclosed holdings outside the open-field system. Among these there developed ... an important section of richer peasants or yeomen, who as they prospered added field to field, by lease or purchase ... and grew by the end of the century into considerable farmers who relied on the hire of wage-labour, recruited from the victims of enclosure or from the poorer cottagers. It was by this class of rising yeomen farmers that most of the improvements in methods of cultivation seem to have been pioneered.
Dobb saw the point of transition as being when the ‘growth in the resources of the small man’ became ‘sufficient to cause him to place greater reliance on the results of hired labour than on the work of himself and his family, and in his calculations to relate the gains of his enterprise to his capital rather than to his own exertions ...’ Thus a capitalist class was born ‘from the ranks of production itself’.
This also occurred, according to Dobb, in industry, as the next and most vital stage of the transition to capitalism. ‘... This final stage generally seems, as Marx pointed out, to have been associated with the rise from the ranks of the producers themselves of a capitalist element, half-manufacturer, half-merchant, which began to subordinate and to organise those very ranks from which it had so recently risen.’ ‘The opening of the 17th century witnessed the beginnings of an important shift in the centre of gravity ...’ – ‘the rise among the craftsmen of a richer, capitalist element who wished to invest their capital in the employment of other craftsmen and themselves to assume the role of merchant-employers ...’ [21]
There is a conflict between the idea of capitalism developing from below in Dobb’s account and the idea of capitalism developing from above in Brenner’s account. But there had to be the developments such as Dobb described if there were to be the developments such as Brenner describes, for there had to have come into existence, before the aristocracy could be transformed, richer peasants who could afford to lease the larger farms, and who had the capital to invest in wage labour and improving production. ‘The breakthrough from below of the yeomanry on the basis of petty capitalist accumulation’, as Colin Mooers says, ‘was a crucial intervening stage in the later development of large-scale capitalist farming.’ [22] Landlords were responding to changes taking place within the peasantry. Patricia Croot and David Parker comment that Brenner’s ‘concept of capitalist relations is narrow and cannot do justice to the perhaps decisive role played by the small capitalist farmers at least from the early 16th to the mid-17th century.’ [23]
The insertion of a phase of petty capitalist accumulation before and alongside the transformation of the aristocrats into capitalists can partially save Brenner’s thesis, but there is still a difficulty about his view that by the time of the English Revolution the ruling class was ‘... by and large – though not of course uniformly – capitalist ...’ But this has yet to be proved, and research has still to be done to ascertain how many landowners did depend on ‘commercial farmers paying competitive rents’ and employing wage workers before 1640. [24]
Dobb thought that before the revolution the ruling class was still by and large feudal, maintaining that ‘the majority of small tenants, although they paid a money rent (which was, however, more often a customary payment than an economic rent), were still largely tied in various ways and subordinated to manorial authority’ and that labourers still often had some land and common rights and were not solely dependent on wages: ‘Social relations in the countryside between producers and their lords and masters retained much of their medieval character, and much of the integument at least of the feudal order remained.’ [25] In that earlier debate on the transition Hilton and Hill agreed with Dobb, Hilton saying that ‘... however important were the changes which gave free reign to the agricultural and industrial commodity producers, there was no transformation of the basic relationships constituting the feudal mode of production’, and Hill saying that ‘... the partial emancipation of the petty mode of production does not in itself change the economic base of society (and still less the political superstructure), although it does prepare the conditions for the development of capitalism.’ Dobb added, however, that ‘... in many places the feudal integument was wearing very threadbare’, and though the form of exploitation of the petty mode had not shed its feudal form, it was ‘a degenerate and rapidly disintegrating form’. [26]
Those are bare assertions, and whether the focus is upon the aristocrats or the yeomen, there is a problem about how far capitalism had advanced by 1640, and whether the mode of production had changed. It is not just a question of how many peasants and artisans had become petty capitalists or how many landlords had become big capitalists, but also how far the poorer peasants and artisans had been reduced to a proletariat. ‘... Capitalism presupposes the existence of a proletariat ...’, wrote Dobb, [27] who stressed what Marx said on ‘Primary Accumulation’:
... primary accumulation ... is nothing other than the historical process whereby the producer is divorced from the means of production. It assumes a ‘primary’ aspect because it belongs to the primary phase that is traversed immediately before the history of capitalism begins, immediately before the establishment of the method of production proper to capitalism.
‘The expropriation of the agricultural producers, the peasants, their severance from the soil, was the basis of the whole process.’ It was ‘the starting point of the development that gave rise both to the wage worker and to the capitalist ...’ ‘... The expropriation of the great mass of people from the land, from the means of subsistence, and from the instruments of labour ... comprises the prelude to the history of capitalism.’ The transition to capitalism is not just a history of the wealth of a few but it is also a history of the poverty of the many. [28]
Before 1640, however, small peasant farming was still viable and predominated in many areas, and artisans often possessed small holdings. The degree of dependence of labourers on wages was reduced by the possession of a little land and the rights to pasture a few animals on the commons, and to take fuel and building materials. The dispossession of the mass of the people – the poor peasants from the land, the poor artisans from ownership of raw materials, tools, and their finished product – came mainly after the revolution. Donald Woodward writes:
English society during the 16th and early 17th centuries had not yet become a predominantly wage-earning society ... It was a poor society and many in the lower ranks frequently sank perilously close to the subsistence level, especially in years of harvest failure. But it was above all still a society in which the small unit of production and the small unit of ownership and control prevailed in most trades. [29]
In his account of the transition Brenner leaves out industrial developments, but if agrarian developments were transforming economic and social structures in some areas, so were industrial developments in others. This is shown in two recent books, one by David Levine and Keith Wrightson on the impact of coal mining on an agricultural community, and the other by David Rollison on the impact of clothmaking on a rural district before the revolution. [30] It is a one sided view to focus on agrarian changes in the 16th and early 17th centuries to the exclusion of the contemporaneous restructuring of rural societies in a number of regions – economically, socially and intellectually – by the development of clothmaking, metalworking and mining. Brenner’s concentration on the landowners, and to a lesser extent his concentration on merchants, cuts him off from adequately explaining both the transition to capitalism and the English Revolution.
Although he maintains that the ruling class was already a capitalist class before the revolution, Brenner does not fall back on explaining the conflict in conventional terms as one within the ruling class over the constitution or religion or both:
... It is a mistake to see the split within parliament as resulting from fundamental differences within the parliamentary classes over political or religous principles or goals. The landed class was, from a trans-European perspective, rather homogeneous in socio-economic terms, its members possessing roughly the same interests and sharing many of the same life experiences. As a result, they held, to a very great extent, a common ideological outlook, both religiously and politically. The social and ideological unity of the parliamentary classes was expressed in the striking level of agreement among the MPs on the very extensive political and religious programme passed by parliament through the summer of 1641. The split is thus inexplicable merely in terms of dynamics internal to parliament or the parliamentary classes alone; it must be explained in terms of forces external to and acting on parliament and the landed classes. [31]
This external force was ‘the London mass movement’ whose leadership included the colonial or ‘new’ merchants. Brenner gives support to my own view that the split in the ruling class was caused by the intervention of the London mob: a section of the ruling class was willing to ally with the radicals who controlled the London mass movement as the only means to secure the reform programme against the resistance of the king, while another section found this too dangerous and the price demanded by the radicals too high, fearing ‘... that the further pursuit of reform would inevitably encourage popular and radical interventions in the political arena and in religious affairs’, and that alliance with radical London citizenry would ‘open the way for what many saw as a serious challenge to social hierarchy and social order.’
The aim of the radical leaders of the London popular movement was ‘to overturn the established socio-political oligarchy in London and so to significantly democratise London’s municipal government’, and to overthrow episcopacy and replace it ‘by a more locally – and popularly – controlled church, Presbyterian or Independent.’ The popular movement was composed of shopkeepers, mariners, smaller domestic traders, craftsmen and artisans. [32] But Brenner pursues this no further and fails to root the radical and popular movement in the challenge of the ‘middle sort of people’ to the existing order, in the provinces as well as in London. This follows from his interpretation of the transition from feudalism to capitalism in terms of the landlords rather than the producers. His theory of the transition cannot explain the revolution whereas Dobb’s can.
Dobb’s thesis that capitalism in its revolutionary form developed from the ranks of the small producers led him to pose that the smaller gentry and rising yeomen ‘were a most important driving force in the bourgeois revolution of the 17th century ...’ His view of the transition helps to explain the crucial role of the ‘middling sort’ in the parliamentary party and in driving forward the revolution. Brenner’s thesis ignores industrial development before 1640 and so cannot explain why industrial districts – not all of them – provided a main base for the parliamentarian and revolutionary parties. Dobb stressed the development of industrial capitalism before 1640 and the parliamentarianism of industrial districts in the civil war. [33] This is supported by modern research and, for example, Rollison says that without the manufacturing districts there would have been no effective parliamentarian party in Gloucestershire:
Manufacturing, as Marx claimed, was the dynamic element in the field-of-force. It alone made the kind of civil war which took place in the 1640s possible. In this sense long-term developments were decisive. [34]
However, there is much more work to do on identifying the revolutionary forces in the industrial districts and the relations between various elements in those districts – gentry, yeomen farmers, and merchants, landholding and landless artisans, proto-capitalists and proto-proletarians.
Brenner has made an invaluable contribution to understanding the English Revolution by establishing the central role of colonial merchants and colonisation, based on massive research. That will need to be matched by a similar study making the development of industry and the industrial classes equally central. Brenner builds on Marx’s stress on the role of colonisation in primary accumulation, but Marx also linked it to the proletarianisation of the masses: ‘... the veiled slavery of the European wage earners became the pedestal of unqualified slavery in the New World.’

Notes
1. Science and Society (Spring 1950, Fall 1952, Spring 1953, Fall 1953) reprinted with additional essays in R. Hilton (ed.), The Transition from Feudalism to Capitalism (London 1976).
2. T.H. Aston and C.H.E. Philpin (eds.), The Brenner Debate: Agrarian Class Structure and Economic Development in Pre-Industrial Europe (Cambridge 1985).
3. V. Pearl, London and the Outbreak of the Puritan Revolution (Oxford 1961), pp. 243–244, 276–277, 282–284.
4. R. Brenner, The Civil War Politics of London’s Merchant Community, Past & Present, No. 58 (1973).
5. R. Brenner, Merchants and Revolution, pp. 375–388.
6. K. Lindley, London’s Citizenry in the English Revolution, in R.C. Richardson (ed.), Town and Countryside in the English Revolution (Manchester 1992).
7. M. Dobb, Studies in the Development of Capitalism (London 1946), pp. 86–89, 120–122, 168–169.
8. R. Brenner, Bourgeois Revolution and Transition to Capitalism, in A.L. Beier, D. Cannadine and J.M. Rosenheim (eds.), The First Modern Society (Cambridge 1989), pp. 291–292; Merchants and Revolution, pp. 668–670.
9. R. Brenner, The Civil War Politics of London’s Merchant Community, op. cit., p. 65.
10. R. Brenner, Merchants and Revolution, pp. 113–115, 154–162.
11. Ibid., pp. 375–388.
12. B. Manning, The English People and the English Revolution (Bookmarks, London 1991).
13. R. Brenner, Merchants and Revolution, pp. 114, 159, 184, 395.
14. Ibid., pp. 83–89.
15. B. Manning, op. cit., pp. 388–390.
16. D.H. Sacks, Bristol’s Wars of Religion, in R.C. Richardson (ed.), op. cit.
17. B. Manning, op. cit., pp. 388–390.
18. R. Brenner, Merchants and Revolution, p. 693.
19. T.H. Aston and C.H.E. Philpin (eds.), op. cit., p. 299.
20. R. Brenner, Merchants and Revolution, pp. 642, 649–651.
21. M. Dobb, op. cit., pp. 60–62, 125–129, 134–135, 160–161.
22. C. Mooers, The Making of Bourgeois Europe: Absolutism, Revolution, and the Rise of Capitalism in England, France and Germany (London 1991), pp. 36–37.
23. T.H. Aston and C.H.E. Philpin (eds.), op. cit., pp. 79–90.
24. R.B. Outhwaite, Progress and Backwardness in English Agriculture, 1500–1650, Economic History Review, 2nd series, vol. XXXIX (1986).
25. M. Dobb, op. cit., pp. 20–22.
26. R. Hilton (ed.), op. cit., pp. 25–26, 63, 118–121.
27. M Dobb, op. cit., ch. VI.
28. C. Lis and H. Soly, Poverty and Capitalism in Pre-Industrial Europe (Atlantic Highlands, New Jersey 1979).
29. R.B. Outhwaite, op. cit.; R.W. Hoyle, Tenure and the Land Market in Early Modern England: or a late contribution to the Brenner debate, Economic History Review, 2nd series, Vol. XLLIII (1990); J.R. Wordie The Chronology of the English Enclosures, 1500–1914, Economic History Review, 2nd Series, Vol. XXXVI (1983); J.M. Neeson, The Opponents of Enclosure in Eighteenth-Century Northamptonshire, Past & Present, No. 105 (1984); D. Woodward, Wage Rates and Living Standards in Pre-Industrial England, Past & Present, No. 1 (1981).
30. D. Levine and K. Wrightson, The Making of an Industrial Society: Whickham 1560–1765 (Oxford, 1991); D. Rollison, The Local Origins of Modern Society: Gloucestershire 1500–1800 (London 1992).
31. R. Brenner, Merchants and Revolution, pp. 688–689; Bourgeois Revolution and Transition to Capitalism, op. cit., pp. 303–304.
32. R. Brenner, Merchants and Revolution, pp. 689–699; B. Manning, op. cit.
33. M. Dobb, op. cit., pp. 169–171; R. Hilton (ed.), op. cit., pp. 64–65.
34. B. Manning, op. cit., pp. 212–229, 281–304; D. Underdown, Revel, Riot, and Rebellion: Popular Politics and Culture in England 1603–1660 (Oxford, 1985), pp. 170, 276, 192–207; J.R. Dias, Lead, Society and Politics in Derbyshire before the Civil War, Midland History, Vol. VI (1981); D. Rollison, op. cit., Introduction and chs. 1, 2, 6.
 



Ehud’s Dagger
James Holstun
Verso £25.00
Basing his book on wide reading and deep thought, James Holstun has produced a comprehensive critical analysis of historical and literary theories relating to the English Revolution. He demonstrates the weaknesses of revisionism and mounts one of the best Marxist accounts to have appeared since Maurice Dobb’s Studies in the Development of Capitalism (1946). The differences between Dobb’s work and Holstun’s show many of the creative advances of Marxism.
This book links literature, history and theory with a series of empirical studies which illustrate that Marxism is well able to combine a focus on autonomous individuals with associative collectives. These studies include John Felton, who assassinated the Duke of Buckingham; Edward Sexby, who sought the assassination of Cromwell; and reflections on political violence and terrorism. A chapter on Anna Trapnel, the prophetess, embraces an excellent account of the Fifth Monarchists as radical small producers.
There are important chapters on the New Model Army in 1647 and the Diggers in 1649. The former finds the root of the differences between the soldiers in the acceptance by the chief officers of a hierarchical order in the army and the state, and the strivings of the rank and file for participation in the governing of the army and the state. This was in the context of the efforts of military and civilian radicals ‘to preserve small property and the democracy it underwrites against capitalist engrossment’. The background to the Digger movement illuminates an issue which lay at the heart of the revolution – the struggle in agrarian relations ‘between a rights-based model that gave the direct producers some measure of immediate access to the agrarian means of production, and a model of absolute property that gave them such access only through the mediation of the capitalist wage form’. Holstun relates the struggle of the Diggers to the Zapatista Army of National Liberation in Chiapas, Mexico, and the resistance of small producers in Amazonia to capitalism.
He explores the notion of ‘the containment of subversion’, in which revisionists maintain that opposition cannot surmount the ideology of the dominant ruling class culture but in the end reinforces it rather than subverts it. He proceeds to an interesting analysis of how radicals do not start from an attempt to subvert the dominant culture or produce a counter-culture, but come to recognise the hypocrisy of the ruling class in betraying or abandoning the principles which the people themselves hold and thought that their rulers did also.
Holstun places his interpretations in the context of revolutionary actions emerging from the class of small producers – peasants and artisans. He associates small producers with wage labourers and the poor in general under the category of the ‘labouring classes’. This serves his purpose of putting the focus of the revolution on the struggle against developing capitalism. This is an important element, but it shifts attention from the ‘middling sort’ – the propertied peasants and artisans – who provided the main force of revolution in the 1640s. In the end they sided with economic ‘improvement’, enclosures and the expropriation of direct producers, and the imposition of wage labour and the ideology of absolute property, against the radicals who are the chief concern of Holstun’s book. Looking beyond the scope of his work, the ‘middling sort’ who made the revolution in the 1640s were also the people who ended the revolution in the 1650s. It was not foreign invasion, or royalist insurrection, or a coup by big landowners and city financiers, but the swing of the ‘middling sort’ to conservatism that brought about the restoration of the monarch and old institutions in 1660 – a swing paralleled in most modern revolutions.
 



Jonathan Haslam
The Vices of Integrity: E.H. Carr, 1892–1982
Verso 2000, £15
E.H. Carr belonged to the British establishment. He was a classical scholar at Trinity College, Cambridge, an official in the Foreign Office from 1916 to 1936, and a leader writer on The Times in the 1940s. After the Second World War he devoted 30 years of his life to a massive and scholarly History of Soviet Russia Since the Revolution in 14 volumes. He was a public figure during a large part of the 20th century and exercised considerable influence through his books, journalism and radio talks. His powerful and original analysis of international relations between the two world wars, The Twenty Years Crisis (1939), became a classic, and his published lectures on What is History? (1961) stimulated a large audience, selling nearly a quarter of a million copies. From within the establishment he was a persistent critic of the conventional thinking, assumptions and prejudices of the ruling class. He operated on the fringes of Marxism and socialism.
Haslam originally intended to write ‘a purely intellectual biography’ of Carr, but he was persuaded ‘to treat the whole man’, which means that we have long accounts of his marriages which add nothing to our understanding of his historical work or his politics. Haslam uses letters and minor pieces of journalism which helpfully enlarge our knowledge of the development of Carr’s thinking. Haslam does place him in the history of his times, but this history is often sketchy and superficial, and the analysis of Carr’s ideas lacks penetration
Carr came late to the academic world and to history, but he was denied the academic jobs for which he was pre-eminently well qualified – his scholarship was never doubted – by appointing committees which typically subordinated academic standards to their political prejudices. He embarked on his study of Soviet Russia at the age of 54 and without paid employment or grants to fund his research: ‘Increasingly Carr found himself in internal exile, cut off from a secure source of income, living actively by his pen.’ He himself said, ‘The fact that I was working against a Cold War background of Western political opinion ... inevitably meant that my work was regarded by my critics as an apologia for Soviet policies.’ [1] Faced with the remorseless hostility of his own class, he showed courage and integrity in relentlessly pursuing and publishing his work (Haslam’s biography would be better entitled The Virtues of Integrity).
 
Past, present and future
Carr asserted that the function of the historian was to understand the past as ‘the key to understanding the present’. This is especially relevant today when the central thrust of revisionism is that the past should be studied in its own light, without importing into it concepts and issues that did not arise until a later age which can cause misunderstanding and distortion of the past. This is a helpful warning, but it can be carried to such absurdities as denying that the English Civil War was a revolution because that term then meant only the rotation of a wheel. Carr, however, sensibly maintained that historians, by increasing their awareness of the society in which they live, gain a better grasp of how it differs from past society and become better able to guard against reading the present anachronistically into the past. [2] But revisionists go further and seek to break the link between past and present, and assert that the purpose of history is not to understand the present but only the past.
Carr, however, saw not only the link between past and present, but also the link between present and future: ‘The historian undertakes a twofold operation: to analyse the past in the light of the present and the future which is growing out of it, and to cast the beam of the past over the issues which dominate present and future.’ It is, he said, the function of the historian not only to analyse what he or she finds significant in the past, but also ‘to isolate and illuminate the fundamental changes at work in the society in which we live’, which will entail a view ‘of the processes by which the problems set to the present generation by these changes can be resolved’. People are a product of history, their judgements and actions conditioned by the past, and the historian should work to make them aware of this, but also to make them aware of the issues and problems of their own time; to break the chain that binds them to the past and present, and so enable them to influence the future. [3]
Current historiography seeks to break the links between past, present and future. It does so sometimes by denying that history has any objective reality or validity but arises in the present day world of the historian and is recreated in his or her subjective imagination as if it were the past – history is not actually the past but really the present in disguise. Or the past is represented as meaningless, being random events dictated by chance and accident, without pattern or direction. Carr sought to rebut both these mystifications, the objectives of which are to prevent people understanding the present or controlling the future. As Chris Harman observes, ‘If a ruling class can stop people understanding where society comes from, it can stop them understanding the development of society and so consolidate its power.’ [4] The breaking of the link between past, present and future prevents the projection into the future of the struggle against capitalism and for transition to socialism. [5]
 
Planned economy
Carr saw the trend towards monopoly under capitalism and increasing state intervention as having led to an uneasy interregnum in which capitalism was ‘likely to be succeeded by a new order containing both elements of planned economy and elements of socialism in the sense of a more equitable distribution of this world’s goods’:
It seems to me that the conditions for that breakdown or transformation of capitalism had matured, at any rate over most of Europe when the First World War broke out; after the war capitalism in the old sense never came back and there was an uneasy interregnum in which capitalism and socialism, national planning and socialist planning, jostled one another without really finding any working compromise. [6]
Carr did not regard a planned economy as being necessarily socialist, for it could take the form of ‘state monopoly capitalism’. He maintained that the problem after the Second World War was to make planning for socialism compatible with political liberty. He thought that reconciling planning for socialism with democracy would be a difficult task, ‘but it is the only course which may yet ... enable democracy to survive’. He saw nationalisation by the Labour government after the Second World War as being a step in the right direction, but it did not result in control over the economy, and it could not advance socialism until the worker became ‘a full and equal partner in the running of affairs, including the management of its industries and its economic policy’. [7] It is not true that his model of progress was one ‘which ends up a Soviet-style planned economy’. [8] He did see the dominant trend in his time as being towards a planned economy, not on a Russian or British model but on a socialist model.
As a leader writer on The Times during the Second World War, Carr advocated a planned economy for Britain: ‘Economically, planning must take the place of laissez-faire; the wellbeing of the community and not the price mechanism must be the governing factor in our economic policy; and planned consumption – an adequate standard of living for all – must be the basis of our system.’ [9] He was above all concerned that there should be no return to mass unemployment, which ‘has been the specific scourge of the contemporary Western world and takes a high place among the ultimate causes of the Second World War’ (he is thinking of unemployment and the rise of fascism). He saw full employment as ‘the master key to social justice in the modern industrial state, the dynamic force which alone can cure the major social evils of our time’. It was the means to mobilise resources for increased production, and to bring about freedom from want, greater equality and social justice. [10] But a socialist economy and socialist values were not established, and after Carr’s time this undermined resistance to the resurgence of mass unemployment and the arbiter of the price mechanism.
 
Hitler and Stalin
From the 1920s and 1930s onwards, Carr’s vision had been dominated by his analysis that traditional or laissez-faire capitalism, and its ideology of individualism and liberalism, was breaking down and being replaced at the national level by planned economies – the planning and control of production and distribution centrally by the state. He regarded this as the revolution of his time. He saw this developing in Russia and Germany, but it would become a worldwide trend, drawing in the Western democracies. This led him to equate Hitler’s Germany with Stalin’s Russia (with a preference for the former). ‘Fascism, whatever its catch words and slogans,’ he wrote in 1936, ‘is as revolutionary in essence as the Soviet system.’ In 1942 he judged that ‘Hitler has consummated the work, which Marx and Lenin began, of overthrowing the 19th century capitalist system’.
There is no reason to say that Russia is Left and Germany is Right. That is all complete nonsense, nor do I think it any use to talk of the wickedness of one side or the other, whether Hitler is wickeder than Stalin or the converse is true ... Both the German and Russian regimes today represent a reaction against the individualist ideology prevailing, at any rate in Western Europe, for the last 150 years ... The whole system of individualist laissez-faire economy has, as we know, broken down. [11]
Carr, however, failed to recognise the differences between the economies of Nazi Germany and Stalinist Russia. Under Hitler, ‘private enterprise remained overwhelmingly preponderant not only in agriculture, retail and wholesale trade, but in industry and finance’, and ‘the market continued to mediate myriad relations which, in the USSR, were now mediated directly by and within the state’. [12]
 
Moral judgement in history
Carr was constantly accused of being in the 1930s an apologist for Hitler, and in the 1940s and 1950s an apologist for Stalin. Orwell said cruelly, and falsely, that he had transferred his allegiance from Hitler to Stalin (it was characteristic of Carr that this did not alter his high regard for Orwell). But Carr’s defective evaluations of Nazi Germany and Soviet Russia sprang from his historical method. In the first place, he viewed history from above rather than from below, through the eyes of governments and governing groups. Isaac Deutscher, in a review, criticised the first four volumes of History of Soviet Russia for being ‘primarily a history of the ruling group’ (this did not disturb Carr’s friendship with Deutscher). In the second place, Carr rejected the passing of moral judgements – the business of the historian ‘is to explain why people act and think in the way they do’, whether they ‘were right or wrong does not, from my point of view, matter’. [13] This is likely to be interpreted by the reader as an apologia for what they do. But Carr was uneasy and inconsistent about this. He did make an unsatisfactory distinction between judgement on individuals and judgement on the society which produced them. He shifted the terminology of the debate from moral judgement to value judgement. He recognised that historians inevitably brought their own values and those of their society to history. These values are not absolute but relative to the milieux in which they arise. [14] The important point, in his view, was that historians should be conscious of those values and make them explicit. However, this contradicts his statement that the historian was concerned only with what people thought and did in history, and that whether they were right or wrong did not matter. A socialist brings socialist values to history, which like other values are relative to their milieu. For socialists it does matter whether they judge Hitler and Stalin right or wrong, otherwise their history becomes, like Carr’s, an apologia, whether intended or unintended, for Hitler or Stalin.
Carr saw the question of moral judgement as being particularly a problem for the historian of the contemporary world. ‘And if anyone cavils at the statement that it is not our business to pass moral judgement on Hitler or Stalin – or, if you like, on Senator McCarthy’, it is because they are our contemporaries and our current opinions make it more difficult for us to be objective than in dealing with periods of history more remote from our own. Judgement has to be postponed to a future in which their actions can be viewed in a longer perspective: ‘This is one of the embarrassments – I should say, the principal embarrassment – of the contemporary historian.’ [15]
Carr debated with Isaiah Berlin questions of causation, inevitability and moral judgement in history. Carr held that historians should not assume that an event is inevitable until it has taken place. He observed that there were alternative courses available to the actors and other options than the one which prevailed: ‘Nothing in history is inevitable except in the formal sense that, for it to have happened otherwise, the antecedent causes would have had to be different.’ [16] In theory this is logical, but there is a problem in practice which has been raised by revisionist historians – that it may bias the historian to ignore or underestimate the alternative courses and options, and to assume that all things happening before the event were causes of that event. The task is to establish whether there is sufficient evidence that such and such factors were or were not probable causes of the event. Carr noted that interpretations depend on establishing priorities amongst the causes presented by the historian. [17] But he treated what happened as a fait accompli, and this laid him open to the criticism of Berlin that he refrained from moral judgement on what happened because it happened. It does not follow, however, that being able to cite causes for what happened excludes making a moral judgement on it. [18] Socialist history requires value judgements.
Carr was concerned to preserve the concept of progress in history. As a result he saw ‘the most significant of all the achievements of the Russian Revolution’ as the industrialisation of Russia under Stalin, but added that it ‘would be wrong to minimise or condone the sufferings and horrors inflicted on large sections of the Russian people in the process of transformation’. [19] He drew an analogy with the earlier industrialisation of Britain, when peasants were driven off the land, workers herded into unhealthy factories and unsanitary dwellings, and child labour exploited. But he argued in 1961 that historians accepted that measures of coercion and exploitation were an unavoidable part of the cost of industrialisation, and they do not say that it would have been better if it had not happened: ‘This example is of particular interest to me because I hope soon in my history of Soviet Russia to approach the problem of collectivisation of the peasant as a part of the cost of industrialisation; and I know well that if, following the example of historians of the British industrial revolution, I deplore the brutalities and abuses of collectivisation, but treat the process as an unavoidable part of the cost of a desirable and necessary policy of industrialisation, I shall incur charges of cynicism and of condoning evil things.’ [20] This serves as a justification for Stalin. But the concept of progress in history requires a broader political, social and ideological context. Carr had considered the Russian Revolution as a ‘thoroughgoing experiment in socialism and planned economy’. He did not appraise the achievement of industrialisation in terms of progress toward socialism.
 
A socialist revolution?
In the end, however, in 1971, Carr did pass judgement on the Russian Revolution and the role of Stalin: ‘The dictatorship of the proletariat ... was a political myth.’ If it was not the dictatorship of the proletariat, was it nevertheless socialism that had been established?
The Soviet industrialisation firmly rejected the bourgeois pattern of industrial revolution, and was based on the conception of central planning in the collective interests of society. In this sense its socialist credentials were impeccable, and the scepticism of the opposition was unjustified. But, in the sense in which socialism was identified with the aims or achievements of the proletariat, and proclaimed social equality as the goal, it could not be called socialist ... What Marx and Lenin meant by a proletarian revolution, and what the Russian Revolution failed to achieve, was a process of human emancipation which would abolish exploitation, not a revolution which would expose the masses to new forms of inequality and new forms of bureaucratic organisation and oppression.
At the apex of the process, Carr continued, stood ‘a politically oriented and organised ruling group, whose core consisted of a small circle of party leaders by whom major decisions of policy were taken’. And above them towered Stalin. He broke the link with the revolution. He exploited the workers as mercilessly as he exploited the peasants: ‘He drove into opposition, crushed, and finally exterminated the old party leaders of the school of Lenin ... The purges had more of the aspect of a “White” than of a “Red” terror; their principal author stood out in the guise of a counter-revolutionary monster.’ [21] The industrialisation which Carr had deemed the ‘most significant’ achievement of the revolution took place in the context of the destruction of the socialist revolution.
Although subjected to its hostility, Carr passed his life within the establishment, and he had no political base. At the end he was overtaken by pessimism. In 1978 he wrote in the New Left Review, ‘I am not reassured when I look at the present disarray of the Left, divided into a galaxy of minute warring sects, united only by their failure to attract more than an insignificant fringe of the workers’ movement, and by the brave illusion that their prescriptions for revolution represent the interests and ambitions of the workers.’ He saw the choice as being for the left to become ‘an educational and propagandist group, divorced from political action’ because it had no ‘solid revolutionary base’, or to go ‘into current politics, become social democrats, frankly recognise and accept the capitalist system, pursue those limited ends which can be achieved within the system, and work for those compromises between employers and workers which serve to maintain it’. [22] Sadly, he was prepared to abandon his life-long struggle against capitalism without any realistic hope of achieving ‘those limited ends’. But he had fought a good fight.

Notes
1. J. Haslam, The Vices of Integrity: E.H. Carr, 1892–1982 (London 2000), pp. 137, 155.
2. E.H. Carr, What is History? (London 1961), pp. 20, 31, 35, 38; E.H. Carr, The New Society (London 1951), pp. 101–103.
3. E.H. Carr, The New Society, op. cit., chapter 1.
4. C. Harman, History, Myth and Marxism, in J. Rees (ed.), Essays on Historical Materialism (London 1998), pp. 9–10.
5. A. Callinicos, Marxism and the Crisis in Social History, in J. Rees (ed.), op. cit., p. 40.
6. J. Haslam, op. cit., p. 134.
7. E.H. Carr, The New Society, op. cit., pp. 36, 39, 55.
8. The Future of History, Socialist History 14 (1999), p. 13.
9. J. Haslam, op. cit., p. 88.
10. E.H. Carr, Nationalism and After (London 1945), pp. 68–69.
11. J. Haslam, op. cit., pp. 74–75, 78, 98.
12. E. Acton, Nazism and Stalinism: A Suitable Case for Comparison?, New Appreciations 39 (1998), Historical Association Pamphlet, pp. 25–26.
13. J. Haslam, op. cit., p. 162.
14. E.H. Carr, The New Society, op. cit., pp. 101–103; E.H. Carr What is History?, op. cit., pp. 72–73, 76–78.
15. E.H. Carr, What is History?, op. cit., p. 72.
16. Ibid., p. 90.
17. Ibid., pp. 83–84.
18. J. Haslam, op. cit., pp. 201–202.
19. Ibid., p. 248.
20. E.H. Carr, What is History?, op. cit., pp. 74–75.
21. J. Haslam, op. cit., pp. 255–256.
22. Ibid., p. 287.
 

