

Toby Shelley
Exploited: Migrant Labour in the New Global Economy
Zed, 2007, £14.99
Exploited should be a basic reference for all those
concerned with economic, social and political aspects of migration
today. This short book contains a mass of information on migrants and
their role in the economies of Western Europe and North America. It
demonstrates that migration is essential to contemporary capitalism
and that, despite hostility towards immigrants, including official
campaigns of exclusion, they are an increasingly important part of
state strategy.
But this is also a frustrating book – one that hints at
explanations for the major contradictions in migration policy but
does not go on to examine them or tackle the biggest issue in
immigration policy, that of border control.
Shelley is a journalist with the Financial Times and has
used his access to its resources to great effect. He marshals up to
date information on numbers, patterns of movement, employer
interests, trade union interventions and, importantly, migrant
experiences. He shows that, as the process of globalisation has
accelerated, migrants, especially “illegal” or undocumented
workers, have become crucial to certain industries in Europe and
North America.
In the US, he notes, “illegals” account for 24 percent of all
farm workers, 17 percent of cleaning workers, 14 percent of
construction workers and 12 percent of those in food preparation.
These figures demonstrate that irregular migration is part of the
fabric of US capitalism. Shelley quotes a recent analysis to the
effect that demand for “illegal” labour is structural in
character; it is “deeply embedded” in the economy and in social relations.
So also in Europe. Here Shelley shows that exploitation of migrant
workers can be as systematic and cynical as under the most repressive
regimes of the Global South. Focusing on Britain, he demonstrates
that the state encourages employment of workers under conditions in
which they are denied elementary rights. At the same time, he
observes, politicians and officials encourage a “victim-villain”
discourse, targeting smugglers, traffickers and gangmasters as
responsible for criminal practices in which migrants themselves are
said to be complicit.
Shelley spells out what many researchers in the migration field
have long failed to do: that the state itself is part of a system
under which poor and vulnerable people are imported for the purpose
of exploitation under conditions of illegality or semi-legality.
Notwithstanding media campaigns in which politicians inveigh against
“bogus” refugees and illegal entrants, it is governments that
accommodate employer demands to restrict employment law.
In Britain, he points out, the much heralded Gangmaster Licensing
Act excludes companies that service food retailers, wholesalers and
caterers. These continue to pay paltry wages to workers who are
vulnerable to the threat of instant dismissal or deportation. There
is ample evidence that immigration officers and police collaborate
with employers, so that those who challenge their conditions may be
targets for dawn raids followed by imprisonment and deportation.
Shelley’s impressive data and sustained argument make this book
an important resource – but one that also raises a series of
unanswered questions. Who are the migrants moving in large
numbers to North America, Western Europe and other destination
regions? What leads them to travel long distances, undertaking
dangerous journeys? What is the relationship between their
circumstances in countries of origin and the strategies of those who
dominate the global economy?
Large scale migration is often associated with the displacement
of those involved. Sometimes this is the outcome of war, repression,
civil conflict or environmental crisis. When it is systemic and
continuous, however, we must look for other explanations. Industrial
capitalism has always required mass movements of people, usually from
the countryside, who can enter the waged workforce or become part of
a reserve of labour. As Marx observed in the case of Europe, the
early phases of capitalist development required active efforts to
dispossess rural people who could provide “requisite supplies of
masterless proletarians”.
Today large numbers of people in Africa, Asia, Latin America and
the Middle East are being displaced by the impact of neoliberal
globalisation. This is the outcome of 30 years of aggressive
“marketisation”, during which corporate capital has been
encouraged to operate freely in even the most vulnerable regions of
the Global South. Many economic and social reforms associated with
independence from colonialism have been reversed. Land reforms have
been revoked, welfare slashed, subsidies reduced or abolished. As
part of an ideological commitment to remove obstacles to free
movement of capital, the state itself has been forced into retreat.
Hundreds of millions of people have been driven closer to the margin
of survival and, when affected by conflict or specific economic or
environmental problems, many leave their homes in search for security
and stability.
Mexico presents a striking example of the problem. Mexicans have
been migrating to the US for over a century, but in recent years
numbers have increased enormously. The change is associated with
policies introduced though the North American Free Trade Agreement,
under which the Mexican state has been obliged to end guaranteed
prices for key agricultural products. Cheap American grain has
flooded the Mexican market; at the same time the ejido
system, under which for over 70 years peasants held collective rights
in land, has been modified to allow for its mortgage, lease or sale –
the beginning of a programme of rural privatisation.
Agribusiness has moved in, with corporations buying out debt-laden
peasants, using the courts to facilitate mass evictions, and
targeting vulnerable populations such as the indigenous people of the
south. Millions have left for Mexican cities or for the border with
the US, with the result that local arrangements for communal labour
have collapsed and that those remaining on the land have been
compelled to join the exodus.
One in every five rural households in Mexico is directly affected
by emigration – in some regions one in two. They are the source of
millions of “irregulars” who make up most of an unofficial
workforce now integral to US capitalism.
Similar developments are under way across the Global South. Tens
of millions of people are on the move. They are “survival migrants”
compelled to undertake journeys in which they risk all in order to
cross borders which are heavily policed but at which entry can be
guaranteed by payments to smugglers and to immigration officials who
are active agents within the system of irregular movement. Their
numbers dwarf recent legal migrations to Western Europe from
accession states of the European Union. The combined totals of
workers from Poland and the Baltic states who have appeared in
countries like Britain and Germany in recent years are a fraction of
those travelling to the US from Central America, or from Africa and
the Middle East to states of Southern Europe.
This is part of a global pattern that Shelley hints at but does
not investigate. While recognising the importance of “push”
factors in contemporary migration, and the hypocrisy of states eager
to exploit those affected, he does not ask about the role of the
latter in creating conditions that facilitate mass movements. He
concludes with a series of proposals for reform of migrant labour
policy: ending the criminalisation of “illegals” and regularising
their status; developing labour movement activity which draws them
into trade unions; and challenging discrimination and the
racialisation of such groups.
Shelley fails directly to address one of the issues with which he
opens the book – that of open borders. He writes tersely that
proposals for abolition of border control “make perfect sense”,
but this passing comment is not developed. In fact, as a series of
recent publications make clear, arguments for free movement are being
discussed more and more widely and with increasing urgency.
As more people undertake long and dangerous journeys in their
struggle to find security, governments eager to exploit them place
more obstacles in their way. More irregular migrants die in the
Arizona Desert, or on leaky ships in the Mediterranean or the Java
Sea. Those who make it to their destinations provide a vulnerable and
often compliant workforce – and a convenient target for ideological
offensives by politicians prepared to encourage populist campaigns
that result in detention and deportation, and which poison the wider
society by directing old prejudices towards new victims.
Migration policy is an area of the most extreme hypocrisy and
injustice. As neoliberalism stimulates displacement on a wider scale
(Kenya is just the latest example), more people will join millions
already on the move. A radical strategy is required. Perhaps Shelley
can follow his excellent Exploited by considering how we can
advance the argument for open borders.
 



Nigel Harris
The Return of Cosmopolitan Capital: Globalisation, the State and War
IB Tauris, 2003, £24.50
I read this book with a sense of increasing scepticism, becoming
incredulity. By the end I also felt indignation that the author could
claim to address ‘the old agenda of socialists’ while advancing
theories of economic and political change which sit comfortably with
those of the most aggressive neo-liberals. The Return of
Cosmopolitan Capital is less a book about capitalism than an
apology for it, in particular for the ravages of globalisation.
Phil Marfleet has always written books crammed with information.
This one too contains a mass of data of real interest, especially on
the world economy before the coming of industrial capitalism. But
this material is incidental to the main plot – Harris’s account
of the changing relationship between the state and capital.
Developing an argument he began to set out in the early 1990s [1] he
suggests that for the past 500 years the most important feature of
world history has been a continuing struggle between merchants and
traders – the ‘cosmopolitan bourgeoisie’ – and those who
operate territorial states. The kings, princes and politicians who
dominated states, says Harris, succeeded in subordinating world trade
networks to local control, inhibiting and distorting the positive
features of capitalist development. They misdirected productive
resources into war – hence Harris’s concern is with ‘the
war-making state’, with its waste and destructive power.
Much of the book is a detailed account of successive phases of the
struggle between commercial capital – seeking to move freely across
the globe – and the efforts of local states to compel the market to
serve their own ends. The war-making state is malign, argues Harris,
and it is only when its influence is diminished that the potentials
of capitalism can be realised. Globalisation, he maintains, is now
driving the state into retreat; in effect the era of states and of
war-making is reaching its end and the productive capacity of
capital – that is, capital as trade – an initiate a new period of global
well being.
Harris foresees ‘a new bourgeois revolution’ – ’the
establishment of the power of world markets and of businessmen over
the states of the world’. [2] It is this that will serve the
interests of the mass of humanity, ending poverty and making ‘the
conditions of all consistent with the best’. [3] The more there is
of uninhibited capitalism the more there will be prosperity and
harmony; the ‘return’ of the bourgeoisie, released at last from
the tyranny of the state, will mark the moment of advance of the
many.
 
Super-globaliser
The key contention here – that extension of the market brings
universal good – is awfully familiar. It can be seen in almost any
strategic document produced by the major transnational financial
institutions. In its report on the world economy, Entering the 21st
Century, the World Bank, for example, insists that full engagement
with world commerce is a requirement for the countries of Africa,
Asia and Latin America. According to the World Bank, ‘For
developing countries, trade is the primary vehicle for realising the
benefits of globalisation.’ [4] Like the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Trade Organisation
(WTO), Harris believes that embracing the world market is the key to
economic and social advance. He is not just a globaliser, however,
but a super-globaliser. In common with pioneers of globalist theory
such as Kenichi Ohmae he maintains that states abuse the productive
capacities of capitalism. Ohmae argues that ‘the nation-state has
become an unnatural, even dysfunctional unit for organising human
activity and managing economic endeavour in a borderless world.’
[5] But Harris believes that the state has always been
‘dysfunctional’ and that only when global capital has reconquered
the world of states can we look forward to an era of prosperity and harmony.
Harris sees the state as an incubus, an alien force that for
centuries has haunted the bourgeoisie, seizing and redirecting all
the potentials of commerce for its own interests. But the
relationship between capital and the state is far more complex than
is suggested by this struggle between good and evil. Since the
emergence of the nation-state it has been impossible to dissociate
the state as such from capital and from the agendas of capitalists.
To be sure, at various phases of capitalist development governments
have accommodated or strongly encouraged the commercial and
industrial bourgeoisies, while during other periods they have
restricted them. States have often been strongly identified with
private capital, while some dominated by the bureaucracy and the
military have set out to regulate capital in their own interests,
hence state capitalism. Even in this context, however, it is wrong to
see the state merely as an independent category, a political actor in
its own right. States have a class character-they are dominated by
men and women who have specific interests vis-à-vis the mass of the
population and who mobilise resources to maintain their positions of
privilege. When the formal structure of the state changes, as in a
revolutionary upheaval, there may be a change in power relations to
the disadvantage of capitalists. In other cases, however, as with
recent developments in the former Soviet Union, many of those who
formerly enjoyed power have been able to retain positions of
privilege. The key issue is the actuality of class relationships.
Much of Phil Marfleet’s work in the 1960s and 1970s focused
directly on this issue. His analysis of Mao’s China, The Mandate
of Heaven, was a corrective to the approach of those who saw the
Chinese state as a new model of popular power. [6] At a time when
many on the left were seduced by the rhetoric of China’s rulers –
by the idea of peasant uprisings, military means to power, and
‘cultural revolution’ – Harris examined the reality of class
relationships, concluding that a new bureaucratic state capitalism
had emerged. Curiously, Cosmopolitan Capital contains no
reference to The Mandate of Heaven, not even in a bibliography
which lists many of Harris’s publications. Not does it undertake
any analysis of class relations within a state or specific states;
rather it assumes ‘the war-making state’ as an undifferentiated
category which is pitched in constant struggle against capital. How
shallow this approach is when compared to Harris’s earlier
insights.
 
Drive to war
At several points in Cosmopolitan Capital Harris is at
pains to point out the shortcomings of the Marxist perspective. Marx,
he says, was ‘beguiled’, ‘wrong’, ‘misguided’ – indeed
Marx and Marxists appear so often in the text that one begins to feel
that the author protests too much. [7] But despite his ambitious
project – to provide a world history of relations between the state
and capital – nowhere does he suggest a alternative to the Marxist
perspective as a whole.
This is especially striking in relation to processes of change,
notably the crucial issue of the rise of industrial capitalism.
Harris asserts that this system emerged because those who controlled
the early centralised states of Europe wished for enhanced means to
wage war. They therefore directed local representatives of commercial
capital to use their resources for production of materiel: ‘The
heart of the national industrial system was the making of arms and
naval vessels, what ultimately became heavy industry.’ [8] Long
periods of ‘manipulation’ of private business by the state
consolidated industrial production and the special groups of
capitalists who were organised to sustain it. [9] Industry, then, was
the outcome of the imposition upon merchants and traders – Harris’s
true capitalists – of priorities dictated by the state’s drive to
war. This is Harris’s challenge to Marx, to the idea that
capitalism grew organically within primarily agrarian societies and
that this process produced social and political upheavals which were
eventually settled in the interests of a new bourgeoisie. Harris
enquires rhetorically, ‘Was there then no “bourgeois
revolution”?’ – and answers in the negative. [10]
Harris’s method is to pile up data on production for war and to
argue by assertion. The thousands of pikes, swords, muskets, cannon,
ships, lengths of rope, sail, chain, etc. demanded by Europe’s
princes to wage war on their rivals amount to evidence that the rise
of industry was driven by the monarchical state. Harris ignores those
who have examined other more fundamental processes at work within
European society in the 16th, 17th and 18th centuries. He has nothing
to say on changes in class relations within agrarian society. He is
silent on the growing impact of merchant capital, the spread of craft
industry, and the consolidation of urban-based production – here he
might have addressed the insights of Braudel, for example. What of
the political upheavals associated with these changes, notably the
English and French revolutions? The former hardly makes an appearance
except as illustrative material for the war-making thesis – the New
Model Army is a passing example of a novel type of military
formation. [11] Events in France are described simply as ‘a monster
of popular nationalism’. [12] Harris ignores the participants in
these epoch-making movements. They are simply irrelevant: what is
important is the volume of gunpowder, the number of wagons, the
tonnage of vessels required to support an escalating drive to war.
Harris has removed entirely the men and women who make history.
 
Nation-states
In the Harris account the state is foisted upon the commercial
bourgeoisie. It is the state which misdirects the positive energies
of merchant capital, which indeed corrupts trade, destroying the
harmonious relations it has generated worldwide. As late as the mid
19th century, he suggests, commercial capital held out the promise of
a world integrated by the market: ‘Cosmopolitanism seemed to
promise a world without nationalism, provincialism and racism, a
world in which trade harmonised all.’ [13]
On this view commercial capital has an unblemished record. It is
innocent of any active engagement with the state. To sustain this
idea Harris must again ignore the mass of literature which addresses
social and political change in Europe over some 400 years. There are
no peasant revolts, urban uprisings, movements for reform,
revolutionary crises – certainly none which engage the merchant
classes. History – as in the schoolbooks of an earlier era – is
the work of princes, kings and emperors. Like the rest of the
population, the commercial bourgeoisie is passive and credulous.
Consider the comments by Hill on the character of merchant capital
in England:
By the 17th century some merchants were as rich as peers,
though their fortunes were usually made in one lifetime. Such men
were quite independent of all but the government. They were busy
breaking down the privileges of local corporations where these
impeded; and they were using their wealth to reconstruct the society
in which they lived. [14]
These men, and the lesser merchants and artisans, played a key
role in the English Revolution of the 1640s. They were active in
prolonged struggles against the Crown and in years of debate about
representation and legitimate authority. To paraphrase E.P. Thompson,
they were present at the making of the modern English state. They
were less coerced or ‘manipulated’ by the state than instrumental
in shaping it.
The merchant class was not composed of innocents. It contested
both the old order and those movements from below which wished for
more radical outcomes – for example, it facilitated the deportation
of Leveller activists and later of Irish Republicans and dissenters
who refused to take an oath of allegiance to the new state. [15] Eric
Williams notes that as a result of mass deportation the island of
Monserrat in the Caribbean – a mercantile enterprise – ‘became
largely an Irish colony’. [16]
There was a similar story during the revolutionary events in
France. Merchant capital was deeply engaged in constructing the new
order. It had blood on its hands – not only that of Louis and his
supporters but of the radical activists who demanded more rights than
the bourgeoisie was prepared to accommodate. The Republic, which was
to have a profound influence on national movements throughout the
19th century, was unthinkable without the engagement of the merchant
class. Like all capitalists they required both an apparatus of state
and an ideology of belonging which could assist in the struggle to
unite inherently unstable populations. They were architects of the
nation-state, the particular formation which has served capitalism so well.
 
Slavery
For Harris it is the world-embracing activity of commercial
capital which is so distinctive. This, he argues, has been pursued
without the involvement of vulgar political constructions such as the
state. Such a view cannot be sustained.
Marx was the first to identify the relationship between
colonisation and the world market:
The discovery of gold and silver in America, the
extirpation, enslavement and entombment in mines of the aboriginal
population, the beginning of the conquest and looting of the East
Indies, the turning of Africa into a warren for the commercial
hunting of black skins, signalled the rosy dawn of the era of
capitalist production. These idyllic proceedings are the chief
moments of primitive accumulation. [17]
The first colonies were constructed upon slave labour. This was
indeed driven by the market, by the activities of commercial capital,
but it required more than an economic impulse. As Gai observes, the
merchants, traders, slavers and plantation owners needed ‘the
politicisation of space – an organised community, legislation of
the use of force, rules, adjudication, and ideology’. [18] The
colonising powers developed elaborate codes of ownership and means of
regulating disputes among traders and slave-owners. Core structures
of the state which had emerged in Europe – legal systems, judicial
institutions and means of enforcement – were reproduced in the
colonies as mechanisms which both guaranteed the rights of owners of
property and mediated relations among them. [19] Here the colonial
enterprise was underwritten by states in which the merchant class had
a stake of its own.
The ruling families of Europe struggled to maintain control of the
monarchical state – and most eventually lost. They were also forced
to surrender their early colonial possessions. The states which
emerged reflected above all the interests and ambitions of commercial
capital. Many of the wealthiest people in Britain’s American
colonies were slave-owners or were closely associated with the trade,
among them leading activists of the independence movement. Samuel
Johnson, a strong opponent of slavery, observed, ‘How is it that we
hear the loudest yelps for liberty among the drivers of negroes?’ [20]
The American traders and planters demanded a state adequate to
their specific needs. Blackburn comments that, ‘the most prominent
champions [of the American Revolution] included slaveholders and
carrying-trade merchants who looked forward to an unfettered advance
of the North American involvement in plantation agriculture.’ [21]
By the mid 19th century similar movements had broken up the Spanish
and Portuguese empires in Latin America – in less than 100 years power
relations across the Americas changed comprehensively, leaving local
merchant capital in an influential position. Rather than being
overwhelmed by an abstract, disembodied state, the real individuals
who made up the trading networks had engaged in flesh and blood
struggles which brought into being new national states which they
hoped would better serve their own interests.
 
‘Buccaneers’
By the late 19th century the US and most European governments were
attempting to regulate commercial capital much more closely. Even at
this stage, however, merchant adventurers played a leading role in
their own right. In an earlier era they had been the active element
in what Kiernan calls ‘private enterprise imperialism’, whereby
the state endorsed organisations such as the various East India
Companies. [22] During the 1870s and 1880s such activities were
resumed in Southern Africa, West Africa and China. In 1889 the
British South Africa Company was chartered, headed by the profiteer
Cecil Rhodes. He made vast sums from gold and diamonds, using much of
his fortune to finance land grabs which the British authorities were
pleased to endorse. When he created the colony of Rhodesia Europeans
flooded in – traders, speculators, carpet-baggers and ‘buccaneers’.
[23] Similar operations were conducted across the continent – there
was a British East Africa Company, a Royal Niger Company, a Deutsche
Ostafrikanische Gesellschaft. Their pioneering activities were
invariably associated with the drawing of new colonial boundaries and
the establishment of new states.
It was not clear, comments Porter, whether the state was ‘the
tool of mammon’ or the capitalists served imperial interest, but in
many places diplomats and capitalists ‘were found suspiciously
together’. [24] This observation sums up neatly the continuing
relationship between senior state functionaries and private
capitalists in general.
 
World war and recession
Why did the states of Europe launch the catastrophic wars of the
20th century? For Harris they are the product of state structures
themselves: ‘War was the very raison d’être of the
nation, the sacred affirmation of its existence and superiority, its
historical validation, beyond all calculations of accident, let alone
profit and loss.’ [25]
World wars were fought, Harris insists, because states were bound
to fight them. He is uninterested in precipitating factors, including
the specific conjuncture of global rivalries and the domestic
problems of European governments. More important is the industrial
character of the conflict: the number of artillery pieces produced,
shells fired, aircraft manufactured, vessels launched, men
slaughtered. In the case of the Second World War Harris is concerned
above all with the construction of the war economy – the activities
of states which declared for autarkic strategies in which ‘the
government made itself supreme’, bringing business as a whole under
close control and preparing for new conflicts. [26] This is perhaps
the most startling section of Cosmopolitan Capital, for the
drive to war takes place as if the greatest crisis in capitalist
history was merely incidental. The Great Depression appears as an
extrinsic factor, and the events of the 1920s and 1930s which
preceded and accompanied it – including revolutionary turmoil
across Europe – have no place in the story.
Harris does go to pains to examine the rise of fascism – or at
least one aspect of it. He is concerned to demonstrate that in
Germany the Nazis held no brief for big business. They were not a
party of capitalism; rather they were the ultimate creation of the
war-making state. He looks in detail at relations between Hitler and
the barons of German industry and concludes that ‘business was
reduced to being an instrument of the state, not at all the reverse.’
[27] The precise relationship between the Nazi Party and business is
a matter of debate, but what is not at issue, surely, is that fascism
was a violent opponent of independent mass struggles. Its mission was
to bring order to a system in profound crisis – to destroy workers’
movements in evidence across Europe and especially assertive in
Germany. Reflecting the anxieties of capitalism in general – above
all of the fearful small capitalists – it waged war against the
movement from below. The ‘war-making state’ was in this sense a
state that struggled to preserve capitalism by liquidating its most
potent enemies.
 
Globalisation
It is with a sense of relief that Harris reaches the calm waters
of the post-war era. He notes the long boom of the 1950s and 1960s,
which ‘lifted almost all the boats, transforming the living
conditions, the style of life and the psychologies of millions of
people’. [28] If only such growth could be resumed, he suggests,
all would benefit.
For Harris globalisation offers this very possibility. Over the
past 30 years, he proposes, capital has defied the best efforts of
states to continue regulation. New networks of exchange have eroded
national boundaries, bringing together physically distant regions,
promoting new efficiencies and seeding prosperity across the
continents. The agent of this transformation is trade: ‘inexorably
world markets, step by step, are adjusting political behaviour and
responses, creating, all unseen, a new world order.’ [29]
If only governments would understand. Their participation could
speed progress, serving the interests of all. But many, Harris
suggests, are stuck in the past. They continue to see the state as a
means to personal advance and influence, they are mere ‘rent-seekers’
clinging on to power at the cost of the majority. [30] Third World
governments unable to reform bear responsibility for the
consequences. The crisis in Africa, for example, is an outcome of the
failure of its rulers to allow the market to dictate the pace of
change. Here regimes were ‘too late to change and so unwilling to
abandon the national capital project’. [31] Africa could have
learned from market-led policies in other parts of the world; instead
its people are saddled with corruption and with rulers who may be no
more than ‘military mafia’. [32]
Harris is shameless. He writes off centuries of ruthless
exploitation of sub-Saharan Africa – not just slavery, European
settlement, and the colonial state, but generations of
one-dimensional ‘development’ which have produced vulnerable
monocultural economies. The role of the latter has in fact been to
satisfy the demands of commercial capital – the heroic figures of
Harris’s world narrative. To assure the flow from Africa of coffee,
cocoa, cotton, copper, diamonds and much more, Western governments
have endorsed regimes prepared to do their bidding. They have bought
up a whole generation of rulers, or where this has proved difficult,
created them. The rivalries built into colonial states have been
exploited to ensure instability – arms have poured in and all the
while crops and minerals vital to production in distant parts of the
world have flowed out. The great trading multinationals have made
merry while hundreds of millions of people have been pushed to the
margin of survival – or beyond.
On his account transnational institutions which have led the
offensive are not guilty. Their agendas, says Harris, have had no
impact on a process ‘driven by markets’. [33] At this point one
feels that Harris is commenting on events in another galaxy: is he
unaware of the pressures exerted on governments which baulk at
Structural Adjustment Programmes (SAPs)? Is there no relationship
between arms deliveries to Third World rulers and the latter’s
willingness to crush opposition to IMF reforms?
Harris ploughs on, blaming the Third World in general and Africa
in particular for an inability to change. This is the Washington
consensus – the view that attributes failures of development to an
imperfect alignment with the world market, the task being to
neutralise or remove recalcitrant elements, drive back the state and
open local economies to the proper disciplines of competition. It is
difficult to see what separates Harris from the strategists of the
World Bank, the IMF or the WTO. For several years he has worked as a
World Bank consultant: does this account for his attachment to their
ghastly creed?
 
Riots
Harris writes as if resistance to market-led policies has been
restricted to unco-operative governments – local ‘mafia’. He
has not noticed that since the IMF introduced its first SAP in the
mid-1970s, there have been hundreds of mass protests involving
hundreds of millions of people. According to Walton and Seddon,
between 1976 and 1992 alone there were almost 150 such events – by
the 1980s they had become so common they were routinely described as
‘IMF riots’. [34] Many forced governments and the IMF into
retreat – to reinstate food subsidies, fixed prices or emergency
food stocks. Were the participants simply perverse: should they have
accepted the discipline of the market and paid the higher prices?
Should they have starved?
Harris likewise ignores the emergence of the anti-capitalist and
anti-globalisation movements. His sole reference to the phenomenon is
to compare the protesters of Seattle with J.M. Keynes. Neither, he
comments, wished to be at the mercy of world markets; both have
pursued the illusion that states can intervene to ameliorate their
effects on the mass of people. [35] The collective has no role in bringing change; rather we must place our faith in new bodies which
have appeared in the wake of the retreating state –
non-governmental organisations (NGOs). They constitute ‘all that is
left of a fundamental critique of modern society, but also the
beginning of a global political forum that reaches well beyond the
conventional circle of world power and influence’. [36] Some NGOs do express democratic sentiments – but most do not and are indeed
part of the problem.
Harris closes his book with another appeal to the liberating
powers of capital. The ‘real bourgeois revolution’ is on its way,
he intones. Echoing Adam Smith he promises that ‘the unknown –
and unintended – outcome of market transactions’ is to be the
guarantee of universal well-being. [37] The evidence is already with us: war, Harris says, is a thing of the past and only minor local
conflicts remain to be resolved. Oh dear! – has he noticed those
little problems in Afghanistan, in Iraq, and the promises of
conflicts in Syria, Iran, Korea? The state appears to be fighting fit
– and fighting for profit, clearing the way in Iraq for Bechtel,
Halliburton and Exxon. As before, politicians and capitalists are
‘found suspiciously together’. It is the same old imperialism.
Unlike Harris vast numbers of people worldwide believe that the
world is a more dangerous place – and fortunately they are prepared
to do something about it.

Notes
1. See N. Harris, National Liberation (London 1990), and Harris’s contribution to an exchange with Chris Harman and Alex
Callinicos in International Socialism 2 : 51, 2 : 53
and 2 : 54: A Comment on National
Liberation, International Socialism 2 : 53
(Winter 1991).
2. N. Harris, The Return of Cosmopolitan Capital (London 2003), p. 264.
3. As above.
4. World Bank Development Report (New York 2000), p. 5.
5. K. Ohmae, The End of the Nation State (London
1995),p. 78.
6. N. Harris, The Mandate of Heaven: Marx and Mao in Modern China (London 1978).
7. Harris’s work still shows the influence of the Marxist
perspective within which he produced his early work. Unexplained
references to combined and uneven development and to state capitalism
may puzzle readers of Cosmopolitan Capital who are unfamiliar
with the work of Leon Trotsky and of Tony Cliff.
8. N. Harris, Cosmopolitan Capital, as above, p. 58.
9. As above, p. 88.
10. As above, p. 89.
11. As above, p. 70.
12. As above, p. 71.
13. As above, p. 86. Can Harris really mean that the merchant capitalists of the Atlantic slave trade and those who plundered India
and later Africa were making ‘a world without nationalism ... and
racism’ – a world of harmony? They were in fact leading actors in
constructing racism, inexplicable without the colonial experience in
general and that of enslavement in particular.
14. C. Hill, Reformation to Industrial Revolution (London 1969), p. 53.
15. As above, p. 164.
16. E. Williams, Capitalism and Slavery (London 1964), p. 13.
17. K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I (London 1954), p. 703.
18. Y. Gai, Migrants Workers, Markets and the Law in W.
Gunguru (ed.), Global History and Migrations (Boulder
1997), p. 145.
19. See R.S. Dunn, Sugar and Slaves (New York 1973) for a detailed account of slaving and colonial states in the Caribbean.
20. H. Thomas, The Slave Trade (London 1997) p. 476.
21. R. Blackburn, The Making of New World Slavery (London 1995), p. 472.
22. V.G. Kiernan, Colonial Empires and Armies 1815–1960
(London 1982), p. 98.
23. B. Porter, The Lion’s Share (London 1975), p. 149.
24. As above.
25. N. Harris, The Return of Cosmopolitan Capital, as
above, p. 78.
26. As above, p. 96.
27. As above, p. 114.
28. As above, p. 129.
29. As above, p. 219.
30. As above, p. 164.
31. As above, p. 166.
32. As above, p. 168.
33. As above, p. 170.
34. J. Walton and D. Seddon, Free Markets and Food Riots (Oxford 1994), pp. 39–40.
35. N. Harris, The Return of Cosmopolitan Capital, as above, p. 97.
36. As above, p. 248.
37. As above, p. 264.
 



The Hebron massacre in February was a truly awful reminder of
the racism that infests Israeli society. But these killings may be
remembered less for what they say about Zionism than for their
importance in accelerating the break up of Palestinian nationalism.
Phil Marshall reports
Palestinians were already sceptical that last year’s Washington
‘peace’ deal signed by PLO leader Yasser Arafat could bring any
benefits. When Israel refused to withdraw troops from Gaza and
Jericho, as it had promised, many Palestinians concluded that they
had been sold another phoney agreement. As a result, Arafat’s
authority was crumbling when the Hebron outrage took place; his
refusal to lead protests against the killings and his willingness to
renew negotiations with Israel has produced further fury among
Palestinian activists. Al Fatah, Arafat’s base within the PLO, is
now collapsing throughout the Occupied Territories.
The long predicted advance of Islamic activism is becoming a
reality as Hamas (‘Zeal’) becomes the main attraction for
Palestinian youth. This was highlighted by the bomb attacks on
Israeli citizens carried out by Hamas recently.
Since Fatah launched its armed struggle against Israel in 1965
Yasser Arafat has been ‘Mr Palestine’, an apparently
irrepressible nationalist whose ‘survivability’ guaranteed
loyalty among the mass of Palestinians. But Arafat’s obsession with
the Washington deal has driven many activists to despair.
While his PLO negotiators jet from Washington to Oslo, Paris and
Cairo, the Israeli army maintains a relentless repression to which
the people of the Occupied Territories are compelled to respond. At
the same time, conditions in the Gaza camps are worsening;
unemployment stands at 50 percent and repeated curfews prevent
migrant workers travelling to Israel.
Arafat has received clear signals that even the Fatah cadre have
had enough. In January Fatah lost control of the Gaza Engineers’
Association, a professional body which has been a bastion of PLO
support. For the first time Islamic candidates gained almost half the
vote. One activist in Gaza observes that Fatah has ‘imploded’ –
that the political apparatus Arafat intended to use for his
proto-government under the Washington deal has largely disintegrated.
Fatah is likely to have serious problems assembling even a skeleton
administration for the ‘limited autonomy’ zones it is due to take
over in Gaza and Jericho.
Radical nationalist opposition to Arafat has always been
ineffectual and has long since been overtaken by the Islamists. Hamas
has the advantage of being seen as relatively ‘clean’. Fatah
built its influence in part by buying loyalty, with the result that
its most influential members often lived well, taking comfy villas in
the wealthiest neighbourhoods. Although most Hamas leaders are also
middle class, they are far less ostentatious. Many of its cadres are
poor camp dwellers who have built a following amongst the ‘intifada
generation’ – youth who were radicalised by the uprising which
began in 1987. These activists are now the core of Hamas’s
guerrilla organisation, which has become the strongest armed
Palestinian force, scoring a number of successes against the Israeli
army. According to the Israeli paper Al Hamishmar, Israeli
intelligence in Gaza is genuinely worried about Hamas and the
military command has decided that it must back Arafat in any
confrontation with the Islamists. It is Israel’s fear of Hamas’s
advance that seems finally to have prompted troop withdrawals from
Gaza and Jericho.
But how is an enfeebled PLO to combat the Islamists? As part of
the Washington deal Arafat was to assemble a Palestinian police force
which would, in effect, mediate Israeli rule in Gaza and Jericho,
targeting more intransigent elements such as Hamas. Such is the speed
of Fatah’s collapse, however, that by April no more than a few
hundred of the expected 25,000 trainees had been recruited.
One reason for this failure may be that Arafat’s coffers have
finally emptied. Between 1969 and 1990 Fatah received huge sums of
money from the Gulf states: in Saudi Arabia, for example, the state
provided its own funds for Arafat and levied a poll tax on every
Palestinian worker which was channelled directly to the PLO. The deal
was that the PLO would operate a principle of ‘non-interference’,
desisting from political activity within Saudi Arabia.
The world economic crisis and a falling oil price hit all the Gulf
economies and by the late 1980s the PLO was feeling the pinch. But in
1990, when Arafat aligned with Saddam Hussein in the Gulf War, all
funds were cut off. In addition, many Palestinian workers in the
wealthiest states were expelled – in Kuwait they were hounded in a
sustained racist attack on the 300,000 strong community. Arafat lost
his financial lifeline and with it much of the PLO’s direct
influence in the Occupied Territories.
During the Washington peace talks last year the PLO was promised
huge sums to operate the new administration and start basic
development. The World Bank has since estimated that a minimum of
$2.4 billion is needed over five years; the PLO’s own Palestine
Economic Council for Development and Reconstruction wants 15 billion
dollars. To date, the PLO has promises of less than 250 million
dollars, of which almost nothing has arrived. Arafat cannot even
guarantee basic welfare – in December teachers at the Fatah backed
al-Aznar College in Gaza went on strike because they had not been
paid for seven months.
The PLO’s whole project for a semi-autonomous Gaza/Jericho –
an ‘Arafatistan’ occupying less than a fifth of historic
Palestine – is in the balance. At the same time, a more coordinated
form of resistance to Israel is emerging across the Occupied
Territories. In January Islamic activists and radical nationalists
combined to reform the Unified National Leadership of the Uprising
(LTNLU) – the body which had coordinated the intifada. In
March UNLU responded to the Hebron massacre by issuing its first
leaflet, arguing for mobilisation against Israeli occupation
throughout the West Bank and Gaza Strip – a call to relaunch the uprising.
Israeli repression may prevent an upsurge on the scale of 1987-88
but the Occupied Territories remain in a volatile state. Last year’s
talk of a ‘breakthrough’ raised expectations which have been
dashed by Israel and Arafat’s feeble compromises. Events in Hebron
raised the temperature, provoking fury first towards Israel and then
at the PLO’s passivity. Yet most Palestinians cannot see a way
forward. Many view the PLO with a mixture of sorrow and disgust and
are drawn towards Hamas. But many are also rooted in a secular
politics which has combined Muslims and Christians in collective
action and is wary of the prescriptive formulas of religious
fundamentalism. The mass of Palestinians are not calling for sharia
law, rule by the clerics or restrictions on women’s dress – all
part of the Hamas programme which accompanies its call to free
Palestine from Israeli rule.
In Egypt at the moment the Islamic militants’ assaults on the
Mubarak regime are combined with a communalism that promotes attacks
on the country’s large Christian minority, fatally disabling the
opposition movement. Such divisions among Palestinians would spell disaster.
In the face of the PLO’s retreat, Hamas may look an attractive
alternative, but across the Middle East political activists are
discovering that Islam divides as well as unites – and that in the
end it always compromises. There are already signs that if Arafat can
cobble together the means to run his micro-state in Gaza and Jericho,
there are sections of Hamas prepared to compromise in order to secure
a stake in power.
This reflects the roots of both the PLO and Hamas in the politics
of Arab capitalism, each organisation expressing the aspirations of
the Palestinian middle class to run an independent state, and each
tied to one or other of the Arab states. Thus for over 25 years Fatah
was in hock to Saudi Arabia; Hamas, with its ties to both the Saudis
and Iran, is similarly dependent on forces which are hostile to the
interests of the mass of Palestinians.
The PLO has failed, yet Hamas seeks to emulate Arafat by adding an
Islamic gloss to his strategy. In the crisis which faces Palestinian
nationalism a far more radical approach is needed, one based on the
prospect of challenging Arab capitalism as a necessary part of the
struggle against Zionism.
 

