

There are groups of socialist revolutionaries who spend their time sighing for the type of opportunity which was presented to the Left in Northern Ireland after 5th October 1968. Suddenly there was an audience tens of thousands strong, shocked out of its old attitudes, bewildered and excited by what was happening, looking for explanations, asking to be led. The Left proved incapable of taking the opportunity. The 5th October march the first significant Civil Rights demonstration had been organised by people who would have described themselves as left-wing socialists. The decision to defy the ban announced by Home Affairs Minister Craig on 3rd October was opposed by the executive of the Civil Right Association and by the overwhelming majority of those who had been even marginally involved in the prior organisation. The decision was forced through at a chaotic meeting of ‘all interested parties’ late on 4th October by two Labour Party delegates who insisted that they would march, irrespective of any majority vote to the contrary. It was a very small march. Many of the marchers were students and local teenagers. Possibly two hundred and fifty Derry adults took part.
The blood which flowed in Derry that day unleashed a howl of outrage across Northern Ireland, mobilised and momentarily radicalised the apathetic Catholic masses and brought them out into the streets, spoiling for a fight. Bogsiders. born with wounded pride in their Republican history, cursed the Government the morning after and resolved that this time they were not going to take it lying down. Yet, within a short time, the ‘revolutionaries’ who had organised the demonstration, bad lost leadership of the resultant mass movement. The original detonating group in Derry disappeared into the middle-class Citizens Action Committee, led by John Hume and Ivan Cooper, both now members of the Social Democratic & Labour Party. After that left wingers directed their attentions and hopes towards the People’s Democracy which had been founded in Belfast on 8th October. But while maintaining a separate existence, the PD too, was for a long time effectively submerged in the mainstream of Civil Rights agitation, establishing itself not as an organisation with a programme qualitatively different to that of the ‘moderates’, but as a lively and aggressive ginger group within the same broad movement. The result was that the revolutionary forces in the North, at the time when mass Catholic working-class discontent was erupting into new political formations, did not manage to convey clearly the difference between their politics and the politics of other anti-Unionist tendencies. To the mass of the people it was apparent that the PD was more militant than the Derry Citizens’ Action Committee on the Northern Ireland CRA. It was not clear what it was being militant about. This meant that Unionist spokesmen were able plausibly to suggest that the difference was this: that the ‘moderates’ were anti-Protestant; the ‘militants’ even more anti-Protestant. This was plausible because it contained a kernel of important truth. There was one sense in which the Civil Rights Movement was ‘anti-Protestant’. After 5th October the movement was demanding an end to discriminatory practices. Leading moderate spokesmen such as Hume and Fitt insisted endlessly that this was all they were demanding. In a situation in which the Protestants had more than their fair share of jobs, houses and voting power, to demand an end to discrimination was to suggest that Catholics should get more jobs, houses and voting power than they had at present – and Protestants less. This simple mathematical calculation did not seem to occur to the leaders of the Civil Rights Movement. But five minutes talk with a Paisleyite counter-demonstrator would have left one in no doubt that it was not missed on the Protestant working class. There never was the slightest possibility of a movement demanding ‘fair play’ in Northern Ireland engaging the support, or even securing the neutrality, of the Protestant masses. In terms of strict economics the only programme with any potential to undercut sectarianism and make contact with the consciousness of the Protestant working class would have been one which linked the demands for fair distribution of the relevant commodities to demands designed to increase absolutely the number of jobs and houses available for distribution. This would have involved campaigning for an end to the system of grants and inducement to private industry, a ban of the export of profits from Northern Ireland, direct investment in areas of high unemployment. With regard to housing it would have meant demanding the cessation of repayments by the Housing Trust and local authorities to London banks – repayments which were and are crippling the housing programme in the North and forcing rents up. In a phrase it would have involved a comprehensive anti-capitalist programme.
If any group had fought consistently for such a programme within the CR movement, it (the CRM) would have split wide open, and such a programme, hardly the normal stuff of Northern politics, would not of course, have attracted immediate mass support. At any rate, the matter was never put to the test. No such group existed or emerged. By the middle of 1969 the Left was established in the Catholic mind as those who were most impatient, who were willing to run most risks, who wanted to go along the same road as the moderates but further. It was not clear that the Left wanted to go along a different road.
Thus when Northern Ireland exploded in August 1969 the Left was still imprisoned within the sectarian strait jacket, forced to operate almost exclusively within the Catholic community but unable to give any clear lead to the Catholic masses. In Belfast the PD did not have a single person on any of the Defence committees. In Derry an ad hoc alliance of Derry Labour Party members and left wing Republicans did manage to carve out a separate minority position on the Defence Committee but, unwilling to cause a split in the barricaded area and doubtful about the extent of its own support, it never seriously attempted to wrest leadership from the moderates.
This was one of the reasons for the emergence of the Provisionals. The raging bitterness of the Catholics in Belfast especially, after the August days was certain, sooner or later, to swamp Fitt and Hume. Emotions were too strong to be contained for long within the thin shell of timid respectability. The Provisional filled the vacuum created by the effective absence of the left and the irrelevance of the right. Had there been a consistent attempt between October 1968 and August 1969 to build a vigorous socialist movement, applying and refining the half-formed ideas which motivated the organisers of the original march, then we might have had, when the explosion came, an organisation sufficiently clear in its perspectives, sufficiently confident of its politics to intervene decisively and seize the initiative. Instead, taking leadership from the Left had proved as easy as taking candy from a baby.
All of which is to present the matter in a simplistic economistic form. One does not over-estimate the objective possibilities of winning Protestant workers in 1968-9; no mass deflection from the ‘loyalist’ camp was on the cards. What is true is that the lack of open class-orientated agitation destroyed whatever potential did exist to develop some tenuous links with militant Protestant workers. Moreover, the problem was not, of course, one of mere economics. The national question, once posed, would still have polarised the two sections of the class. To be more exact, the national question posed in exclusively bourgeois terms, as a choice between rule by the Orange or rule by the Green bourgeoisie, would have inevitably split the class. And there was no possibility of the national question not being posed.
The failure of the subjectively revolutionary left to demarcate itself from middle-class civil rights politics was paralleled by and connected to, its failure to understand this. The Civil Rights movement was an understandable reaction to the pattern of discrimination, repression and institutionalised Protestant supremacy – and it was the duty of revolutionaries to support its demands for ‘democratisation’ – as far as they went. But the fact, was, and is, that Northern Ireland cannot operate ‘democratically’. It is an artificial creation containing within its territory a massive, permanently discontented minority. The struggle for ‘democracy’ was bound, sooner or later, to become a struggle against the state. By agreeing to suspend consideration of the national question, while simultaneously failing to make clear enough the class nature of its politics, the revolutionary left was helping the middle-class to peddle an illusion, the illusion that it was possible to reform N. Ireland.
It will be objected by some of those involved that the PD, in particular, far from peddling this illusion, consistently advocated the end of Unionism and the creation of a socialist Republic. And indeed, none of our speeches was complete without an invitation to go ‘Forward to the Workers’ Republic’.
But this slogan was quite detached from the day to day practice. It was, in effect, a piece of rhetoric tucked on to the end of a series of liberal demands. This manic oscillation between reformist practice and adventurist rhetoric is not uncommon in student-based groups. Projected into the mass movement, it served to preclude any possibility of winning people by consistent practice and propaganda, to a revolutionary position and delivered them up to the ‘moderate’ leadership of Fitt, Hume and the rest. There was no campaign for a socialist independent Ireland, in any meaningful sense of the word. This had a disastrous effect on the left after August 1969. It meant that when the moderate leadership was swamped, the Catholic workers did not pass into the socialist camp. There was no socialist camp there to receive them.
After the traumatic experience of August 1969 the National Question re-emerged. The mutiny of the RUC and the Specials in Belfast shattered any possibility of the Catholic communities being weaned to tolerance of the State. It was the machinery of the state itself which had threatened their destruction. Afterwards, securing the physical safety of the community meant striving to bring the state down. The Catholics in Belfast had to pose the partition issue, despite both the Left and the Right in the Civil Rights movement. In this situation there was no socialist option available. There was no movement with a base in the Catholic working class able to offer the ‘socialist Ireland’ as a remedy. Given this absence, the emergence of the Provisional was inevitable. Tens of thousands of Catholics in the North literally had no alternative but to throw up some such grouping. There are parallels with 1921. There is a folk myth account of the founding of the Northern State which holds that, in 1921, the Protestants hi the North, blackmailed and befuddled by sectarian Loyalist propaganda, chose, against their own interests as Irish people, to retain the link with Britain; that had it not been for the agitational activities of Carson and Craigavon the Protestant masses would have seen that their interest lay in joining with their fellow-countrymen to build a free Ireland. This is a misty simplification. Half a century ago the Protestants had to choose between the Union and bourgeois rule from Dublin. The protectionist economic policies of Sinn Fein, had they been applied to the North, would have bid to destroy all the Northern industrial structure. The ship-building and linen industries, cut off from sources of raw materials or markets, or both, would have gone to the wall. The loyalist posters which festooned Belfast showing the shipyards and Royal Avenue choked with weeds and inscribed ‘Belfast under Home Rule’ may have been caricature. But they contained an important element of truth. On a short-term economical basis home rule from Dublin would not have been in the interests of the Protestant masses.
It is not true that the Protestants, blinded by propaganda, made a crazy choice. They made a perfectly rational economic decision between the alternatives offered. Which is not to say that their conscious decision was based on cold economic calculation. It is to say that there was a curious economic rationality underpinning all the quasi-religious jingoism with which the Unionist case was expressed, a rationality which was not being challenged in the existing working-class movement.
It is academic to argue that there was a third alternative – the Socialist Ireland of Connolly – which would have better represented the interests of all workers. This is an attractive truism. But the Socialist Ireland was not really on offer. Connolly had not understood the necessity to build a revolutionary party (for that matter, neither, in 1916, had Trotsky). When he was executed there was no political party which could clearly be seen as the repository of his thought. In 1918 the Irish Labour Party accepted De Valera’s dictum that ‘Labour must wait’ and collapsed into an all-class national alliance. The result was that there was no credible socialist presence when the carve-up came. Just as – and for many of these same reasons – there was no credible socialist presence in August 1969.
This is not to argue that in 1921 the Protestants were ‘right’ to choose to fight for the link with Britain; in so far as such monolithic concepts are applicable they were ‘wrong’. It is to argue that in the absence of the left it was, anyway, inevitable. The vacuum which the Provisionals rilled was in the first instance a physical one. The adhesion of the Republican leadership to the crazy Stalinist ‘stages’ theory had disarmed the community. Arms were needed and the Provisionals eventually supplied them.
The role of the Republican leadership pre-1969 does not fall within the orbit of this piece. It can be said, however, that they had helped to disarm the community politically as well as militarily. Grafting the crude Stalinist theorising of Roy Johnston et al. onto the republican tradition, they strove to guide all mass agitation in the North into a struggle for ‘democratisation’. They, too, denied vehemently that the national question was of any relevance. And, in their efforts to build a ‘broad-based movement for reform’, they emerged as the most bitter opponents of suggested agitation within the civil rights movement on economic class issues. If the PD and its fellow-travellers failed to see the need to link the socialist and republican struggles together, the Republicans chose not to see any immediate need for either. The Provisionals did not fight for and win the leadership of the national struggle. They did not have to. There was no competition. They developed as the leadership of the national struggle.
The absence of a movement in the South was crucial. Without such we could not fight bourgeois nationalism, even had we set out much more rigorously to do so within the North. One cannot fight bourgeois nationalism if one is not part of a struggle against that section of the national bourgeoisie which is actually in power. Obviously, without a struggle against the set-up in the South, it was in effect impossible for us to drive a wedge between ourselves and the northern Catholic middle-class.
The southern bourgeoisie, as clients of British Imperialism, could not fight British Imperialism. Within the southern state it presided over the intensifying day-to-day exploitation of the working-class. It had to be attacked on both these fronts and the link between the two demonstrated. Only by linking the two together could the socialist content of our anti-imperialism be demonstrated. And only by doing that could the grip of orange ideology on the northern Protestant working-class be loosened.
This was illustrated by the most elaborate single attempt to ‘extend the fight to the south’ – the PD’s Belfast-Dublin march in April 1969. The marchers swung into O’Connell Street chanting, pithily enough, ‘Lynch Lynch! Lynch O’Neill!’ What they meant was that O’Neill and Lynch represented two equally oppressive Tory regimes and that the working class in each area ought to rise up and eject them. But what the people standing in O’Connell Street understood it to mean was different – that O’Neill was a Unionist and therefore had to be brought down. And that Lynch had to go because he was insufficiently militant in pursuing this objective. The difference between the revolutionary left and Fianna Fail was not seen in terms of the kind of societies they aimed at. It was seen almost exclusively in terms of the intensity with which they were willing to attack the regime in the North. In a phrase, the link between the anti-Republicanism of Lynch, and the anti-working-class motives of his policies was not demonstrated. This is how the Protestants saw it and were encouraged to see it by their leaders. (And there were indications that others shared the assessment. Once after making a fierce and, I thought, a rather effective attack on the Southern Government at a meeting in Bogside I was given an Irish fifty-pound note by a prominent member of Fianna Fail who said that he supposed I could find use for it. Clearly he did not feel threatened.)
This resulted in total confusion. On the one hand we were more or less denying that the national question was on the agenda at all. On the other we were seen to be attacking the southern regime for failing to live up to its stated national aspirations. Nowhere were we illustrating in action the class nature of our objections to Fianna Fail. In August 1969 in the Bogside it was stated from a socialist platform (a) that Lynch was a traitor because he had not sent his troops over the border when we needed them; and that (b) if he had sent them over we would have opened up a ‘second front’ to repel them. In the circumstances it is difficult to imagine what the listeners made of this.
A credible attack on the class nature of Fianna Fail could have been mounted only by an organisation which was seen to be engaged in a day-to-day economic struggle against it. This would have required an all-Ireland organisation, the southern section of which was not directing its own and others attention to the North, but was taking up issues of wages, rents and unemployment in the South and linking these to the anti-imperialist struggle, the front line in Ireland of which was in the North. No such organisation existed, and between October ’68 and August ’69 there was no consistent attempt to build it.
The Left did not fail between ’68 and ’69 for lack of effort. While prominent ‘moderates’ were circling one another, daggers in hand, each wondering into which back it might most profitably be plunged, the PD was directing more energy into the struggle than any other single tendency. In Michael Farrell it had at the helm possibly the most determined political operator in Northern Ireland. The loose left group in Derry was frenetically active. The very ‘effectiveness’ of the original strategy was one of the things which derailed the Left. In Derry before 5th October we had been working on a conscious, if unspoken, strategy to provoke the authorities into overreaction and thus spark off a mass response. We certainly succeeded. But when the mass response came we were not capable of handling it.
Socialist revolutionaries get used to talking to audiences numbered in tens. When we were confronted with an audience tens of thousands strong our reaction was to abandon the attempt to win people, if necessary in ones and twos, to a hard political position, and instead to try to exert some general influence over a broad, relatively political movement. The Young Socialist Alliance, the semi-clandestine core of PD in the first three months of PD’s existence, was, by majority vote, dissolved on 31st December 1969, the night before the Burntollet march.
In a phrase, we lacked a revolutionary Marxist party and did not understand the necessity of building one. The events of the last four years in N Ireland demonstrate that mass ‘influence’ or prominent involvement in mass agitation is, despite sometime appearances, meaningless and fruitless unless one is, in the process, forging the political instrument necessary to lead such agitation to conclusive victory over the opposing force. This is not a lesson for revolutionaries in Ireland alone.
 



THERE IS no subject in Irish politics about which more nonsense is spoken than the Protestant working class.
Most political groups – including all the major political parties – are either frightened or flummoxed by it. Usually both.
The reason for the fear and confusion is fairly simple. It is that any calm analysis of why Protestant workers cling to Orange bigotry leads to conclusions which most political organisations can’t stomach.
We have to begin by facing the obvious fact that sectarian bigotry is still widespread and strong among a majority of Protestant workers. This was clear from the results of the 15 by-elections held in the North in January.
Right-wing Loyalists increased their support by thousands and won 78.6 percent of the poll. Moreover, support was strongest in solid working-class areas like East Belfast.
This hard fact can’t be wished away by claims that Protestant workers were ‘confused’ or ‘misled’ or by reference to the lack of credible alternative candidates in some constituencies. More Protestant workers went out to vote for Orange bigots than in 1983.
This fact was reinforced by the relative success of the strike against the Anglo-Irish Agreement in February. Of course, there was widespread intimidation and, of course, the RUC did little to counter the intimidation. But if there had been sizeable hostility to the strike in the power stations, the shipyard, the engineering factories and so forth, the intimidation would not have worked. The strike call was answered because, while many Protestant workers might not have been enthusiastic about it, neither did it go against the grain. And what they were striking about was the apparent involvement of ‘representatives’ of the Catholics in running Northern Ireland.
The strike was about keeping Catholics out. And ‘keeping Catholics out’ means preserving Protestant privilege.
Orange bigotry is based on Protestant privilege today as surely as it was when the Orange Order was founded in 1795. Then, the privilege had to do with access to the best land on the most favourable terms.
Today it has to do with jobs, houses, social prestige and access to political influence.
The fact that, from the Protestant workers’ point of view, the privilege is pretty small, matters not at all. When tuppence-halfpenny is looking down on tuppence, the halfpenny difference can assume an importance out of all proportion to its actual size.
The existence of Protestant privilege in the North down through the years is not seriously denied by anyone any more.
Nor is it seriously denied that from the inception of the Northern state in 1921 the preservation of Protestant privilege became official state policy.
The quotes from Unionist prime ministers are so well known they have become catch-phrases: ‘A Protestant parliament for a Protestant people’ (Craigavon); ‘If we in Ulster allow Roman Catholics to work ... we are traitors to Ulster’ (Brookeborough); and so on.
This policy of anti-Catholic bigotry was enforced by means of repression and murder, often carried out by the official forces of the state (the RUC and B-specials), occasionally carried out by unofficial armed gangs and merely tolerated by the state.
These facts are now acknowledged on all sides. What, very often, is not acknowledged is that Protestant privilege is still a fact of life in the North.
For example, in January the Belfast magazine Fortnight published a survey of unemployed trends in the North by Cambridge economist Bob Rowthorn. Using the 1971 and 1981 census returns and statistics released since, Rowthorn traced the way patterns of unemployment affected the Protestant and Catholic workers. What he discovered was very simple.
Average male unemployment had increased massively between ‘71 and ‘85 (from 10.3 to 26.4 percent). Within this, Protestant unemployment went up from 6.6 to an estimated 18–20 percent. But for Catholics the rise was from 17.3 to 38 40 percent. (The figures for female unemployment, published separately, showed the same pattern: average rise, 4.7 to 9.5; Protestant rise, 3.6 to 11 12; Catholic rise, 7.0 to 18 19.)
In other words, while Protestant workers had become worse off over the 14-year period, Catholics had become worse off at a faster rate. The sectarian gap had not narrowed. It had become wider. And there is no reason to suppose that this trend is not continuing.
Despite the Fair Employment Act and the existence of a Fair Employment Agency, Catholics are still finding it impossible to get jobs in the shipyard, in Shorts aircraft factory, in the major engineering firms and so on.
And the same pattern – of a sectarian gap – emerges from Cookstown, Antrim, Derry, Armagh, Lisburn, Enniskillen ... everywhere. Concluded Rowthorn: ‘The disparity between Catholics and Protestants will remain gigantic for the foreseeable future.’
Thus when Protestant workers march today under the slogan: ‘What we have we hold’, they are talking about something very real. And insofar as they have lost anything in the last two decades (in terms of direct control over the police and unchecked power in the councils) they are demanding: ‘What we used to have we want back’.
This fundamental fact is scarcely mentioned at all in most coverage of the North, which strives to suggest that the Protestant masses are just deluded by demented demagogues, that if only the real situation was explained to them clearly they wouldn’t follow the Orange drum anymore.
It’s understandable that this mindless nonsense should be peddled by Garrett FitzGerald and his hangers on in the media: the right-wing nationalist tradition they represent has made evading the reality of the North into an art form.
But the same line – that there’s no real basis for Orange bigotry at all – is also pushed enthusiastically by self-styled socialists like the Labour Party left and the Workers Party (the old Official Sinn Fein/IRA). Indeed the Workers Party goes further and suggests that Orange bigotry is merely an emotional reaction to militant Republicanism.
Unless reality is faced it cannot be changed. Unless we deal with the real basis of Protestant workers’ sectarianism we cannot devise a strategy for detaching Protestant workers from it.
When they attach themselves to sectarian ideas Protestant workers are entering an alliance with Protestant bosses. They are declaring that the religion they share with middle and upper class Protestants is more important than the status of worker which they share with people of a different religion. The Orange Order and its associated bodies have traditionally provided the mechanism by which this integration took place.
Former Unionist Prime Minister Brian Faulkner summed it up perfectly when he told a Twelfth of July demonstration in 1963:
‘Many a company director has marched with his lodge today shoulder to shoulder with wage earners. This is a healthy state of affairs.’
What the wage earners got out of this was a feeling of involvement in the dominant group in society, plus a guarantee of a place towards the front of the queue for whatever jobs, houses etc. might be going.
What the company director class got out of it was a feeling of security that the wage earners wouldn’t be marching against them. (Faulkner completed the quote by declaring that: ‘This is the right ground on which to base the soundest of industrial relations.’)
Orange sectarianism has always played this role in working class politics, binding the workers to the boss class, while simultaneously cutting off the possibility of an alliance between protestant workers and others of the same class.
Over and over again it has proved very useful to capitalism in the North. The history of the North is studded with examples of working class militancy being divided and destroyed by appeals from Orange bosses to Orange workers to desert the class battlefield and come back into the fold.
The fragile working class unity established on each of these occasions did not last long. But at least it happened. And on each occasion it happened in the course of working class struggle.
Indeed – and this is a point of overwhelming importance for socialists – the only occasions on which sizeable numbers of working class Protestants have even temporarily deserted Orangeism have been occasions when they were involved in class struggles.
When they struggle to better themselves as workers, Protestants – like Catholics, Muslims and Hindus – must break with their bosses and associate themselves with other workers.
When they struggle to better themselves as Protestants, they must break with other workers and associate themselves with their bosses.
Of course, there are many Protestant workers – mostly active trade unionists – who have not been swept away by the sectarian rhetoric and who in their unions and workplaces have stood firm courageously against the pressure pushing them backwards towards sectarianism.
However, these are in the minority and for the time being right-wing bigots are making all the running. Thus the reaction of many left-wingers to write the Protestant working class off as hopelessly lost to bigotry and political filth.
This is very stupid.
It is obvious that Protestant workers can – and sooner or later will – reject Loyalism and make common cause with their Catholic fellow-workers. This is obvious because it has happened frequently in the past – including the very recent past – and for reasons that will inevitably recur.
Any socialist seriously interested in overcoming the sectarian divisions and establishing working class unity must look closely at the occasions when this came about, and examine why it came about and the reasons it was so short-lived when it did.
It happened in 1907, when James Larkin led Protestant and Catholic dockers and transport workers in a strike which paralysed Belfast.
It happened in 1919 when 40,000 shipyard and engineering workers came out in Belfast for the 48-hour week in a mighty struggle which only ended when British troops were sent in to smash the strike. Most of the strikers were Protestant – but a majority of the strike committee were Catholic. The strike lasted weeks, was absolutely solid and the workers fought together against British Army scabs.
It happened in 1932 when thousands of unemployed workers engaged on ‘relief’ work struck for higher payments. The Falls and the Shankill joined and from the interconnecting streets fought off RUC baton charges.
It happened in 1944 when Belfast was gripped by an unofficial general strike involving more than 25,000 workers after mainly-Protestant shipyard workers defied wartime anti-strike laws and came out over pay.
It happened in 1982 when thousands of Catholic and Protestant health service workers across the North stood shoulder-to-shoulder on picket lines against Thatcher’s cuts and for a wage rise.
These particular incidents are well-known to anyone with a smattering of Irish history. But there are hundreds of other examples of smaller-scale industrial action which make the same point – that, year in and year out, Protestant workers do break from sectarian loyalist ideas and ally themselves instead with Catholic workers to better the conditions of both.
Of course on each occasion the unity has been short-lived. But the fact that it happened at all – and has happened so frequently – shows clearly where we have to start from.
We have to start from the simple and glaringly obvious fact that it is when, and only when, they are involved in class struggle that Protestant workers see Catholic workers as their natural allies and Protestant bosses as their natural enemies.
There are no examples of sizeable numbers of Protestant workers in this century rejecting Loyalism in any other circumstances. Only class politics has ever successfully challenged Loyalism for Protestant workers’ allegiance.
The reason the moments of class unity have always been brief is that unity on the economic issues has never developed seriously into unity on the political issues. On each of the occasions mentioned above, the workers began to split along religious lines as soon as the ‘national question’ was raised. And in the aftermath of working class struggles it was always raised by the bosses for precisely that reason.
Once ‘Home Rule’, and later ‘The Border’, entered into it, the Protestant workers lapsed back into Loyalism and began to identify themselves again with people of the same religion rather than people of the same class.
One of the major reasons for that has been that the official leaders of the labour movement have time and time again failed to face up to the political questions.
The North’s official trade union leaders, for example, have argued at every stage that economic issues must be kept separate from politics, that to introduce politics is ‘divisive’.
The result has always been that when division came about anyway they have had no answer, no basis on which to combat the divisive politics which are inherent in the structure and the very nature of the Northern state.
This was true after 1919, when Craigavon, preparing for the establishment of the State, whipped up Loyalist emotions in the Belfast shipyards and split the workers asunder.
It was true after the unity of 1932 when Basil Brooke (later Lord Brookborough) did likewise and triggered the bloody sectarian riots of the mid-30s. Etc., etc. It is still true today.
On no occasion has the official workers’ leadership been able to enter into political battle against those out to split the unity which workers themselves had shown could be established. The most dramatic example was the pitiable attempt of the Irish Congress of Trades Unions (ICTU) to organise a back-to-work march during the 1974 anti-power sharing strike. About 200 turned up – under British army protection.
Throughout the current troubles – like all previous troubles – Northern leaders of the ICTU have denounced anyone who tried to argue that no section of the working class should support a State based on sectarianism. That’s ‘divisive’, they said.
The result has been that when the question of supporting the Northern State is raised – as it has been raised now by Ian Paisley and James Molyneaux over the Hillsborough Agreement – the ICTU is in no position to say anything.
It is the official policy of the ICTU in the North to say nothing about the border, or anything relating to the border. The policy is – no policy.
Small wonder then that many of the workers who were solid together in the health service strikes a short time ago are now deeply divided. Their own union leadership had told them that the picket line unity had no political implications whatever.
At the same time, the major tradition which does consistently put the issue of the sectarian nature of the Northern State right on the very top of the agenda – the Republican Movement – doesn’t acknowledge the importance of workers’ unity on the economic issues at all.
While the Provos generally express support for workers struggling for better wages or to save jobs, or whatever, they deny that such struggles have any immediate relevance to the fight against the State.
The Republican line is that class politics must take a back seat until such time as the sectarian State is destroyed. So the united Ireland which they are offering as an alternative to the North is, clearly, a capitalist united Ireland.
Once that is created, so the Republicans say, then the struggle for a socialist Ireland can begin. There is nothing whatever in this to attract Protestant workers, even Protestant workers who are class-conscious.
The key to winning Protestant workers away from Loyalism and to socialism is to build an organisation which is based on the day-to-day struggles of the working class and which also faces up squarely to the necessity to smash the Northern State.
An organisation which only fights on the economic front might gather Protestant working class support on a shallow basis and in the short term, but it will be broken when it comes into collision – as inevitably it will – with the realities of Northern politics.
An organisation which fights only to destroy the sectarian State, but which doesn’t base itself on working class struggle, will remain confined within the Catholic community and will never make contact with the consciousness of Protestant workers, even when they are directly engaged in fighting their own bosses.
To the sectarian State which offers Protestant workers marginal privileges in relation to jobs and houses it is necessary to counterpose the idea of a socialist Ireland in which the rule of the capitalist class – Orange, Green and true-blue Brit – has been ended. A State which represents the culmination of all the struggles of Irish workers, Catholic and Protestant, North and South.
It is possible to make a link between that vision for the future and Protestant workers in the present. Protestant workers – simply because they are workers – are thrown into conflict with their bosses time and time again. They are not mindless automatons, nor are they helpless victims of some mysterious virus. To analyse the situation as if they were is a perverse form of anti-Protestant bigotry.
Moreover, it is to ignore the fact that the strength of Loyalist ideology in the North has a great deal to do precisely with the disastrous failure of both the social democratic and Republican ideologies to get to grips and grapple at close quarters with it for the allegiance of Protestant workers.
Only revolutionary socialism – Marxism – which links the question of the existence of the Northern State to the question of what class is to rule in Ireland has any hope of success.
 



ANYONE WHOSE life long ambition was to become very unpopular had an easy time of it last weekend.
All you had to do was slag off Live-Aid and perfectly intelligent people would treat you to their full range of frowns, glowers and dark looks.
Even Cliff Richard was fireproofed from criticism for the duration. There, strumming his acoustic in the studio and crooning tunelessly, We got the skill/to end all the ills. And only at the peril of your life could you remark that it’s a great pity he didn’t have the skill to write a decent lyric.
There was Mark Knoppfler, who many of us will have regarded as an intelligent and very talented man answering the question, What can we do as a follow up? by suggesting that rock bands should now raise money for the Prince of Wales trust.
Flashing on the screen at regular intervals came the logos of Lloyds Bank, William and Glynns, the Halifax and so on, the central pillars of the capitalist system solidly rooted in the enterprise.
There on the stage, bathed in the warm approbation of the multitudes were Prince Charles himself and his stupid simpering wife, representatives of the British royal family in whose name the continent of Africa was laid waste and its peoples slaughtered and subjected to appalling suffering for more than two centuries.
Billy Connolly wept on screen after the showing of the video of a child in a refugee camp stumbling like a dying stick insect while on the soundtrack the Cars sang: Who’s gonna take you home?
Who indeed. The truth of the matter is resoundingly simple. Untold millions of people in the third world, and some in what styles itself at the first world, are born into misery. And as things are organised at the moment, doomed to die amidst the filth in which they first saw the light of day. This does not happen because of the accidental circumstances of their birth, or because of unfortunate climatic conditions which prevent the land they live on yielding up food, nor because of the primitive or stupid or corrupt nature of the governments which rule their territories.
It happens only because the food and resources which exist in the world in marvellous abundance are owned and controlled by a relatively small group of rotten rich people, who precisely calculate how exactly to deploy them to ensure that they remain rich and rotten.
If this means, as it does, that food – which could make children dying in misery strong and healthy – remains stored in warehouses surrounded by barbed wire, then so be it.
There will always be famine until these people’s control of the world’s wealth is ended.
The single most constructive thing which can be done by any one concerned about the plight of children dying dreadfully in Africa, is to engender in the widest possible section of the population an implacable hatred of those responsible and an intelligent means of organising hatred so as to overthrow them – so instituting in place of their system one based on the proposition that the needs of human beings are paramount over the interests of profit.
Live Aid didn’t do that. Through the involvement of the royal family, the banks and the bourgeois press and through the explicit statements of Geldof, Knoppfler, Bowie and others, it invited a belief that the politics of class struggle are extraneous to the effort needed to deal with mass hunger.
For this the rich and the rotten are profoundly grateful to the organisers of Live Aid This gratitude may well be expressed in the bestowal of honours in the near future. Live Aid, like rock and roll generally, was full of bullshit.
 



ALTHOUGH ALL the obituaries said what a warm and wonderful person he was, it is likely that Phil Silvers died a bitter man.
When he lay down to sleep and didn’t wake up again last weekend he was 73 years of age and much better known as Bilko than by his real name. The first episode of Bilko was made in 1956, the last in 1959. When the show was cancelled he was 47.
He managed a few stage shows afterwards and guest spots in films, but for the most part he was offered only appearances on TV chat shows and cabarets in which he was required to be Bilko.
In private and sometimes in public he raged that although Bilko remained massively popular and the networks ran and re-ran the programmes (as they still do) no I one would ever put up the money for another series.
What he didn’t understand was that Bilko was the product of a fleeting moment in post-war American history.
The character was created after the end of the war in Korea and killed off just before Castro and Kennedy and the first ominous incursions into Vietnam.
At home and abroad the Bilko era was as peaceful and tame as America has known in half a century. Actually Bilko pudgy, bald and full of innocent bluster – was as unviolent and unmilitary a character as has ever been created in the United States. Not once during the series did Master Sergeant Ernie or any of his motor pool squad fire a shot in anger.
Bilko’s appeal lay in his endless battle of wits against stuffed shirt authority and his irrepressible pursuit of easy money via crooked gambling schemes.
In the course of this he bombarded the top brass with ridicule. The series’ standard plot was of Bilko managing by some inspired contrivance to escape the consequences of sustained insubordination.
Many episodes ended with a bemused Colonel Potter making yet another futile effort to understand how Ernie had triumphed again. And of course the audience was clearly invited to identify with the brash role and to enjoy the discomfiture of thwarted authority.
Such a pitch wouldn’t have been possible a few years earlier when military matters were serious in the States and Pentagon chiefs were lobbying for a nuclear strike at North Korea and a land invasion of Mao’s China.
Nor would it have been permissible a few years later when the Bay of Pigs was followed by the deepening involvement in Indo-China and patriotic paranoia became the dominant mood in middle America.
From 1956 to 1959 it was possible – just about – to believe that Fort Baxter was a slapstick representation of a piece of existing reality. But from the onset of the sixties it has to be seen – and could be mightily enjoyed – as a satire on something which clearly no longer existed. No new series would have been plausible even as pantomime.
Ernie Bilko was a casualty of US foreign aggression.
 



The Autobiography of Terence O’Neill
Hart-Davis £2.25
Lord O’Neill of the Maine says in this book that he is the nicest man in the world and that if it had not been for Catholics and Protestants he would still be the Prime Minister of Northern Ireland. He says it very badly. Reading his book is like wading through a pool of thick porridge.
Many of the 154 pages are taken up with trivia and tittle-tattle about his journeys abroad with Jean (wife) and the important people they met. Most of the rest comprises examples of his own quaint wit and wisdom. Did you know that Capt. O’Neill once wrote to Harold Wilson urging him to send the Queen Mother to Southern Rhodesia to stop UDI, but that Wilson did not get the letter because he was at a Party conference and this is the reason why there was UDI? It’s in the book.
O’Neill became Prime Minister at a time when the Orange machine in Northern Ireland was becoming redundant to the needs of monopoly capitalism. What Toryism needed was a hard-headed ‘professional politician’ who could wean the Catholic middle class with a conservative consensus while not alienating the Protestant masses to the point of rebellion. Instead, what they got was an effete Etonian snob who sucked up to the Orange Order and sucked down to the Catholic clerics and thought that to do both simultaneously was to be ‘non-sectarian’. The book is not worth reading.
 



Eamonn McCann writes: Events in Ireland gather towards one of their periodic climaxes. Within a few weeks Whitelaw will have produced the definitive White Paper on the future government of the Six Counties, and the British Army will brace itself for possible backlash from Protestants outraged by the denial of security powers and a refurbished Stormont. Whitelaw has prepared his ground fairly well. Lynch, in return for British ‘concessions’ on the control of security in the North, has begun the long-awaited crackdown on the Proves. Meanwhile, in the North, the Army has desperately been trying to take the steam out of Protestant allegations of a British ‘sell out of Ulster’, by stepping up its harassment of the Catholic ghettos. The reasoning behind this is that if the army can be seen to have smashed the Provos – with Lynch’s help – there will be much less chance of an organised Protestant rejection of the White Paper.
The indications are that there will be a blacklash of sorts, no matter how the lily is gilded. Whether Craig’s threat of an armed uprising is bluster remains to be seen. But we have already seen that on the lunatic fringe of the Protestant right wing – not the least populated segment of the Irish political spectrum – there are those who will ‘fight’ – i.e. shoot and bomb Catholics more or less at random on both sides of the border.
The response to the situation by the Republicans and the revolutionary left has been less than adequate. The Marxist forces are, as yet, too tiny to intervene directly with any decisive effect. The Provos, confused about the nature of the twenty six county state, have reacted to the arrest of two of the top men in a sporadic fashion which betokens no real strategy. The Officials have called for a Civil Rights Movement in the South on the lines of the Northern experiment. The Provos, quicker, so to speak, on the gun, have already set up one – though it is far from clear what they want it to do.
The Tories’ strategy of smashing Republican resistance and isolating the Protestant right could work, just. Whether it does or not depends in some measure on the ability of those within both Republican sections who are, apparently, moving towards Marxism, to understand what is happening: and understand specifically that neither an intensified purist Republican campaign, nor an adaptation to ‘respectable’ political methodology meets the needs of the moment.
 



‘Ten degrees to the left of centre in good times,’ sang the late Phil Ochs. ‘Ten degrees to the right when it affects me personally ... Love me, love me, I’m a liberal’.
Ochs, from New York, was not singing about The Guardian newspaper, having almost certainly had the good fortune never to set eyes on the publication.
But he could have been. The quotation’s apt. And the type of easy-oozey, willy-wobble political poseur he depicted is the archetypical Guardian-person.
The Guardian prides (it is the exact word) itself on being the journalistic defender of British-liberal values. And so it is. It stands for the poor and the underprivileged – and sincerely regrets that, under present circumstances, there is little can be done about their situation.
It is sternly opposed to racism, and agonises over the necessity, as things stand at the moment, for racist immigration laws. It is willing fearlessly to expose corruption in the police force, while making the point that, taking everything into account and looking at both sides of the question, the police are, on the whole, wonderful.
It counsels against anti-trade union law, while highlighting the importance of taking whatever steps are required to end the distressing scenes of militancy at factory gates. It is genuinely concerned about the likely effects of Thatcher’s cuts in public services while recognising that, however unwelcome consequences, a cogent case can, on balance be made for stringent control of public spending (in the light of ongoing economic circumstances). The Guardian wrestles daily with its conscience, and wins.
I began reading The Guardian when I foolishly went to university because I had gathered somewhere or other that reading The Guardian, so the theory ran, you could become incredibly well-informed and impress people at debates. You would know, for example, the name of the foreign minister of Venezuela and casually toss it in. Up to a point, there was, and is, some basis for this theory. There’s quite a lot in The Guardian. But I realised after a time that while I had become a dab hand at the facts, I didn’t seem to know what the facts meant. The name of the Venezuelan foreign minister, no problem. The reason why things were as they were in Venezuela, no notion.
And one gradually made the awesome discovery that, for understanding, the high Tory Daily Telegraph was much the superior broadsheet and took furtively to toting a copy around hidden guiltily beneath the slogan-festooned combat jacket.
The Telegraph was and is better because it has always had a clearly expressed point of view. This is helpful in two ways. As a general rule of thumb, you can take it that anything the Telegraph denounces cannot be all bad. More fundamentally, the fact that The Telegraph is openly opinionated from a class viewpoint gives its coverage of events a clear perspective which, although not ours, can illuminate causes as well as reports on effects. Class warriors like Colin Welch and Robert Moss, in their endless search for socialist subversion on the one hand, and capitalist weakness on the other, actually analyse.
You don’t get writers like that in the Guardian: Guardian persons in their de rigeur denims would choke on their real ale at the prospect. Guardian writers are objective, their objectivity shrouded in an impenetrable fog of blandness and a vague sense of social concerp. Usually it is not at all clear what, if anything, Guardian writers believe except that, somehow, things ought to be rather better than they are ...
To discern The Guardian’s politics it is necessary to examine where it has stood on issues which affected matters, as it were, personally.
For example: I haven’t done any research on this (and don’t intend to do any) but am willing to bet a strong Sterling pound against a bent Irish penny that no Guardian writer would have been permitted to express, however blandly or vaguely, a view that it was an OK thing for a Western capitalist government to incinerate thousands of Asian workers and peasants ... until a Western capitalist government (The United States) began doing just that. At which point (during the bombing of Hanoi) the paper (after much public agonising, mind you, and with heart-felt feelings of regret) decided that (sigh) it was really the only course.
Similarly, a bottle of Jameson against a half pint of shandy says The Guardian was totally opposed to closing down hospitals until hospitals began to be closed down.
In good times The Guardian is against The Telegraph’s politics ...
(It is, perhaps, worth recalling that in 1926 after the General Strike The Guardian in Manchester formed a scab union to get the paper out: thus, no doubt, to report the proceedings from an entirely objective point of view).
None of this is to say that there is nothing good in The Guardian.
It employs a very witty, if shallow-minded, television critic called Nancy Banks Smith. A fine, if too-tortured, descriptive writer called Jill Tweedie. Arguably the best soccer writer in the bourgeois press, David Lacey. A person could, without doing him or herself lasting harm, buy the paper to read these. (There are also, of course, dreadful dingbats like Peter Jenkins, to read whose political column is akin to wading through a pond of thick porridge).
All newspapers are weapons in an ideological war, and different weapons are needed for different spheres of the war. If there was only, say, The Times and The Telegraph, for the ‘educated’ upper class to read of a morning, a section of that class – the section which for whatever reason of class origin or background likes to think of itself as enlightened would feel, well, left out. If The Guardian didn’t exist they would have to create it. Which, as a matter of fact, they did.
It exists not only to reflect and confirm their own image of themselves, but to remind them at moments when it matters of whose side they really are on.
The most recent blockbuster series carried in the paper was a week-long special on Northern Ireland. No fewer than 19 Guardian writers descended on Belfast to attempt to ‘stimulate discussion of “Ulster” in Britain again’. Locally, the most obvious effect of the visit has been on the profits of the Europa Hotel bar where scenes reminiscent of the reign of the Emporor Caligula were reported by sometimes reliable sources.
Some of the pieces were not as bad as all that. Polly Toynbee wrote a vivid report on Belfast’s Divis Flats, which she described as the worst slum in ‘Britain’. Polly’s reactions probably had much to do with her inexperience of slums (there’s as bad post-war flat complexes in Lancashire, difficult as it must be for Divis people to believe it). Still, not to carp. Jill Tweedie contributed a dewy-eyed piece about the Provos, which – apart from a ‘balancing’ exit-line – cast them as armed members of the St Francis of Assisi Fan Club. Which is (the truth must be told) improbable. There was an entertainingly daft feature by Stanley Reynolds and a daft article by Richard Gott. Plus unremarkable reports on everything else from punk rock to the tourist trade (!).
The strange (or not) thing was that in a massive series designed to ‘stimulate discussion’ not one house writer put forward the argument for withdrawing the troops.
That, you see, would be against the line of the class on an issue which affects it personally.
To be absolutely fair, Peter Jenkins did say that he would not weep salt tears if the troops were eventually withdrawn. Eventually. Not, so to speak, now, at this point in time when, looking at both sides of the question and taking into account all relevant factors it would – and this must be recognised whatever our long-term aims – be, on balance, and with a view to arriving in the end at a solution acceptable to all right-thinking persons whatever their persuasion – mine’s a brandy, eventually, things ought to be better and with good will on both sides, in the fullness of time ...
 



The Guinea Pigs
John McGuffin
Penguin Special, 40p.
BRIAN Faulkner made a mistake when he interned John McGuffin in August 1971. McGuffin, a Belfast Protestant who describes himself as an anarchist, was so outraged that since his release he has spent his spare time collecting and publishing the facts about internment His first book, a history of imprisonment without trial since the inception of the Northern Ireland state, was published in 1973. This, his second, is a detailed account of what happened to fourteen of the 342 men arrested in the August ’71 swoop. It is hair-raising stuff and every socialist should read it.
Some of the internees were tortured. No-one denies that any longer and a few of them have been awarded substantial sums in compensation. But it has been widely assumed – and little has been published in Britain to contradict the assumption – that the torture consisted mainly of physical assault: unjustified perhaps, outrageous even, but hardly sinister. And, anyway, it was stopped after a wave of liberal indignation.
The facts themselves are horrific enough. The men were kicked and beaten, thrown into landrovers, lorries and helicopters and tossed out again. Taken to ‘interrogation centres’, separated from one another, stripped naked, some urinated on. Then black bags were put over their heads and they were made to lean spread-eagled against a wall, all their joints kept rigid and all their weight on flexed fingertips while white noise played into their ears. When they collapsed they were kicked and thrown up against the wall again. The ‘wall treatment’ lasted up to 43 hours.
In October 1971 some of the facts were published by the Sunday Times Insight team, and a low-decibel hue-and-cry was bought off by the appointment of then Ombudsman Sir Edmund Compton to write a report on the matter. McGuffin devastates Compton:
‘Compton saw only one complainant and received written evidence from another. As opposed to this he admits to hearing ninety-five Army witnesses, twenty-six police witnesses, eleven prison officers, two civilian doctors, and two specialists, one from a military and one from a civilian hospital, as well as receiving from their secretaries written evidence from a further ten prison officers and one police officer.’
Compton concluded that there had been ‘ill-treatment’ but no ‘brutality’. This piece of sneak-semantics was so transparently ludicrous that even some legal big-wigs blinked. Heath appointed Lord Parker to produce another report advising whether such techniques should be discontinued. Parker said they should not; but Lord Gardiner in a minority report said they should and it was Gardiner who was accepted by the Government. Sighs of relief all around that the whole nasty business could now be forgotten.
But McGuffin argues that none of that was the point. He claims that Compton, Parker and Gardiner, taken together, were a massive cover up, and that Compton may have willingly made himself look foolish the better to effect the cover-up. Because McGuffin’s basic thesis – and he argues it convincingly, bringing a wealth of evidence to bear – is that British Intelligence did not torture the men to gain information, that it was rather conducting a cold-blooded experiment into Sensory Deprivation as an interrogative technique: that the men were not chosen for any knowledge of subversion they were believed to have, but on a much more random basis, simply because they were young, physically fit and available for use as ‘guinea-pigs’.
After Compton’s report all controversy focused on the bizarre distinction between ill-treatment and brutality. Thus attention, including the attention of Parker and Gardiner, was directed towards the definition of what had happened, not why it had happened.
McGuffin traces the history of Sensory Deprivation from the NKVD through the Korean War, where the British first became aware of its potential for use in wartime, to Malaya, Aden and on to Northern Ireland. He says that the introduction of internment was regarded by Military Intelligence as a heaven-sent opportunity to run further checks on SD. He does not prove this thesis. And indeed it is not provable, short of somehow extracting a confession from the interrogators concerned ... But he certainly mounts a formidable case for it.
If McGuffin is right the British Army must be very pleased. It has conducted a successful experiment on how to deal with recalcitrants in the Kitsonian age and the knowledge gained no doubt adds measurably to its readiness to handle subversion at home. (What is the optimum time for depriving a man of intelligible sensory stimulation? The fourteen were subjected to it for periods ranging from nine to forty-three and a half hours. Should it be continuous or broken up? Some of the men were left to stand until they collapsed, others given periodic ‘rests’. And so on.)
McGuffin concludes:
‘These techniques have been used in controlled experiments, on members of the civilian population of Northern Ireland. There is no reason to suppose that the interrogation specialists ... will not, at some time in the future, use them on dissident members of society in England.’
Indeed not.
 







On 5 October 1968 an apparently small and unimportant civil rights march took place in the city of Derry. The march led by small numbers of socialists and Republicans proved to be the spark that set Northern Ireland alight. Twenty years on Eamonn McCann, one of the leaders of the march, analyses the beginnings of the struggle and its consequences.




AS THE 5 October march approached, socialist thinking in Derry wasn’t as strong as has sometimes been made out. It is true that most of those involved in the local organisation of the march were socialists of one sort or another. But the politics were very vague and there was no coherent socialist organisation.
This is clear from an examination of the role of the Derry Labour Party.
It was the local branch of the stodgily respectable constitutionalist Northern Ireland Labour Party (NILP): its official name was the Londonderry Labour Party (LLP). It had around a hundred members “on the books”.
The LLP had made an impact in the local government elections of 1967 in which it contested both the majority Catholic South Ward and the majority Protestant North and Waterside Wards and picked up almost 30 percent of the vote without winning any seats.
Its approach was to attack both Unionists and Nationalists for their sectarian bickering, which, so the argument ran, was detrimental to the general interests of Derry.
These middle of the road ideas sat uneasily with the street agitation on the housing issue which began to gather momentum from the beginning of 1968 and in which younger, more left wing members of the party quickly became involved. Moreover, the fact that Republicans were also involved in the street action alarmed both the local party leadership and the NILP hierarchy in Belfast.
In Derry a number of prominent moderate members dropped out. As a result the left came into the ascendancy in time to commit the party to the October march, but this leftism was based on radical activity, not on any clear set of socialist ideas.
This was paralleled by developments in the local Republican Movement. Republican morale had been hard hit by a disastrous showing in the 1966 Westminster election (just over 2,000 votes in a constituency with more than 25,000 Catholic electors). The 1967 Easter Rising Commemoration had attracted 37 people (including the platform party and two Special Branch men) to a meeting at Little Diamond. Meetings of members were drawing around a dozen. The Irish Republican Army was entirely moribund.
A handful of younger members eagerly seized on the new line being pushed by Dublin leaders like Cathal Goulding and Sean Garland which emphasised economic and civil liberty issues rather than the age old question of partition. At the beginning of 1968 they joined with housing activists, individual leftists and Labour Party members to form the Derry Housing Action Committee, which was to spearhead a campaign involving squatting and street meetings. A number of older Republicans disapproved of this move, arguing that it downgraded the national question.
Thus by the middle of 1968 a group, perhaps 30 strong, was cooperating loosely to highlight issues of discrimination and deprivation and the inability of the old sectarian parties to offer any remedy. The street protests, disruption of official events, etc., served not only to unnerve the Unionists but to alarm the Nationalist Party, whose leadership of anti-Unionist politics was under threat. What’s more, it also perturbed some elements in the parties that the street protestors belonged to.
It was this activist group which organised the 5 October civil rights march. The Belfast based executive of the Civil Rights Association (CRA), anxious for a respectable image, asked Nationalist councillor James Doherty and John Hume, a local factory manager, to sign the official notification of the march to the RUC, Northern Ireland’s police force. However, neither wanted anything to do with the venture.
The march was banned on 3 October by Northern Ireland’s home affairs minister, William Craig. This angered many in Derry, including many who had been wary of the march.
The Labour Party met that night and resolved to defy the ban – an important factor in forcing a very reluctant CRA not to back down.
The RUC trapped the march between two police lines in Duke Street and launched a mass assault. Many injured were hosed by water cannon as they fled. RUC men snarled sectarian insults of the “’Fucking Fenian scum’’ variety as they wielded their batons.
Reports and pictures of RUC violence caused uproar in Dublin and London as well as nearer home. Within hours the Bogside had risen up in anger. By the next morning the most prominent half dozen of the organising group were being credited in Derry with having being instrumental in bringing about the moat significant change in decades.
 
FOUR DAYS after the march, on 9 October, a new organisation was formed at a meeting in the City Hotel. This was the Citizens’ Action Committee (CAC), a 15 strong body which included: factory manager Ivan Cooper, chairman; John Hume, vice-chairman; millionaire bookmaker Michael Canavan, treasurer.
The first action of the CAC was to call off a further protest march which the 5 October organisers had announced for the following Saturday.
The CAC represented a takeover of civil rights activity in the town by the Catholic establishment.
The reason it succeeded so well in placing itself at the head of a movement which it had done nothing to build was that many of the left wingers who had been involved pre 5 October accepted the CAC takeover. A number of the most prominent became non-prominent members of the CAC.
This wasn’t a “sell out”. Rather there was no plausible alternative. The “original organisers” weren’t members of any grouping in which they could have worked out a common line on the CAC interventions. So it made “common sense” to “work from within” in the hope of outmanoeuvring or exposing the right wingers like Hume, Canavan, Doherty etc. But they weren’t even “working within” on an organised basis. So they were trapped as individuals inside the CAC, pushed forward to provide it with a left looking image when Hume etc. thought that tactically appropriate.
The CAC organised a number of tightly controlled demonstrations. The political flavour of these was apparent in a march on 2 November along the 5 October route, in which only the 15 members of the CAC marched, three abreast, while the masses lined the footpaths to applaud!
A fortnight later about 15,000 set out behind the CAC banner to march illegally on the same route again. This time the CAC had negotiated with the RUC in advance that four CAC members would “symbolically” breach a police cordon. The deal was that CAC stewards would ensure that none of the other 14,996 marchers would cause bother, in exchange for which four symbols were permitted their moment of mock belligerence.
An indication of the depth of the CAC leadership’s dishonesty, and of the left wing’s naivety, is that the two left wingers among the chosen four did not discover until years later that this deal had been done.
The CAC’s watchword was “anti-Unionist” unity. Anyone insisting on political debate within the anti-Unionist camp was denounced as a “wrecker”. This meant that there could be no clear breach with the Nationalist Party, no questioning of the social power of the Catholic Church, no attack on Lynch’s Fianna Fail government in Dublin.
Given these politics, “anti-Unionist unity” was a euphemism for Catholic unity. And insofar as the left hadn’t broken with the CAC it became established in the public mind as the more noisy and extreme wing of an essentially Catholic movement, with Hume and the others who were later to form the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) as the moderate leadership of the same movement.
 
ONE OF the mistakes made by the left was that we underestimated the depth of the sectarian division. In part this was wishful thinking. On the face of it there had seemed no shortage of evidence that religious hatreds were receding. Northern Ireland’s prime minister, Terence O’Neill, may have been an asinine and unconvincing reformer, but at least here was a Unionist saying that discrimination was wrong, which was new.
Taoiseach (the South’s prime minister) Lemass visited O’Neill at Stormont, the North’s parliament buildings, in January 1965. There was much talk of the “two traditions” coming together. “Reconciliation” was the buzzword. The Nationalist Party agreed to become the official opposition at Stormont.
In this general atmosphere it seemed sensible to interpret the modest advances being made by leftish politics as part of a deep rooted and inexorable process which it was the duty of socialists to push further and faster.
The broad argument was that since their side – Green and Orange Tories, North and South – were drifting together, our side – Catholic and Protestant workers, North and South – should come together against them in a realignment at last along the class divide.
Implicit in this was an assumption that the national question would not, and could not, arise again in traditional, stark, for or against partition, terms.
This ignored the extent to which Catholic workers continued, reasonably, to regard themselves as members of an oppressed community rather than a section of an exploited class.
The situation in Deny made the point sharply. The 1966 revision of the electoral register showed 14,125 Catholic voters and 1,474 Protestants in the eight seat South Ward; 4,380 Protestants and 3,173 Catholics in the eight seat North Ward; and 2,804 Protestants and 1,420 Catholics in the four seat Waterside Ward.
In round figure, sectarian head count terms, 20,192 Catholics could hope for eight councillors, 10,274 Protestants for 12. The Labour performance in 1967 showed that by no means all electors were thinking in such terms, but even so, it was a fact that Catholics were being treated with official contempt.
And since local government power was being used to ruthless sectarian effect in the allocation of houses and jobs (there wasn’t a single Catholic working in Derry Guildhall) this wasn’t a matter of Catholics feeling vaguely excluded from civic life, but of real hardship.
Moreover, there were powerful ideological forces binding the Catholics together as a community. The Catholic Church is not just a set of beliefs but a brilliantly organised institution reaching into almost every area of the life of “its” people and providing them with a sense of identity.
Once 5 October happened these factors operated to ensure that Catholics reacted as a community. There had, of course, been Protestant trade unionists, Labour Party members and students on the march.
But when people streamed back to the Bogside, bloodied from the batons and soaked by water cannon, and the first flimsy barricades were thrown across Rossville Street, a pattern of play was established which conformed exactly to the traditional shape of the struggle in the North.
In this situation socialists, even if we’d had coherent organisations and dear ideas, which we hadn’t, would have faced very formidable difficulties in trying to argue for an approach based on class rather than communal solidarity.
 
THE MAJOR difficulty we faced in trying to argue that Catholic workers should look to the working class movement was that the working class movement had held itself aloof from Catholic grievances. In his book, Have the Trade Unions Failed the North?, labour historian Andy Boyd provides a detailed and devastating account of the effect this had, particularly on issues where the vital interests of the Northern state were involved.
For example, Boyd reckons that the Northern Committee of the Irish Congress of Trade Unions (ICTU) was the only union body of its kind in all Europe to fail to condemn internment in 1971. Similarly, it made no condemnation of the Bloody Sunday massacre – in which six trade union members were among the 14 dead.
Evidence of the way it worked at local level in Derry in the late sixties comes from the minutes of Derry Trades Council. The council backed the campaign in 1965 to bring the second university to Derry, added its voice around the same time to demands that Derry be developed rather than a new town constructed at Craigavon, protested against the closure of one of the town’s rail links etc.
These were entirely respectable campaigns which drew support from the Churches, most of the business community, and, particularly in relation to the university, even a section of the local Unionist Party.
This “common-sense” perspective – an appeal for all sections of Derry society to come together for Derry’s sake – was the basis for the local Labour Party’s programme in the 1967 corporation poll.
The failure of all this campaigning helped fuel the frustration which spilled out onto the streets in 1968. At that point the inadequacy and irrelevance of the trades council were exposed.
In keeping with its moderation and distaste for “divisive” issues and actions, the council brusquely rejected all appeals from the left for support. In June 1968 it refused even to hear a deputation from the Housing Action Committee. “No useful purpose would be served by such a meeting,” it declared.
The following month a letter from the Republican Clubs asking the council to protest against their proscription was “noted”. In August the council voted not to protest against the convictions on public order offences of ten Derry Housing Action Committee activists. Invited by the local organisers to co-sponsor the 5 October march, the council voted that it should be “left to individual trade unionists” whether to take part.
This trend was to continue. After internment in 1971 the council held a special meeting which echoed the line of the Northern Committee by “not taking sides”. No motion was passed.
On the day after Bloody Sunday, as six local trade unionists lay in the morgue at Altnagelvin Hospital, the trades council expressed sympathy with the relatives. It said nothing about the circumstances of their deaths.
Down in the Bogside, where young men and women were hurling themselves, stones in hand at the cops, the suggestion that we should “look to the organised working class movement” invited understandable derision.
 
SOME OF the “Marxist” theories fashionable in the sixties didn’t help. Throughout the West the long post-war boom had encourged many to write off the working class and to look instead to oppressed groups – blacks, women, the Third World masses etc – to provide the dynamic for a revolution which would liberate humanity. This trend was particularly marked in student circles. It played a large part in shaping the strategy of the Queen’s University based People’s Democracy (PD) which emerged in direct response to the RUC assault on the 5 October march.
The PD has since been blamed by the right and the reformist left for deliberately provoking sectarianism. It needs to be said that the PD leadership were the most determined anti-sectarians of the time. The Northern Catholics were an oppressed group and when they stormed the streets to combat their oppression they were entitled to the total support of all who claimed to oppose sectarian oppression.
What the PD, and those of us in Derry who became increasingly associated with the PD in the public mind, lacked was a political analysis which put the working class at the centre of the fight against oppression.
In the early stages of its existence the PD was scarcely an organisation at all. In tune with the spirit of sixties student revolutionism, its basic unit was the mass meeting. Anybody who turned up could vote. If the next meeting drew a different attendance, it could overturn all previous decisions.
Such an organisation can only be sustained on the basis of constant activity. And almost by definition it cannot formulate consistent strategy, much less arrive at an agreed analysis.
Since the PD had virtually no structure, almost any group anywhere could set itself up as the local “PD”. As marches, pickets, sit-downs etc erupted in Catholic working class areas all over the North in the weeks after 5 October, the PD emerged as the militant opposition to the Civil Rights Association.
In Derry the CAC roughly filled the role of the CRA, while our own loose left group substituted for a Derry PD.
But, organisationally and politically, the lines were not clearly drawn.
The PD is best remembered from the period for the “Burntollet march” from Belfast to Derry of 1-4 January 1969 in which the Derry leftists joined. The CRA, the CAC, the Nationalist Party and the Catholic Church opposed the march, wanting to “give O’Neill time” to deliver on reforms promised in November and December.
The march was modelled on Martin Luther King’s Selma to Montgomery march in Mississippi in 1965. It was resolved at the outset that no matter what the provocation, no one would retaliate. The march was harassed and battered all the way across the North by large squads of Loyalists who mustered quite openly with cudgels and nailed sticks. Of the 80 or so marchers who set out, only a quarter arrived in Deny uninjured.
At Burntollet Bridge on the final day a large force of Loyalists, marshalled by off-duty members of the B Specials identified by armbands, launched a mass attack which scattered marchers across the fields and into a river. The accompanying RUC contingents joined in the attack. As word of this spread into Derry five miles away, hundreds of local people poured out in cars and commandeered buses to escort those who were straggling on.
Later that night large gangs of police invaded the Bogside, many of them drunk, beating people up, kicking doors, breaking windows with batons and bellowing sectarian songs. These facts were attested to in the report of the subsequent inquiry chaired by Lord Justice Cameron.
 
CATHOLIC OUTRAGE after Burntollet boosted the PD’s standing and credibility among anti-Unionist groups. This was reflected in the result of the 24 February Stormont general election called by O’Neill in a futile attempt to solidify the Unionist centre at the expense of the ultra-right.
The PD put up eight candidates and polled 25,000 votes, winning an average of a third of the poll where it stood against conservative nationalists, and mopping up most of the Catholic vote where it stood alone against Unionists. In Foyle in Derry the Labour Party with myself as candidate took 12 percent against Hume, who won handsomely, and Nationalist Party leader Eddie McAteer.
This was certainly a success for socialists, but it is far from clear that it was a success for socialism.
The socialists had emerged as the most militant fighters against Unionist sectarianism. But given the spontaneous nature of the socialists’ main organisational expression – the PD – and the absence of clear cut ideas, this militancy was as much a reflection of gut opposition to the Northern state as of commitment to a socialist solution.
The implications of this became clearer the following month when the Unionist MP for the Mid-Ulster Westminster seat died. It was a knife-edge, mainly rural constituency with a small Catholic majority and a call arose immediately for a “Unity” candidate and no “splitting the vote”. Bernadette Devlin won the nomination at a “Unity” convention, defeating the opportunist fraud Currie and a number of moderate claimants.
She went on to win 30,000 votes and a famous victory in April. In her victory speech she said with typical, enchanting candour: “There may not be 30,000 socialists in this constituency but it has a socialist MP anyway”, which perfectly encapsulated the undefinable nature of the left’s “advances”. As events spiralled on towards August 1969 and the entry of British troops, the left continued to operate as the militant element within a civil rights movement aiming at winning full citizenship for Northern Catholics. Increasingly, the argument between Hume and the CRA etc. on the one hand and the PD and the Derry leftists on the other, came to be expressed as an argument about the wisdom and efficacy of the proffered strategies for achieving this.
Our strategy, being more urgent and street orientated and couched in rhetorically revolutionary terms, matched the mood of many young workers in Catholic ghetto areas. But matching a mood was almost all it was. We weren’t recruiting them to socialist politics. Indeed, we had nothing to recruit them to.
Within a year of the February 1969 poll the PD had effectively disappeared in areas where it had polled well: in Fermanagh, South Derry and South Down, for example. After all, the local “PDs” had scarcely been organisations at all. And as student militancy receded, as it tends always to do, the main base in Queen’s University eroded steadily away. In Derry the Labour Party had begun a process of slow disintegration. The liberal business element which had been around in 1967 had long gone.
In Foyle a number of right wing trade unionists left to back Hume. And while the party did replenish its membership with new, younger recruits, many of these were very soon to begin looking to Republican guerrilla struggle rather than working class mass action as the way forward.
With no politically hard organisation and no clear orientation on the working class the left in the civil rights movement had surfed along on the tide of events. It was therefore quite unable to stand fast against the direction in which the tide was flowing. We were carried along by it.
This is not to argue that if we had all been hardened revolutionaries working clear-mindedly to build a revolutionary socialist party things would have worked out very differently. The deep-rootedness of sectarianism, the extent to which people in places like the Bogside think “naturally” in communal rather than class terms, the fact that even mildly left wing politics had long been anathematised by the Catholic establishment, all this would have confronted even the most consistent Marxists with formidable obstacles.
If we had been able to point to an organised working class movement – the unions most importantly, and the Labour Party – with a clear record of fighting vigorously for an end to the oppression of Catholics, it might have been possible to point to the working class as the force which had the power to remedy the ills we were campaigning against.
But that wasn’t the case. The realistic possibility we did have, and didn’t take, was of recruiting relatively rapidly from the masses of angry, urgent working class youth whom we had helped bring onto the streets, and perhaps entering 1969 with a revolutionary socialist organisation a few hundred strong. The task of building such an organisation remains.
 



Standard Left assessment of the Provisional IRA:
‘Of course we must support the Provos because they are fighting imperialism. But they have no understanding of the need for class politics: their terrorist tactics stem from that’.
Now hear this:
‘The Congress (of Trade Unions) leaders will try to act as a buffer between the bosses and the rank and file ... The rank and file must itself take the leadership of the struggle’.
‘Rebuilding (Nicaragua) can take two directions – either call back the old bosses, the bankers and the foreign advisors, or turn over a new leaf and build a society for the workers, the small farmers and the poor ...
‘The Sandinistas seem to be risking the future of the struggle by not declaring openly that it is a socialist republic they are after. They appear prepared to hand over the new government to the “respectable” academic and business leaders who are proponents of a liberal form of capitalist rule’.
‘We must be actively involved with the working class in building a front of economic resistance against capitalism in the 26 Counties’.
All these statements are from recent Provisional publications. They make the. point that, whatever the Provos are, they are not the unreconstructed nationalist gunmen of popular imagining.
This will become clearer before the end of the year, by which time the Provos can be expected to have ditched formally their present political programme and substituted for it a commitment to building a mass movement fighting on economic issues as well as on the national question.
All this is a long way from the Provisional’ beginnings. When they split from the Official IRA in 1970 it was explained by one of their leaders that the new movement would ‘fight communism and atheism’. Early polemics against the Officials concentrated on the Officials’ alleged adherence to socialism and weakness for ‘alien ideologies’.
The phrase ‘faith and fatherland’ did not go unused. Trade-union struggles – indeed trade unions themselves – were dismissed as at best irrelevant, at worst downright dangerous deviations from the fight to ‘free Ireland’.
One of the reasons this has changed is that the Provisionals are overwhelmingly working-class. This might not seem of blinding significance. But the Provos are the first working-class Republican fighters in Irish history.
Irish Republicanism has traditionally been a largely rural phenomenon. In this century the Easter rising of 1916 took place in Dublin city. But the war of independence which erupted in its aftermath from 1919-1922 – and which ‘freed’ the 26 Counties from British rule – was for the most part fought in the countryside by men from the countryside.
Republicans since have tended to see their task as the completion of that war, using the Same well-tried tactics – sporadic bombing campaigns in Britain, guerrilla sorties in the border areas.
While there were occasional splits and openings to the left – most importantly in the 1930s – the movement as a whole held firm to its faith that the continued British presence in part of the country was the never-ending source of all our political ills, that all else must wait until that presence was removed.
All of which was of course grist to the slow-grinding mills of the 26 County ruling class and middle-class Nationalist leaders in the North. The IRA might occasionally shame them (’A Republican is a Fianna Failer with guts and gun’ ran one relevant aphorism). But it never really threatened them, at least not directly.
The ebb and flow of economic struggle in the cities was of merely marginal interest. The movement might sympathise. Individual Republicans might actively participate. But the movement itself had higher things on its mind, and could include in its ranks both the unemployed activist and the businessman with a penchant for patriotic perorations.
In the 1950s one eighth of the population of the 26 Counties emigrated – in itself an awesome statistic – while the bravest and the best of the Republican fighters were flinging themselves futilely at the border. There are grounds for believing that the Dublin government was not displeased to see them so divert their energies.
The Republicans’ ideology was bourgeois nationalism – the bourgeois nationalism first articulated in Ireland by Wolfe Tone in the last decade of the 18th century and which did have relevance in the first two decades of the 20th – not least to the national bourgeoisie, which wanted a state of its ‘own’. But it had steadily diminishing appeal to urban workers.
It was realisation of this which caused the Officials to make a left turn in the 1960s and seek to involve themselves in the trade union and tenant struggles – a turn which alienated the Old Guard who believed the ‘Cause’ was being sullied by sordid considerations, that all this chat about class served only to ‘split the people’.
The chagrin of the traditionalists was all the deeper when the Officials, in line with their new orientation, decided to get rid of their arms – a very unrepublican thing to do. They sold off their weapons to a comic opera faction of the ‘Free Wales Army’ which promptly lost them.
Thus when the trauma of August 1969 transfigured the Catholic ghettoes in the North and Sent the youth out raging into the streets, it was those who had kept the faith pure who spoke most directly to the immediate emotional and practical necessities. ‘Leftism’ had, literally, disarmed the people. Nothing more natural than that the youth should pour into the Provos, which they did.
Politics weren’t all that relevant. The Provisionals struck the right note, matched by the mood of the moment, provided a putative link between the struggle on the streets and the chronicle of campaigns past. The immediate motivation of the first recruits was simply a hearty hatred of the cops and the Brits, for which there was no want of fuel.
But it couldn’t go on like that. A sustained campaign demands a realistic perspective and the old guard were, and are, incapable of providing it. The rank and file were not starry-eyed idealists aglow for a great cause, but young workers from grim ghettoes, eventually battle-hardened.
The notion – still prevalent in unexpected places – that they cannot and do not analyse their own situation and draw conclusions from it, is offensively patronising – apart from being wrong.
No group of workers anywhere fights for, almost a full decade without drawing conclusions about the class nature of the society they live in and the class content of what they hope eventually to build.
Many have had ample time for analyses, in Long Kesh or Portlaoise prison, and to ask what ‘Brits Out’ actually entails. The Brits, after all, have been out of the 26 Counties for half a century which doesn’t seem to have resolved all the contradictions in its society ...
And if the Provisionals are the inheritors of long tradition of similar struggles, how come the previous struggles didn’t fully succeed?
In more practical terms, any struggle needs support. And while there have been mass mobilisations at times of great emotion – in the South after Bloody Sunday for example – these have never been sustained. The support and the emotion would subside together. How to make the struggle relevant on a continuing basis to tens of thousands of workers?
As well: to a greater extent than any previous generation of Republicans, the Provos are aware of, and have a sense of solidarity with, anti-imperialist fighters elsewhere. Up to a point, this may simply be a reflection of the fact that people are generally more aware of the world: television has something to do with it.
Republicans in the 1940s and 1950s found their inspiration almost exclusively in their own past, and depended for solidarity on their own kind – on Irish Americans, for example. But the Provos cannot avoid – not that they wish to – feeling a sense of kinship with, for example, the Palestine Liberation Organisation and the Zimbabwean Patriotic Front, neither of which is pure, marxist, but each certainly carriers of ‘alien ideologies’.
All this – here put very simplistically – naturally impelled the Provies towards the Left. But as important as any of it is the simple fact that the old archetypcal image of ‘A Republican’ just didn’t fit the people doing the fighting.
They are products of a modern, purely-urban culture. As likely to be into soccer as Gaelic football, rock concerts as much as céilis. It would be easy impressionistically to make too much of this. There is certainly a genuine love for Gaelic culture among many of them. (That can, just, co-exist with appreciation of more metropolitan things). And nothing wrong with a love of Gaelic culture.
But at an Ian Dury concert, earlier this year I was bumped into by a pogo-ing IRA man. He was, to be sure, a particular case, and exception, and it would be silly to read anything of significance into his presence. Except that, 15 years ago, there was no such thing as a Republican rocker. It would have been a contradiction in terms.
The archetypal Republican of campaigns past would, on the other hand, have fitted very neatly indeed into what has been the Provos’ political programme. This is contained in the document Éire Nua (New Ireland). It envisages, through the encouragement of self-help initiatives and community effort, the establishment of ‘local power’: people in their own areas gradually taking control of local affairs, and forming local councils. And all classes in each area being entitled to ‘fair’ representation of each council.
As far as national politics was concerned, there would be four provincial parliaments, one each for Leinster, Munster, Connacht and the nine counties of Ulster, each having a federal relationship with each other through a national parliament. The class nature of the Ireland so organised would, Provisional leaders explained, be ‘a matter for the people’. If ‘the people’ wanted a socialist Munster and a capitalist Leinster, so be it ...
It was a hare-brained scheme Which related not at all to the realities of the situation situation and which, despite energetic promotion, excited little enthusiasm among rank and file Provisional. And none at all among workers in general, Catholic or Protestant, North or South.
In keeping with developments within the movement, Éire Nua will, I understand, be ditched in the next few months. A new statement of perspective – in line with the quotes at the beginning of this article – will be adopted. And all who are avid for a sign of a left-wing breakthrough in Ireland will, understandably, cheer. And quite right, too – up to a point.
Things will not of course, be quite as they appear.
It will be noted in the first instance that this fairly radical change of direction will not be preceded by any appearance of wide-ranging debate. There will be no spirited polemics by leftist Provisionals against those, still in the movement, who have denounced class struggle as unnecessarily divisive. Nor will th latter mount any sturdy defence of their position.
The main reason – there are others – for this is that the Republican Movement is, firstly, a military organisation. The military wing, the IRA, takes precedence in all things over the political wing, Sinn Fein. It could hardly be otherwise.
A clandestine army cannot have its tactics and strategy dictated to it by an open organisation. It would be literally suicidal. And since strategy and tactics flow directly from political perspectives, the military wing must also decide what that perspective is to be.
There is a form of democracy within the IRA, but it is, in the nature of things, very limited. Members accept a line and implement it, not because they have necessarily become convinced of its correctness, but because they have been ordered to. There is nothing terribly sinister about this. It is just the way with armies.
The left turn which the Provisionals are now making certainly results from a deal of thought about the society they are dealing with, and it reflects the changed dass composition of the movement. It does not mean – or at least it does not have to mean – that there has been a simple, uniform shift in the direction of revolutionary socialism.
Moreover: the shift will not be represented as, and is not seen by the Provos themselves as, a definitive break with the past. They are not into definitive breaks with the past. On the contrary, they depend for most of their political sustenance not on demonstrable public support – although that exists – but on their ability to trace back a direct link between themselves and the founding fathers of Republicanism.
It is that fiercely-felt sense of their own historic inheritance which sustained the Movement through thick and thin – sometimes thin and thin – in the 1930s, 1940s and 1950s. And it is still very real.
The new line must be presented – and understood internally – not as a break from, but merely an updating of traditional Republican teaching. And traditional Republican teaching is irredeemably bourgeois, dating from the era when bourgeois nationalism was a revolutionary ideology.
There is an acute contradiction here, which cannot be resolved within the Republican movement. It can only be resolved within the context of building a marxist party, which the movement cannot become. It if became marxist, it would, by definition, cease to be Irish Republican.
The Provos – it should go without saying in a socialist journal – have never been the rabid sectarians or zombie gunmen of British press caricature. Anyone who has moved among them will know that if the war in Ireland could be won by dogged determination, careless courage and unconcern for self-aggrandisement, they would have won it long ago.
There will be no revolutionary party built in Ireland which does not include them in great numbers. And the increasing socialist content of their programme cannot lightly be dismissed.
But the contradictions remain and should not be underestimated either.
 



Eamonn McCann was involved in the Northern Ireland civil
rights movement in the 1960s and is an active socialist in Derry
today. He talked to Phil Gasper about the political situation
in Ireland and the aims of socialists there
How did you first become involved in politics?
I’ve been politically active for as long as I can remember. My
father was a shop steward in the electricians’ union and was a
member of Derry Trades Council for a quarter of a century. One of the
earliest things I remember is a room full of men – usually men –
smoking in our little house in the Bogside and discussing problems in
the trade union movement.
If you grow up in a place like the Bogside you very quickly become
aware of the political situation, because literally at the age of six
or seven it’s clear, if you’ve been born into the Catholic
community, that there’s something strange going on here. The
Catholics are in a majority in the town but the Loyalists have a
majority on the local council. That was a constant topic of
conversation, along with discrimination against Catholics in jobs and
in housing and so forth. Everybody in the Bogside was aware of that
from the earliest time that they were capable of rational thought.
So that was my background in labour and civil rights politics.
Then when I went to university in the early 1960s, CND and campaigns
against militarism were emerging strongly, and the beginnings of what
was to become the student revolt. I came into contact with
revolutionary socialist ideas and with Trotskyism, and I’ve taken
it from there.
 
You became a central figure to the civil rights movement in
the late 1960s. What sparked that struggle?
The civil rights movement began as a reflection of frustration
with the fact that constitutional, conventional politics didn’t
seem to be providing any remedy for the situation. Anti-Unionist
politics in the North were dominated by the Nationalist Party, which
was a very conservative organisation.
A number of youngish people, particularly in Derry in the early
stages, got together and began to talk about taking politics onto the
streets. This was in mid-1967 and 1968 and it reflected something
that was happening around the world. There had been the black civil
rights movement in the United States which was very important.
Street protests were held simply demanding reform of the
allocation of jobs and houses, and demanding a fairer system of
electoral boundaries and so forth. When they were met with repression
and with straightforward physical assaults by the police,
developments began which led towards the emergence of the Provisional
IRA and the fightback against the state. So beginning from very
simple things, like we want a fair voting system and equal
distribution of jobs and houses, very quickly – literally within
months – a situation had arisen in which people were saying we’ve
really got to take on the state.
This led speedily to discussion of the Republican tradition which
had been dormant in the 1960s in all of Ireland. But once cops began
attacking the civil rights marches, people’s thoughts began to turn
to a physical confrontation with the state. It was in these
conditions that the IRA eventually appeared.
 
Why was it so difficult for the state in Northern Ireland to
grant even these very basic reforms?
The machinery of the state had developed over half a century. The
police, the RUC,was an overwhelmingly Protestant and sectarian force.
A lot of the grievances in the Catholic community were directed
specifically against the RUC, and after the 1968 civil rights marches
these grievances accumulated because the RUC was just physically
battering people off the streets. In April 1969 the first person to
die in the Troubles, Sammy Devenney in William Street in Derry, was
beaten to death by the RUC.
The problem for the authorities was that, in order to buy off the
civil rights demonstrators at that time, one of the things they’d
have had to do was deal with the fact that the police were murdering
people. This was something that the whole force was steeped in.
 
The media generally portrays the IRA as fanatics and
psychopaths. What is the reality?
The IRA isn’t a group of fanatics and psychopaths. No group of
psychopaths could maintain the degree of popular support which is
necessary to sustain an armed struggle over a period of more than two decades.
It’s self evidently the case that the IRA represents a group of
people who feel that they have no way of finding a remedy for the
situation other than by insurrection. That says something about the
nature of the Northern state. The IRA’s a military organisation of
course, a clandestine organisation, but I can assure you that the
overwhelming majority of its members are perfectly ordinary people,
as are the people who support it, who vote for its political wing,
Sinn Fein.
 
Why has the British government now started moving towards a
possible deal with the IRA and Sinn Fein?
I think the British government is moving towards disengagement
from Northern Ireland. The joint declaration between John Major and
Albert Reynolds back in December is a very confusing document in many
ways. It’s a series of word games which tries to satisfy the two
opposing sides.
But the British government does declare in the joint declaration
in unambiguous terms that it has no long term selfish strategic or
economic interest in Northern Ireland, even though Northern Ireland
is constitutionally part of the United Kingdom. The British
government doesn’t say this about any other part of the United
Kingdom. It doesn’t say it about Yorkshire or Devon or Cornwall. It
has been signalling more and more clearly over the past few years
that there is no overwhelming desire to retain Northern Ireland
within the United Kingdom.
The more far sighted sections of the British ruling class also
perceive that it is possible to do business with the leadership of
the Republican movement.
The fact is that there’s nothing in the politics of
Republicanism which necessarily contradicts any vital interests of
the British ruling class. The British ruling class thinks it can do
business with the IRA. It also means that the type of deal which is
likely to emerge will be designed to allow the two communities in the
North of Ireland to live separately and at peace with one another.
It’s not going to end sectarianism in the North of Ireland. It’s
going to manage it, institutionalise it.
At a time of recession this will mean, for example, that there
will be relatively little change economically for the Catholic
working class, that if anything the Protestant working class will be
worse off than now. It will mean that in terms of hospitals, jobs,
houses, each community will be put in a position of comparing how
it’s doing in relation to the other community. This is a recipe for
continued sectarianism.
But the British ruling class could live with that. If they can get
away with that and there’s a period of peace they could edge their
way out of Northern Ireland and give the Dublin government some sort
of role in the North representing the Catholic community, while they
would continue in some sense to represent the Protestant community.
But we’d be left with the sectarianism, the poverty, and with the
endless possibility of renewed violence between the two communities.
Therefore I believe that the type of deal which is likely to
emerge from the Reynolds-Major document, and whatever negotiations
and manoeuvrings are going on between the authors of the document and
the leadership of the Republican movement, will not be a deal that
socialists could accept and will not guarantee lasting peace.
 
What is the path to genuine peace? How can the sectarian
divide be overcome?
The sectarian divide in the North is of very long standing. It’s
rooted very deeply in the history of Ireland – it goes back 400
years. The politics of Northern Ireland, the dominant political
structures of Northern Ireland, have always been based upon the
sectarian divide. So we mustn’t underestimate the depth of the
division in Northern Ireland.
What we can say is that when we look at the history of the North
of Ireland, when we look for the periods when sizeable numbers of
Catholic and Protestant workers have detached themselves from their
sectarian communities and joined arms together, this has happened
only at times of heightened class struggle, has only happened as part
of class struggle. Catholic and Protestant workers join together only
when their identification of themselves as workers overrides their
identification of themselves as either Catholics or Protestants. That
only happens, of course, when they’re collectively involved in
class struggle.
Working class people come together not when somebody convinces
them intellectually that this is what decent people ought to do –
they come together when they have something to fight together for.
And therefore I see the solution to the Northern Ireland problem as
lying in class struggle.
Having said that, it would be nonsense of course simply to appeal
for working class unity and not to deal directly with the reasons for
sectarianism. And the reasons for sectarianism have to do with the
very existence of the Northern state. The leaders of the official
labour movement in Ireland have for a long time talked about working
class unity, but in the interests of forging this unity they have
argued the national question should not be mentioned, the state
shouldn’t be mentioned.
The worst single example of this was in the immediate aftermath of
Bloody Sunday in Derry in 1972. Fourteen Catholics were shot dead by
members of the Parachute Regiment. By coincidence, three days later
in Belfast there was the largest ever meeting of trade unionists held
in the North of Ireland, with over 100 foreign delegates headed by
Vic Feather, then the general secretary of the Trades Union Congress
in Britain. They met all day to discuss specifically the role of the
trade unions in the North and what the trade unions could do. They
did not mention Bloody Sunday.
The argument put up was that to have mentioned Bloody Sunday would
have been divisive, because Catholic and Protestant trade unionists
would have taken a different view. But this is not an excuse. What
they were saying was, ‘There’s a division here. We want unity, so
let’s ignore the issue about which these people are divided’ –
which is nonsense. Once you begin to ask yourself what should the
trade union response be to the sectarian state and the discrimination
against Catholics, the only answer is that you have to campaign
against it, you’ve got to lead workers against it – that’s what
the activists should be doing. Unfortunately, the trade union leaders
didn’t want to do that. And the main reason they didn’t want to
do that was not that the trade union movement was dominated by Orange
bigots, but was the same reason that they won’t lead struggles in
Britain. They don’t see their role as leading workers in struggle.
They see their role as facilitating settlements of labour disputes,
not winning labour disputes. And they certainly don’t see their
role as intervening militantly around political issues such as
discrimination in Northern Ireland.
I see the way forward as the building of a current within the
trade union movement of rank and file resistance to the economic
pressure that workers on both sides of the sectarian divide are put
under in the North of Ireland, and the unashamed and explicit linking
of that to opposition to the Northern state.
Protestant workers are under enormous pressure at the moment, and
many of them are torn between ancient loyalty to the British state on
the one. hand, and realisation that Britain no longer wants them,
doesn’t reciprocate this loyalty, on the other. If the trade union
movement were to give a militant lead on economic issues and in
relation to the state, then many thousands of Protestant workers
would respond to it.
Our problem is that the left is very, very weak in the North of
Ireland. We’re going to have to build this type of struggle in the
teeth of opposition from the union bureaucrats.
So there’s no easy solution. There’s nothing that I could say
to end sectarian violence in Northern Ireland this year or next year.
But I think I do know the road that we have to take in order to reach
an end to sectarian violence, and that is the revolutionary socialist road.
 
Can you describe some examples of successfully building
unity between Catholic and Protestant workers?
Well, for example, last October there was a spate of killings of
Catholics in Belfast by Loyalist paramilitary organisations. One
Catholic was killed as he went into the Shorts aircraft factory. In
fact Shorts has an overwhelmingly Protestant workforce, but thousands
of workers came out in protest against the killing. It wasn’t a
very militant demonstration but they did come out and stood for a
minute’s silence, overwhelmingly Protestants for a Catholic worker
in a clear stand which took a bit of courage in east Belfast where
Shorts factory is situated.
You can also see something similar in the struggle to defend the
health service in Northern Ireland, which is not related directly to
the Troubles, of course, but nevertheless there you can see thousands
of people on the streets defending local hospitals, protesting
against cutbacks in various health services, and so forth, and
Catholics and Protestants come together.
The problem that we have is the gap between some of those types of
expressions of solidarity on economic issues and the campaigns simply
against violence and the killing of people. The problem is that
there’s no large organisation with real credibility in the working
class making the links between these things. There’s a real absence
of political leadership on the left in the North of Ireland, so these
little sparks of cross community proletarian militancy flare up and
then die down again. But they do give us a glimpse of what is possible.
 
The SWM (Socialist Workers Movement) operates in both
Northern Ireland and in the South. What are the connections between
struggles in both these places?
One of the simplest connections between the struggles in both
places is that Ireland is a small country and the communications
media are common to both parts of Ireland, by and large. Therefore in
Derry people would know and discuss what’s happened both in the
parliament in Dublin and in London and what’s happening in the
streets of Dublin and the streets of London. There’s also a
connection because the trade union movement is organised on a 32
county basis.
But more important than that is the fact that one of the problems
faced by people who are advocating British withdrawal from the North
and the dismantling of the Northern state is that this comes across
very commonly as a campaign to spread the Southern Irish state in the
whole territory of Ireland. Now the South of Ireland in many respects
is not a very attractive place.
So the only way really to convince people that you’re not
talking about extending the edict of the Southern state over the
whole island is to be seen to be involved in fighting against the
Southern state as well. And that means the struggle against the
Northern state should be linked to a militant working class struggle
in the South of Ireland for a better society there.
When anybody looks over the border from the North into the South
of Ireland, they can see big changes. In the last ten or 15 years
there have been big strides made over the position of women and the
rights of gays in Southern Ireland. And more and more people –
particularly young people – are less and less in awe of the
Catholic Church in the South of Ireland, and of authority generally.
Our goal is to link up with those people, to make the call for a
united Ireland something which involves all those things which are
happening around abortion rights and gay rights, and economic
advances for the working class, and the rest of it – therein lies
the key to solving the Irish question.
 
How do you see the prospects for socialists in Ireland and
in other parts of the world today? Are you optimistic about what can
be achieved?
I’m certainly optimistic about what could be achieved, because
the opportunities are there. Working class people know that they’ve
been got at, they know they’re losing rights, they know that the
prospects for their children to get a decent education and a decent
job are worse than even a few years ago. And people are alarmed by
this. There’s a lot of fear, alarm and anger in the working class
of Ireland, the working class of Britain, the working class of
Europe. This anger is a precious commodity.
The question is not whether this anger is going to be expressed.
The question is what channel of expression is it going to find? If it
doesn’t find a channel of expression to the left and in the class
struggle to advance people, then it’s going to go to the right.
So I am absolutely optimistic about what could happen. There are
real opportunities. But if the opportunities are missed then the
dangers are at least as great. So I find it impossible to say whether
I’m optimistic or pessimistic, but I think we’ve got to try harder.
 



Has peace come to Northern Ireland at last?
Eamonn McCann and Goretti Horgan report from Derry and
explain who benefits from the IRA ceasefire and look to a different
solution
THE VERDICT of the Irish media on the IRA ceasefire was virtually
unanimous: the gun has been taken out of Irish politics. It’s not
true, of course.
There are still guns on the streets here, still men in uniform
eyeing you along their rifle sights as you walk past. The RUC and the
British army are still stopping and searching, still harassing young
people, even still carrying out house searches. But, Secretary of
State Patrick Mayhew tells us, the security forces have
responded to the ceasefire – the soldiers now wear berets instead
of helmets when they’re on patrol ...
Still, most working class people here greeted the ceasefire with a
sense of relief. For people in Catholic areas, there was also a sense
of release, from a burden which many had found harder to bear
than they’d been able easily to acknowledge. Some may have been
celebrating a step towards freedom which they believed had been won
by the armed struggle, but there was also celebration of freedom from
the armed struggle.
The anti-IRA propaganda which has passed for news coverage in much
of the media the past 20 years and more has involved the demonisation
not just of IRA activists but of the communities in which the IRA was
rooted. ‘IRA supporters’ have been presented as having minds of
dark malice which brighten only with glee at somebody on ‘the other
side’ suffering, which is very far from the truth.
For the people of places like the Falls, the Bogside or Ardoyne,
the waging of the armed struggle in their midst has meant tension and
danger, fear of being harassed and, if they are parents, of their
children being harassed and reacting to the harassment by joining the
IRA and running the real risk of death or desperately long sentences
in prison. So the first reaction to the ceasefire was heartfelt
relief. That, as much as a sense of being on the way to some hazily
defined ‘victory’, lay behind the euphoric crowd scenes which
greeted the ceasefire announcement. Support for the IRA has been a
more complicated and ambivalent and in conventional terms more decent
phenomenon than is frequently suggested.
It’s also the case that – while there are vicious little
bastards everywhere and people on the Falls and in the Bogside who in
their own minds have reduced Protestants to an abstraction and who
may even have reckoned that the Provos were too ‘soft’ in their
targeting – many of the people who have supported the IRA have had
a struggle within themselves when cruel things have been done, as it
were, on their behalf.
Few, if any, welcomed the Enniskillen atrocity, the Shankill bomb
or the individual killings of Protestants with some unremarkable
association with the RUC or British Army. Many who hated this
infliction of grief on decent people nevertheless couldn’t bring
themselves to join in the instant denunciations of media moralists
who had no problem with political killings in other contexts.
The IRA was, and is, generated from within the Catholic working
class community, precisely by the pressures the community was put
under. There was a sort of duty placed upon people by that
consideration which has now been lifted, and they walk with a lighter step.
There are some, and they are right, who have doubts about what is
on offer in return, but no powerful faction emerged to argue that
continuation of armed action was the best way to win more. That
reflected another emerging element in Catholic working class
attitudes – the feeling that the armed struggle had become
counter-productive to the interests of the community in whose name it
was being waged.
The Republican leadership’s alternative ‘unarmed strategy’
is based on an alliance with the SDLP, the Dublin government
(particularly the Fianna Fail element of it) and the Irish-American
lobby around Clinton to which Sinn Fein has been promised direct
access. This is an impressive line up in terms of establishment
political clout, and the Republicans affect confidence that it can
push the nationalist cause ahead. But it is a coalition which can
only hold together within the confines of a conservative agenda, and
that’s already been reflected in small but not insignificant
adjustments in Republican perspectives.
 
WHEN THE American ambassador to Dublin, Joan Kennedy Smith,
visited Derry some months ago local Republicans were instructed
not to join in any protests against US imperialism in Somalia and
threats to bomb Bosnia. And nowadays, when elected Sinn Fein
representatives talk about the Coalition government in the South,
it’s not to castigate Labour for being in league with the right
wing Fianna Fail party but to predict, not entirely tongue in cheek,
that the next Coalition could be between Fianna Fail and Sinn Fein.
So far, the Dublin government has done better out of the ‘peace
process’ than anyone else. Commentators who have argued that
Reynolds was moving dangerously fast in inviting Adams to meet him
within a week of the ceasefire and then authorising a meeting between
government officials and a Sinn Fein delegation a week later are
missing the point or contriving to confuse it. Reynolds wanted Adams
into Government Buildings without any delay so as to have it publicly
made clear that Sinn Fein now accepts that authority of the Dublin
government. He knows what an enormous move away from Republican
orthodoxy this is.
It is also clear that the continued goodwill of what we might call
‘official Irish America’ – Kennedy, Moynihan, Bruce Morrison –
towards the Republican movement is now effectively conditional on the
Republicans staying on side with Reynolds. Visas to the US for
Republicans, and access to centres of power in the US, are
essentially in Reynolds’s gift. The Provos have been put on their
best behaviour and Albert Reynolds is to be the judge of their behaviour.
 
THIS IS NOT to suggest that rank and file Republicans here would
accept instructions from Reynolds on how to campaign on a number of
issues most immediate to them; on nationalist rights within the
North, border roads, harassment or miscarriages of justice.
But the Fianna Fail leader must be confident that if it ever comes
to a crunch, he has the whip hand. He could snatch away from them in
an instant all, or almost all, that they have gained in terms of
their political standing and international credibility. This may not
be the path rank and file Republicans want to take, or believe they
are taking, but for a certainty it is the path Reynolds thinks he has
enticed them along, and he is determined they won’t stray easily
off the path.
This is what Reynolds, a millionaire businessman with a
well-earned reputation for shiftiness, will have meant when he said
that the Republican ceasefire and the political realignment it
prompted was ‘the pinnacle of my career’. He was referring not to
the achievement of ‘peace’ but to his success where his Fianna
Fail predecessors de Valera, Lemass, Lynch and Haughey had all failed
– in bringing Sinn Fein and the IRA to an acceptance of the
legitimacy of the Southern state and the consequent right of the
government of the state to be seen as the ‘official’ leadership
of all Irish nationalists, North and South. In historical terms this
is a real gain for the Southern state and its government. And in the
process, the international standing of the Dublin government – the
fact, for example, that Washington now tilts towards Dublin rather
than London in determining policy towards the North – has been
significantly boosted. It marks the biggest gain anyone has so far
made from the Northern Troubles.
The nationalist politics of the Republican movement, putting class
questions on the long finger until the ‘national question’ is
resolved, made this inevitable. Within the limits of nationalism the
choice facing the overwhelmingly working class Republican
constituency, was between a continuation of the armed struggle and an
all class alliance under the leadership of the Dublin government.
Given the dominance of nationalist ideas within the Catholic
working class it was predictable that in the immediate euphoric
aftermath of the ceasefire announcement it would be hard to find an
audience for advocacy of any alternative to this alliance. But we
live in fast changing times, and already there’s an undertow of
uneasiness about where we are headed, and a dawning realisation that
the prizes which were promised if ‘the violence’ was called off
may be longer in coming than was anticipated.
This is true even in strictly nationalist terms. The Reynolds
government may feel able to take a tougher line with London, but it
is not after conflict with the British but an enhanced role in the
North in partnership with the British. Reynolds, in a recent
interview with the Observer made it plain that he didn’t foresee a united Ireland for a
generation at least.
Martin McGuinness expressed himself ‘surprised and disappointed’
at this approach. He would have been disappointed, naturally. But he
shouldn’t have been surprised.
 
INTERNATIONAL kudos apart, the big bonus for Dublin is that the
North, if the ‘peace process’ were to come to full fruition, will
pose no threat to the South. As little as ten years ago virtually
everyone who wanted an end to the sectarian state up here was at
pains to explain that they were not out to extend the remit of the
South across the whole island, that, on the contrary, what was wanted
was a new Ireland altogether, fundamentally different from society as
it stood on the other side of the border. Generally speaking, those
in the South who wanted to get to grips with the North were also
involved in campaigning for radical social change within the South.
But in the present ‘process’ Southern engagement with the North
is controlled precisely by the Southern establishment. No wonder the
mainstream Southern media, including elements bitterly hostile to
Reynolds across a range of other issues, are now almost embarrassing
in their support for him on the North. A Nobel Prize indeed! ‘Man
of history’ indeed!
Putting the dismantling of the Northern state in the context of
fundamental transformation of the whole island may have cut little
ice with most Protestant workers over the past 20 years, but at least
it focused attention on the social content of the society which was
envisaged as emerging from the Troubles. It put the Falls in a
position, potentially anyway, to discuss with the Shankill what sort
of society might suit both. But that’s right off the agenda of the
process we are now going through. It’s taken for granted that what
suits one community will discommode the other.
The rioting on Protestant working class streets in Belfast reveals
that many there see it this way, too. To be sure, there have been
Loyalist paramilitaries stirring the violence up, motivated by
murderous hatred of Catholics. But there’s also the fact that the
Protestant working class has been deserted by Britain – and
has been told, almost in so many words, that as a result things will
get worse for them, not better, especially as compared with the Catholics.
All this fits in with what the British ruling class wants. Britain
wants out of its present entanglement with the North. It wants an end
to the opprobrium it experiences worldwide over censorship, shoot to
kill, the endless miscarriages of justice and so on. It wants to cut
back on the huge subvention to the North. But it is at one with
Reynolds in not wanting out now. It will be happy to work with
its Southern Irish counterpart in devising a form of power sharing in
the short term.
 
WITHIN THE North a settlement on these lines will represent
advance mainly for the middle classes, particularly the growing
Catholic middle class whose political ambitions can find an outlet in
a new Stormont assembly and its ‘power-sharing’ executive and
whose ‘sense of identity’ will be recognised both in the
all-Ireland dimension and in other measures which it will be no
problem for the British to accept. Formal recognition of the Irish
language, for example, will cost next to nothing, in monetary or any
other terms.
Most of the talk of a ‘peace dividend’ has been effectively
about a negative dividend. Economists are agreed that any money saved
by the British government on security is unlikely to be kept here.
And the money promised by Clinton and the EU for ‘reconstruction’
will go mainly to tourism and employment schemes which are
notoriously poorly paid.
In this situation, the settlement envisaged will not end but
institutionalise sectarianism. Catholic workers will continue to live
on Catholic housing estates, Protestant workers on Protestant
estates. Protestant workers’ children will continue to go to
Protestant schools, Catholic children to Catholic schools. And every
decision taken by the new assembly will be judged on a sectarian basis.
There will be demands that every low paid job that US investment
creates on the Falls is balanced by one on the Shankill, that every
penny of ‘aid’ on one side is matched on the other. By the same
token, politicians on each side will squabble about fair shares of
suffering as cut backs and redundancies continue in existing
employments and services. All this could happen ‘peacefully’, of
course, but not only would it be a poor sort of peace for us to
stumble into in the shadow of the mountain of misery which has
accumulated over the past 25 years, it would be the peace of
sectarian stalemate, and always with the potential to flare up into
fighting again.
It doesn’t have to be like this. There are other
alternatives. Even today Catholic and Protestant workers do work side
by side for the same goals. We do it every day in our offices, our
factories, our hospitals. Cuts, privatisation, redundancies affect us
all and if we fight back, we have to fight back together.
The way forward is to link these struggles to a campaign of mass
opposition to the continued presence of the troops and the RUC. Over
the past month Sinn Fein in the North has encouraged a ‘return to
the streets’, marches on barracks and initiatives to open border
roads sealed off by the British army for more than 20 years, and
lively demonstrations outside watch towers and check points
positioned to use working class communities as human shields. While
there’s been a certain element of cynicism in this – Sinn Fein
had to offer its followers activity in order to win their support for
the new strategy – any shift towards mass action is a welcome step
forward. But a contradiction looms which the Republican movement will
be unable to avoid. The street activity can be seen as a cover for
political retreat. And the main perspective now is not for mass
action anyway, but for consolidation of the alliance with
establishment elements.
The new Republican buzz word, the demand on the placards at the
demonstrations, is ‘demilitarisation’ – a vague term, but one
which clearly falls short of what the mainly young people who have
been mobilised have in mind, which is troops out now. Socialists have
to explain that the pull back from that position is part and
parcel of the alliance with Reynolds, and that the only way to press
on with the demand for an unconditional British withdrawal and the
dismantling of the Northern state is to reject the all class alliance
and to link up instead with workers across both the divide in the
North and the border.
This argument won’t be won in the abstract. But it will become
more winnable in the months to come than at any time in the last
couple of decades, if it is advanced in the context of involvement in
all the struggles of the working class here, both against the
sectarian state and across the range of ‘ordinary’ class issues
which confront workers here.
The choice facing the Falls is whether to link up with Reynolds at
the cost of reining in the demand for an end to the Northern state,
or to reach out to the Shankill while pressing on with the struggle
for a socialist society across the whole island.
 



DOCKERS AND FACTORY GIRLS marched this week in support of the campaign for civil rights in the Northern Ireland police state.
On Tuesday, dockers marched for the second time into the walled area of Derry, defying a government ban. They clashed with steel-helmeted police and stoned a water-cannon. On Monday, 3,000 girls from six shirt factories staged a token strike and also marched in through the walls.
The girls chanted ‘RUC-SS’ and gave the Nazi salute. The RUC is the Royal Ulster Constabulary, the strong-armed police who battered marchers last October.
The girls held a meeting in the Diamond, the traditional meeting place in Derry.
At 11.45 that morning, 700 dockers stopped work and marched through the walled area to their union headquarters. They instructed union officials to tell Harold Wilson that they demanded an end to police brutality in Derry.
 
Stones and bottles
Late on Monday night, as girls on the night shift left the Cerdic shirt factory, they were met by a hail of stones and bottles from a mob of followers of the clerical fascist, the Rev. Ian Paisley.
Two girls had to go to hospital to have stitches inserted in wounds. A number of other girls suffered minor injuries.
Socialists moved into the Protestant working-class area and spoke to people about their campaign for civil rights and an end to the persecution of the Catholic majority in Derry.
There was little support from Protestant workers but no one admitted taking part in the Paisleyite attack on the factory girls.
The socialists had to beat a retreat when they were chased by a man with a hatchet.
After today’s demonstration, Derry is quiet. But a slow fuse is burning and may soon explode again.
The campaign seems to be undermining the mental faculties of Home Affairs Minister Craig, lie denied that the factory girls’ march and meeting had taken place at all and had flouted his ban on demonstrations in the walled part of Derry.
‘There was no such march and no such meeting,’ he declared on television. Told that the march had been seen by thousands of viewers, he said he preferred to accept the reports of his officials, not television journalists.
 






‘This is not a riot. It is an uprising. It is an elemental outburst of rage by a class that has been denied jobs, homes and human rights by a regime that is as near fascism as makes no difference ...’



*
LONDONDERRY is a city under siege.
Riot police patrol the fringes of the Catholic ghetto area in armoured cars. Barricades have been erected and Molotov cocktails, bricks and other improvised weapons are being used by the people.
Police are making sporadic sorties into the area. At 3 a.m. this morning an armoured car smashed a barricade on the Lecky Road and established their first foothold in the city.
 
Brutal
This is the third day of violence in Derry. On Saturday police stopped a peaceful civil rights march with unbelievable brutality.
Men were beaten in the testicles. Water cannons drove demonstrators from the area, back into the police lines.
In Duke Street, two double lines of police with drawn batons boxed in a thousand people and started a systematic and sickening bludgeoning.
An 18-years-old reporter, Martin Cowley, vainly displaying his press credentials, was repeatedly beaten to the ground by District Inspector Ross McGimpsie and left lying in a bloody mess.
One middle-aged man was seized by two policemen and flung over a wall. He was found there later by Labour Party officials. His leg was broken.
Fighting spread to the centre of the city during the evening as police beat the people back into the Catholic ghetto. Houses were turned into casualty centres as the injured were carried from the barricades.
This is not a riot. It is an uprising.
It is an elemental outburst of rage by a class that has been denied jobs, homes and fundamental human rights by a regime that is as near fascism as makes no difference.
Derry has a male unemployment rate of 21 per cent. It is only maintained at that level by massive emigration.
The City Corporation, controlled by the Unionist Party because of a gerrymandered electoral system which permits 33 per cent of the voters to elect 60 per cent of the councillors, has built 15 houses in three years.
It has allocated them to its Protestant supporters while Catholic working-class families (who are the majority in Londonderry) live in conditions which would turn the stomach of an Islington slum-dweller.
 
Rich
A unique voting system in municipal elections gives the rich extra votes according to the rateable value of their property.
Sir Basil McFarlane, for example, has 26 votes in a municipal election. I am a 28-years-old worker. I have none.
The Northern Ireland Special Powers Act gives the police the right to arrest without warrant and intern without trial.
In Derry some of the restrictions on the Catholic population are so petty as to be incredible. For example Catholic bands are allowed to march down Abercom Road, but not, under any circumstances, to march up it.
A small example, but it illustrates the arbitrary and arrogant nature of the restrictions placed on the majority by a clique of anti-democratic gangsters.
Such discrimination inevitably produced a sectarian consciousness among the Catholic working class. They saw the state as being biased against them as Catholics and they were easy meat for nationalist demagogues. Militancy for many years meant an hysterical consciousness of the religious divide.
The beginning of a new phase was marked by the formation of the Deny Housing Action Committee in February. It is a self-appointed body comprising Republicans, left-wing members of the Labour Party and a number of unattached radicals.
It began a campaign of civil disobedience. It disrupted corporation meetings and organised rent strikes.
In June it blocked a main bus route for 48 hours with the caravan home of a family of four. Landlords’ homes were picketed, official ceremonies broken up.
By August some 20 members had been in court for various offences. A news sheet, Reality, was published and displayed an admirable disregard for the law as it detailed the activities of Rachman-type landlords and the inactivities of nationalist politicians.
 
United
The local Labour Party joined with the Action Committee in an informal united front on the housing issue. The Derry Republican Club (an illegal organisation) came into the open and proclaimed its existence with banners at housing demonstrations.
The result was a decisive realignment in which, for the first time in Derry, a militant, if ill-defined, political campaign got off the ground without arousing any sectarian feeling.
The most vital and significant fact about the present situation – ignored, of course by the Tory press – is that there has been no Catholic-Protestant confrontation.
It is this that frightens the Unionist authorities. They – and their Green Tory counterparts in the Nationalist Party – have always been content to see workers tearing each other to pieces in the streets at the order of neo-nazi clerics.
The politicians are happy in the knowledge that worker-against-worker warfare shored up the two-tone Tory state by obscuring the class basis of religious discrimination.
The Protestant working class is passive at the moment. Since the police have sealed off the Catholic area it has been impossible to get through to appeal to them.
But Labour Party and Young Socialist speakers at the barricades denounced attempts by fringe hooligan elements to use ‘get the Protestants’ as a slogan.
*
Arrested twice
Eamonn McCann was arrested on Saturday and charged with incitement to breach of the peace. He was released and immediately went to the barricades.
He was re-arrested at 3 p.m. and charged with defiance of a restriction order and released on £50 bail. He will appear in court on October 21.
The Minister of commerce has spoken ominously of ‘making an example’ of those arrested and militants fear heavy jail sentences.
 



DERRY:– The moderate leadership of the Civil Rights movement was swamped last weekend as the people of Bogside fought to defend their area against the Royal Ulster Constabulary.
Appeals to ‘go home in peace’ from John Hume, MP for Foyle, and members of the Citizens Action Committee were howled down as the residents fought off the riot police with sticks, stones and petrol bombs.
The attack developed after the government banned a march from Burntollet Bridge, scene of last January’s ambush of the People’s Democracy march by B-Specials in civvies. Ulster’s new Police Minister, Porter, visited Derry on Friday and was told by the local Tories that they would use firearms to stop the march. Porter then banned the march.
 
Riot
To protest this partisan order, young civil rights supporters held a spontaneous sit-down in Guildhall Square.
An ugly police riot ensued when the RUC moved in with baton charges, water cannons and armoured cars. At 3 a.m. on Sunday morning an armoured car entered Hamilton Street. It was set on fire. A RUC sergeant jumped out and fired five or six shots at random.
The resistance of the people, was so great that the cops got out of control, the police rank-and-file were unwilling to go into the Bogside and their officers were virtually beating them with batons to force them in.
After several hours’ fighting the riot squad took the Bogside.
 
Outrages
When the police bat one a their way into the area, serious outrages occurred. In one house the door had been left open. Children running to escape the police charges ran through the house and out of the back door.
The police entered and brutally batoned the innocent people in the front room. The father, the father’s friend and the father’s 15 year old daughter – who was just out of hospital – all had their heads split open and were taken to hospital. The younger children were covered in blood but unhurt because the adults had lain over them.
On Sunday morning the Bogside was evacuated and men, women and children moved to the Creggan heights. Reinforced by over 10,000 people from the Creggan Estate, a mass meeting was held and the RUC were given two hours to leave the Bogside.
With only 15 minutes to go the cops withdrew after a hastily negotiated agreement to take out the riot squad in return for an assurance that the barricades would not be re-erected.
This laid the foundations for the present brittle peace which could be shattered at any moment by the simmering rage of the general populace. The street defence committees set up in the wake of the PD march last January have been reactivated.
Defence plans are being laid and any further police attack will be met with organised and disciplined resistance. The fact that the police used guns on Sunday morning has led to discussion of the formation of a citizens’ army – a demand put forward by the new MP for Mid-Ulster Bernadette Devlin and Eamonn Melaugh.
Meanwhile Wilson has agreed to send in troops ‘to guard key installations’.
In the long term it is an assertion of the fact that British capitalism will intervene more and more directly if O’Neill fails to maintain ‘law and order’.
This is certainly on the cards. As O’Neill’s position grows less credible every hour, as the antiquated brand of effete liberal-Toryism neither serves adequately the needs of the system nor satisfies the aspirations of the people, he will go very soon.
 
Slogan
After him we will get a ‘strong man’ with the slogan ‘Here’s your one man, one vote – and the next Popehead who opens his mouth in public will be up and against the wall’.
British socialists must organise to struggle for the withdrawal of British troops, who are being used to release RUC and B-Specials to suppress Derry. Only a major and immediate mobilisation to this end can have any real meaning.
Socialist and civil rights supporters in the Six Counties must mount a campaign to lift the pressure on Derry by drawing off as many police as possible.
Comrades in the South should raise the demand that the Green Tory government arms Derry. Their refusal to do so can be used to expose their complicity in the oppression and their role as commission agents of British imperialism.
If it comes to civil war, then only the united action of all the Irish working people and their allies can provide the material base to resist Orange reaction and their Westminster supporters.
*
A demonstration has been fixed for this Friday (April 26) to the London Ulster Office in Berkeley St W1. For details of times ring 01-808 4847 on Thursday and Friday.
 



THE PICTURE was taken on January 4 in a field above Burntollet Bridge, a few moments before the ambush by Paisleyites was launched on a People’s Democracy march from Belfast to Derry.







The police officer on the extreme right is Head Constable Patterson, chief of the Royal Ulster Constabulary special force, better known as the riot squad.
Third from the right, in civilian clothes is Ronald Cook, a member of the B-specials.
One of the stated reasons for the introduction of the Public Order Amendment Bill, at present making its controversial way through parliament, is that the police need greater power to control counter-demonstrations.
 
Assault
It is obvious from the photograph that at Burntollet the police were in close contact with a group of men whose clear and unmistakable intention it was to launch an assault on a peaceful march, and who had armed themselves for that purpose.
Under existing legislation the police in the photograph had authority to arrest at least the two persons on the left, seen carrying clubs.
Not only did they not do this, they have not, since January 4 charged any of the men shown, all of whom took – and were seen by the police to take – an active part in the ambush. The police did not lack the power to prevent the Burntollet ambush, they lacked the will.
During the debate on the second reading of the Bill, Mr John Hume, MP, elicited from the Minister of Home Affairs the information that B-specials – even in plain clothes – will have power to intervene with all the authority of the state on occasions such as Burntollet. This power will be given to such as the aforementioned Ronald Cook.
Mr Cook works at the quarry owned by W. Leslie Ltd. about a mile from Burntollet Bridge. It was from this quarry that stones were carried in a lorry on the night of January 3 to be left in piles ready for the preliminary stoning of the marchers.
On Tuesday, March 18 Bowes Egan, PD candidate for Enniskillen, Eamonn Melaugh of the Housing Action Committee and I went into Leslie’s Quarry in the course of an investigation into the background to the Burntollet affair (the results of the investigation will be published shortly in a book by Mr Egan).
We were assaulted by a group of men. Mr Cook ripped a roll of film from Mr Melaugh’s camera.
 
Powers
He then told us that ‘we could kill you here and bury your bodies. No one will ever know.’
Before we left Cook said ‘if there is any more talking or writing about that march we will kill you, and we mean that’.
It is to men like Mr Cook that wider powers are to be given. It is worth noting in passing that the allegedly liberal Home Affairs Minister, Mr Porter, recently praised the the B-specials fulsomely and said that the security of N. Ireland depended on them.
Yet, for all that, the basic objection to the public Order Amendment Bill does not rest on its detailed provisions nor on the character and calibre of some of those who will interpret and implement it.
One of the central planks of the civil rights platform was opposition to the repressive legislation embodied in the Special Powers Act and the existing Public Order Act. The reaction of the O’Neill regime has been further to restrict the area of freedom allowed political and quasi-political movements.
 
‘Moderate’
The Bill, by appearing to curb ‘both sides’ was designed to create the impression that O’Neill, the moderate, stood between and above two contending groups of extremists.
He has been assisted in making this plausible by the recent spate of resignations from civil rights groups and by the smear campaign against ‘extremists’ carried out by Miss Betty Sinclair, Mr McAnenny and others.
O’Neill introduced this fake measure because he CANNOT solve the problems of N. Ireland.
The civil rights campaign focused around specific reformist demands such as ‘One man, one vote’ and ‘Abolish the Special Powers Act’. But it was, at bottom, an elemental expression of discontent accruing from a society which could not provide decent housing for its people nor provide any solution to the unemployment problem.
 
Cause
Mr Robin Baillie MP gave the game away recently when he said that in N. Ireland the demands ‘one family, one house’ and ‘one man, one job’ were not reformist, but revolutionary.
Mr Baillie could be right. O’Neill could possibly concede universal franchise and end discrimination, and get away with it – although he is probably too effete and spineless to carry it through.
He cannot, however, end the underlying shortage of houses, because he cannot break the bankers’ strangle hold on the local councils and the Housing Trust which is the root cause of our housing problem.
He cannot end unemployment because the lack of investment in N. Ireland in this period is linked to the general crisis in Britain which, as we have recently seen, is also having a cataclysmic effect on the ‘republic’ in the south.
To solve the problems of N. Ireland it is necessary to mount an assault on the whole Tory system, not just to demand a more ‘liberal’ regime. To do this in a non-sectarian way, to minimise the possibility of evoking a conditioned sectarian response from the Protestant working class, any such continued campaign would have to be seen clearly to be in the interests of all workers.
It is not enough merely to repeat over and over again, ‘we are non-sectarian. We are fighting for social justice for Protestants as well as Catholics.’
The civil rights’ demands should be linked to demands for a minimum wage, to a campaign against redundancies such as occurred at BOC recently and for work-sharing on full pay as an alternative a campaign against rent rises such as those recently announced by Belfast Corporation.
It is clear that until we have built a viable movement based on such policies, measures like the Public Order Amendment Bill will be introduced by panicking Tory politicians and political policemen like Head Constable Patterson will go on condoning the criminal activities of people like Ronald Cook.
This article first appeared in Rampart, journal of the Londonderry Labour Party.
 



DUBLIN:– People’s Democracy, the militant Northern Ireland movement, carried its civil rights campaign into the south when it crossed the border post at Killeen, Co. Armagh, on Saturday chanting ‘Tories Out, North and South’.
The previous day meetings and sit-downs had been held in Belfast, Lurgan and Newry. At Newry 21 people were, arrested after the Royal Ulster Constabulary tore into a sit-down protest against the banning of a meeting in the town centre.
The purpose of the march to Dublin was to assert the fact that civil liberties and social justice are denied to the working class of southern Ireland as much as to the workers of the north.
Leaflets and speakers at meetings in each town we passed through concentrated on unemployment, housing and anti-union legislation.
A consistent campaign of falsification in the press tried to convey the impression that the main demands were for the free distribution of contraceptives and the provision of facilities for divorce – demands which the march voiced, but not as a priority.
 
Joined the march
The result was a rapid withdrawal of support by the Students For Democratic Action, who had been organising in Dublin. Isolated from the student Left, the march entered Dublin unsure of its reception.
But in spite of the absence of students, more than 5000 people gathered outside the GPO, scene of the 1916 rising (see centre pages), to welcome PD to Dublin. In the course of its passage through the slums of north Dublin, local residents came out, addressed meetings and joined the march.
Two hundred and fifty strong when it entered Dublin, the march numbered 1000 when it reached its destination.
An attempt to smear PD as being anti-catholic backfired in both the Tory press and on the timid Left. The march broke the back of clerical prejudice in the south and it is doubtful whether the old smear can ever be used again successfully to discredit a radical movement.
At the same time as the PD march, the Western Civil Rights Movement based on University College, Galway, marched from Galway to Dublin protesting against government agricultural policy which aims to clear the small farmers off the land.
They were joined by trade unionists from Galway and Dublin and arrived at the GPO at the same time as the PD marchers, symbolising the unity of the socialist struggle in Ireland, north and south.
It is interesting to note that on the day the Dublin students were working themselves into a frenzy about contraceptives and divorce, the Galway marchers were joined by two contingents, one from Sceim Na gCeardchumainn – a trade union organisation, the other a group of student priests from Maynooth seminary.
PD is now in the satisfactory position of being attacked by Paisleyites for its romanist tendencies and denounced by Green Tories as anti-catholic! Any socialist organisation in Ireland which draws on itself that type of simultaneous attack is clearly on the right lines.
 



THE CIVIL RIGHTS movement in Northern Ireland has come to the parting of the ways.
The frustration that was building up week by week and was dramatically unleashed in Newry two weeks ago can no longer be contained within moderate demands and dignified protests.
 
Safe direction
Newry was a classic case of a moderate leadership vainly attempting to siphon off and channel the militancy of the rank and file in a ‘safe’ direction.
Before the Newry march they insisted repeatedly that they would not recognise any ban or accept a re-route by the police.






What Left Must Demand
What are relevant socialist demands in Northern Ireland?
1. Cancellation of the Housing Trust debt to the central banks. Last year local authorities paid £2,6000,000 in interest repayments – more than the total rents collected.
2. Government, finance and industry under workers’ control as opposed to the Orange ruling class scrabbling around for ‘foreign investment’.






Then, when confronted by the inevitable police barricade, they advised everyone to return to the starting point ‘where prominent speakers will address you’.
The result was the burning of the tenders that had been used to block the route, the attempted occupation or public buildings and the traditional late-night baton charges.
Reactions have been predictable. The moderates’ line is that the government, by allowing this to happen – and there is no doubt that the cops watched cheerfully as the tenders blazed – has successfully discredited the civil rights movement.
Already there is talk of ‘purging the movement of “extremists” and “revolutionaries” who are using the civil rights for their own ends.’
What the Left must do now is clearly to define its political difference with the moderates.
A ‘more militant than thou’ stance is meaningless unless we communicate to the rank and file precisely what it is we are being militant about.
The problem is that, given the historical legacy of religious sectarianism, it is difficult to get across the point that the struggle is an issue of class, not creed. (And articles such as Paul Foot’s in Socialist Worker of December 21, in which he examined the unemployment problem in terms of ’catholic’ towns and ‘protestant’ towns do not help.)
The Left should make demands that demonstrate the the line of class division and direct a considerably greater proportion of its energy and activity towards the protestant workers.
 
Shatter facade
To do this it is necessary to deliberately shatter the facade of ‘unity’ within the civil rights movement.
The catholic middle-class leadership cannot support socialist demands which pose as great a threat to themselves as to the open enemies of civil rights.
The unity they speak about is sectarian itself. They relegate or ignore class demands and therefore rule out the achievement of the only unity socialists should be interested in at this point – unity of our class against its enemies, Green as well as Orange.
Unless the break is made we will continue like the Duke of York: marching towards battle, realising as we approach the front line that the ‘enemy’ is largely working-class protestants, deciding that strife between workers is a bad thing and pulling back in confusion.
This silly zig-zagging is caused by the fact that those leading ‘our’ side cannot and will not- tolerate appeals to the ‘enemy’ on the only basis that holds any hope of success – on the basis that, as workers, they have to suiter unemployment, low wages, bad housing, high rents and disfranchisement in local government elections.
The instinctive militancy of radical socialists will, in the nature of Northern Ireland society, achieve its greatest immediate response among the catholic working class. We cannot wipe out the last trace of religious bitterness from working-class consciousness overnight.
There can be no doubt that the voices of moderation will cry to the heavens about the danger of bloodshed and civil war ...
Our answer must be that it is ‘moderation’ and ‘liberalism’ which, down through the years, have prevented any assault on the system that provokes the possibility of civil war.
 
Keep control
It is the same moderates and liberals who are today struggling desperately to keep control of a movement that, under their leadership, has done nothing to lessen sectarianism.
And it is they who wish to expel the only people and ideas that might successfully realise struggle along a non-religious axis.
 







1968 was the year it dawned on Derry. And on every other area with a sizable Catholic population in the North of Ireland. The long night finally lifted and, all around, people woke up and began to wonder what things we might be able to do now that daylight had suddenly broken. There were vivid faces everywhere.





The way it was:
It is difficult now to convey – or even to remember – how heady it all was. Catholic workers suddenly had a sense of achievement. Something we had never felt before. What exactly it was that we had achieved, or where it might lead to, no-one was quite sure. But that didn’t matter. Or at least it didn’t seem to at the time. It was enough to savour the feeling.
Politics, for as long as any but the oldest could remember, had been as unchanging as the hills. Indeed, in a sense, for practical purposes, there hadn’t been any politics.
We knew that we were being badly done by, that we had more than our fair share of poverty, bad houses, unemployment, and no power at all even in the areas where we were in a majority. We felt the constant, pin-pricking humiliations of day-to-day discrimination. And we knew that it all happened because we were Catholics. It was accepted. A cross to bear. A price we paid for being true to our own traditions and the old ideal of a united Ireland. Nobody made much of a fuss about it, there being no point.
What politics we had within our own areas was dominated by the Nationalists, the rump of Parnell’s party, its head long dead, still protruding into the present.
Nationalist candidates, particularly in rural and semi-rural areas, were not selected. They were anointed. There were not a few who believed that it was, literally, a sin to vote any other way. Every Nationalist’s nomination paper was countersigned by the parish priest.
And what the Nationalists told us – echoing what we believed already anyway – was that there would always be discrimination while the Northern State existed, no hope of succour until it was ended. And we couldn’t see any way of ending it. The IRA’s last campaign against the border had fizzled out in demoralising fiasco in the early 1960s. What Republicans were left were isolated, old men mainly, accorded some honour for the selfless, hopeless fight they had put up in times past, but with little now to offer. There was nothing for us to do but suffer on and wait for deliverance to come sometime, from somewhere, in the future.
It is possible, in retrospect, to identify the small signs of impending change in the consciousness of the Catholic workers from the mid 1960s. Television had a little to do with it: for all our poverty quite a few houses acquired a window on the world, and looked out. The decline of the traditional, local Unionist-owned industries like linen and heavy engineering, and their replacement by branches of multi-nationals like DuPonts that, too, although old patterns of employment (and unemployment) persisted, hinted at a shift in the structure of power.
And there was the 1947 Education Act (the belated extension to the North of the British 1944 Act) which provided free places in secondary schools for any who passed the 11-plus. By the 1960s it had been in operation long enough to produce a sprinkling of graduates from the Catholic working class and, every year, a batch of Senior Certificate holders (the GCE).
The church-controlled schools we went to were hot-beds of reaction and clerical snobbery. But they did represent a possible means of escape from the life for which, hitherto, we had all been ‘destined’. It became possible for boys and girls from places like the Bogside and the Falls to ‘do well’. And that increased resentment that there were still well-defined areas of local life from which we were shut out.
When we were all hewers of wood and drawers of water and couldn’t get work from the corporation, we resented it. But not as much as we did when we came strutting from the local grammar school festooned with certificates of academic accomplishment and still couldn’t get wood-hewer’s work from the corporation. Then there was a deal of determination just not to stand for it much more.
None of these things was vital in itself. None of them was perceived at the time as being particularly significant. They were imperceptively small, subterranean slips presaging the earthquake to come.
At the beginning of 1968 Eddie AcAteer, president of the Nationalist Party and Stormont MP for the Bogside, issued a New Year Message to constituents via the Derry Journal. In it, he announced that he could ‘smell sulphur in the air’. Eddie was and is noted for his sensitive nostrils. What he meant was that in many Catholic areas in the North small noisy groups of mainly Catholic malcontents had begun shouting the odds, challenging the Unionists and jeering at the Nationalists for complicity in the set-up. And they were not going about their business in the time-dishonoured ways.
Tenants’ Associations were mushrooming. And unemployed Action Committees. Branches of Young Socialists and Young Republicans popped up in the most unexpected places. Squatting, the harassment of landlords, the disruption of official functions, pickets outside Mayors’ houses, main roads blocked by sit-downs: it was all happening.
One leader of the Northern Ireland Labour Party lamented to his Executive that a ‘new, tough element’ was abroad in the land – even, damn! in branches of the NILP itself.
When the earthquake finally came, however, even the most articulate and self-assured of the tough elements were as bewildered as anyone else by the changed contours of the political scene afterwards. One morning of 6 October – the day after the first Derry Civil Rights March was batoned off the streets by the Royal Ulster Constabulary – there was a palpable sense of excitement around the Bogside. There were knots of people every where debating what to do next. Politics buzzed. And coming clear from the hubbub was a conviction, a certainty, that nothing was ever going to be the same again. No-one knew exactly what was possible, so everything was.
That was a marvellous, magic thing to happen – as exhilarating to be involved in, I’d guess, as the Carnival Against the Nazis. But then, exhilaration is not enough.
Nobody knew what was possible, because in the frenetic days which led up to 5 October, nobody had stopped to work it out, or refine attitudes down to ideas and apply them, or formulate a perspective and follow it. In the chaotic aftermath, which lasted well into 1969, the left, which had led towards the defensive barricades of Orangeism and breached them, could give ho clear direction for further advance.
And because of that, subsequently, taking leadership from the left proved easier than taking sweets from the average child.
 
Provos:
It is possible – just – that the Provisional IRA would not now exist if the Left in the late 1960s had understood the nature of Northern Ireland society.
The disparate, inchoate movement which surged up and swept over the North in the wake of the 5 October riots in 1968 demanded, with one voice, ‘civil rights’: and end to discrimination in job and house allocation, freedom for all political parties to operate openly, the repeal of the Special Powers Act, fair electoral boundaries, one person one vote, and so on. Nothing outrageous.
Within the movement there were ‘militants’ and ‘moderates’ – the militants, for the most part, being those who had been involved from the outset and who had detonated the Derry events, the moderates, with few exceptions being clerics, the clerically-dominated, the Catholic middle-classes and nervous Nationalists scrambling desperately to get aboard the bandwagon before it picked up to much speed.
Most of the militants were socialists; some were revolutionary socialists. There were very few Republicans. The IRA at the time was a not-very-funny joke.
The militants and the moderates disagreed about the demands the movement should put forward and the tactics to be used. Should we demand ‘fair distribution of houses’ or ‘houses for all’? Should we avoid trouble at all costs on demos or just let it rip? And so on. But about one thing we were united: partition was irrelevant. The old idea that nothing could be done until Ireland was united was turned on its head. It was necessary not to demand a united Ireland in order to get things done.
To be fair (not that fairness has much to do with it) the left’s reasons for taking this stance were not at all ignoble. United Irelandism had for so long been the "property" of craw-thumping Nationalists that the very mention of it smacked of jingoism. For decades it had been used to mobilise the Catholic working class behind middle-class and bourgeois politicians. We wanted to break away from all that, and why not?
And we wanted, insofar as it was possible, not to alienate Protestant workers who, almost to a man and woman, were fiercely opposed to the end of partition.
The problem, as we were to discover to our own cost and at some cost to the prospects of building a workers’ party, was that partition was an issue, a damnably difficult issue to face, but an issue whether we liked it or not. (Rather like the issue of Ireland for British socialists today.)
The series of marches, clashes with militant loyalists and confrontations with ‘the RUC which followed on from 5 October came to a climax in August 1969. Bogside teenagers fought off the RUC for two days while, in Belfast, the cops led Loyalists in an armed assault on the Falls Road which left hundreds of homes burned out and nine people dead. The Wilson government sent the troops in.
Hindsight is a great simplifier. It is clear now that the RUC assault on the Falls shattered the perspective of making gains within Northern Ireland. The police, the forces of the Northern state, had murderously attacks the Falls because the people there had been demanding that the State concede democracy. The conclusion drawn by Falls, people, particularly the youth, was devastatingly simple and unanswerable: there’ll be no democracy while the State exists. Smash the State. Unite Ireland.
Equally clearly, given the gable walls pock-marked by police bullets, the fight to smash the State could not be conducted with weapons of windy rhetoric and parliamentary pussy-footing. Teenagers, first in a trickle, then a torrent, poured into the Republican movement. And in so doing bypassed the left which all along had been whooping it up for revolution ... but a different revolution unfortunately to the one actually beginning to happen.
When the British Army, in time, took over the repressive role of the RUC the pattern of play matched perfectly the old Republican idea of the way things really were. The old, narrow men who had clustered in corners almost unnoticed while the blithe advocates of newer revolutionary ideas had romped towards the barricades, the old men had been right all along. Partition, the existence of the Northern State, was the central issue. Britain had always stood, and still stood, behind the Orange State.
So they and their ideology, and not we and ours, came to dominate the struggle against imperialism in Ireland.
Their ideology split the existing Republican Movement in the immediate aftermath of August 1969. Those Republicans who had been involved in the civil rights struggle had agreed with the perspective of putting partition on the long finger, and most held firm to this position even when they were swamped by kids who wanted to ‘join the Republicans’ to get their hands on a gun. The movement thus split in 1970 into ‘Officials’ and ‘Provisionals’.
The Officials, and a section of the Communist Party close to the Officials, have argued since that the Provos were deliberately set up by a faction within the ruling Fianna Fail party in the South which sought to divert attention from social and economic matters by triggering an armed anti-British campaign. There is some truth in this, but not much. Certainly, the Provos at the outset were better armed, organised and financed through the intervention of a Fianna Fail faction than would otherwise have been the case. Equally certainly, the Provos would have come into being anyway. And once they did get off the ground a united Fianna Fail joined Britain in repressing them.
Other sections of the left join with the Officials in denouncing the Provos as ‘right-wing’. And in a sense so they are. They are not Marxists. They see themselves, and it is not entirely fanciful, as the lineal descendants of the United Irishmen who rose in 1798 against British rule, led by Wolfe Tone, ‘the Father of Irish Republicanism’. That rising was inspired by the American and French revolutions, and sought the same goals: political independence, the overthrow of feudal property relations and no brake on the rising commerce of aspirant manufacturers, parliamentary democracy. There was nothing socialist about it, nor could there have been, given the time of its inception.
Republicans trace their descent down through the Fenian Movement of the second half of the last century, the Provisional Government under Patrick Pearse which launched the Easter rising of 1916, the IRA which fought the War of Independence which ended in 1921 in sell-out and the partition settlement, and on in an unbroken line down to the present.
The Republican movement is military, the armed wing, the IRA, taking precedence over the political wing, Sinn Fein. As such, it is necessarily clandestine. And it cannot operate like, say, a socialist or social democratic party, formulating its policies and perspectives through open discussion, testing them against reality, changing them if necessary after factional disputation. Military organisations, in time of war most of all, demand loyalty from their members. Thus the old ideology survives almost unscathed, as if it had sailed through history in a time-capsule, despite the fact that it makes little sense to socialists.
But then, when the crunch came, the carriers of the socialist ideology had made little sense to the Provos’ potential recruits.
And the majority of those recruits are working-class. For the first time in its history, the majority of IRA activists come from an urban working-class rather than a small-farming background.
That is one of the reasons many go far beyond the ‘approved’ ideology of the organisation, take up left, even far-left, positions. This is reflected in Republican publications and leads occasionally to speculation that ‘the Provos are moving to the left’.
Individuals may well be. But the organisation itself is not capable of that kind of movement. And the individuals concerned have no mechanism available within the movement through which they might try to move it.
They will continue as they are, their tactics with all their occasional attendant horrors, stemming from bourgeois notions of battle, pursuing the Republican ideal through upturns and downturns, as they have done in the past seven years through botched jobs and brilliant jobs, marches for and against repression and replenishment, eyes fixed firmly on the day of deliverance when the Brits leave at last and the Orange State crumbles.
That’s what the Provos have got going for them: the fact that, unchallengably, they have taken the brunt of the British war effort, alone met it head on without wilting and ploughed doggedly through, battered and bloody and showered almost on all sides with curses and contumely. They cannot reasonably be expected now to pay serious attention to advice shouted from the sidelines.
 
Brits:
At five o’clock on Thursday, 14 August, in 1969 a company of the Prince of Wales Own Regiment under Major Hanson marched into Waterloo Place in Derry and brought to an end two days of rioting between Bogsiders and the RUC. The next day 600 men of the Third Batallion Light Infantry took up position with fixed bayonets in Belfast and ended the attempted pogrom on the Falls Road. Britain had taken direct control of events in the North.
At Westminster Harold Wilson expressed determination to ensure that economic discrimination against Catholics and sectarian operation of the law would cease in the North. The function of the troops, it was generally understood in the North and in Britain, was to defend the Catholics from attack and to supervise the implementation of necessary reforms. Things worked out very differently. Today the British Army in the North is clearly seen by most Catholics as an instrument of oppression.
Britain’s commitment to reform was not based on any sentimental attachment to liberal ideas. It was based on the fact that the Orange machine which had run the North in Britain’s name since Partition had become redundant. It had had a role to play through the years when most industry in the North was in local, Orange ownership and was a thriving component of the British economy.
Now, however, the staple Industries like linen and heavy engineering were in rapid and irreversible decline, being replaced by branches of multinationals concentrating mainly on light engineering and synthetic fibres. Moreover, the South of Ireland, hitherto unindustrialised, had thrown open the doors to new investment – much of it British. It was no longer true that in all Ireland, only Orange capital had any real clout with Britain.
And reforms did go on the Statute book. The notorious B Special Protestant militia were abolished, to be replaced by a new part-time British Army regiment, the Ulster Defence Regiment, membership of which was to be open to all. A Police Bill aimed at disarming the RUC and making it a civilian, rather than a paramilitary force was introduced. The Prevention of Incitement to Religious Hatred Act was designed to curtail the activities of Orange rabble-rousers like Ian Paisley.
A points system for the allocation of houses was devised and control of housing taken out of the hands of untrustworthy local authorities and given to a Government-appointed Housing Executive on which Catholics were fairly represented. And so on.
The reforms didn’t work. And the reason was that, while they could be pushed through Stormont under pressure, there was no machinery to implement them. Having run Northern Ireland on a sectarian basis for almost half a century, the administrative apparatus was the nub of the problem, not the instrument with which it could be solved.
For example: on the same day as the Prevention of Incitement to Religious Hatred was introduced at Stormont, another bill to make prison sentences for rioting mandatory was also brought in. This was intended to deter Catholic teenagers, who had not given up the habit of throwing rocks at any passing representative of law and order. One law against the Protestant trouble-makers, one against the Catholic trouble-makers. On the face of it nothing could have been ‘fairer’.
By the end of 1970 109 people had been charged under the new legislation with rioting. 105 were found guilty and jailed. Only one person had been charged with inciting hatred. This was a Mr John McKeague, who published a ‘song-book’ of which the following is a fair sample:



If guns were made for shooting
Skulls were made to crack
You’ve never seen a better Taig (Catholic)
Than with a bullet in his back.



Mr McKeague was acquitted.
The law against the Catholic trouble makers worked. The law against the Protestant trouble makers didn’t. The assumptions on which the police force and the magistracy worked frustrated the probably-genuine wishes of the lawmakers.
To greater or lesser extents, the same happened to other reforms. As moderate politicians on all sides pointed to the progress being made, the instinctive belief of the teenagers at every street corner in Catholic ghettos that nothing had changed, and that nothing would while the State existed, hardened into a certainty.
British press coverage, which had projected the Catholics as victims and generally been sympathetic, changed radically. Editorials raged at the ‘impossible’ Irish who were never satisfied. And as the Catholic youth increasingly came into conflict with the troops, calls at Stormont for ‘stern measures’ were echoed in Fleet Street.
By the beginning of 1971 the Provisional IRA had some sort of presence in most Catholic areas and the stage was set for the inevitable conflict which, almost 2,000 deaths later, still continues.
In its efforts to win the conflict, Britain has used a combination of ruthless repression, political double-dealing and, under the guise of ‘community organising’, more subtle efforts at ‘pacification’.
Repressive measures have ranged from mass surveillance to imprisonment without trial to torture and multiple murder. It has been the use of such measures which reveals most clearly how and when the reformist strategy was decisively abandoned and Britain lined up again with the Orange ultra-right. And how hollow and dishonest British Governments have been in their protestations of liberal intent.
Internment without trial was introduced at the behest of Unionist Prime Minister, Brian Faulkner, on 9 August 1971 when 319 men were picked up by troops in pre-dawn swoops. All were ill-treated. Some were tortured, by methods which the Heath Government later made a show of outlawing: ‘wall-standing’, white noise, hooding, starvation and deprivation of steep. In his book The Guinea Pigs John McGuffin describes in harrowing detail how men were selected for what was, in effect, a cynical experiment designed to test out techniques and instil terror rather than to obtain information.
Internment and torture united the Catholic community against the Army and the Stormont regime, and caused an outcry even in some liberal circles in Britain. After the torture was exposed in the Sunday Times, the Heath Government set up a committee under Lord Parker to report on interrogation techniques. It presented its findings in March of the next year.
Parker reckoned there hadn’t been any real torture, merely ill-treatment, and that circumstances had justified its use. Heath, however, accepted the minority report of former Labour Attorney General Gerald Gardiner which recommended that the five methods should not be used ever again.
In a stirring show of bipartisan camaraderie Wilson welcomed Heath’s assurances. With the Liberals tossing in their tuppence-worth of agreement, the entire House of Commons pounded its collective breast and promised that this was the end of a very unfortunate chapter.
Meanwhile, back in the North, the torturers tortured on. And as the Amnesty International report demonstrated earlier this year, they are still torturing.
Internment too has been abolished, in theory. In October 1972 a commission under Lord Diplock and including ex-TUC leader George Woodcock was charged with considering ‘what arrangements for the administration of justice in Northern Ireland could be made to deal more effectively with terrorist organisations, other than by internment ...’ Diplock’s report, published in December 1972, recommended that the Special Powers Act, which permitted internment, be abolished. Again, the Commons echoed to hosannahs, hurrahs and hallelujas as honourable members, right left and centre, welcomed the report. Internment is ended shouted the headlines.
Special Powers were replaced by ‘Emergency Provisions’, introduced in July 1973. These include: the abolition of trial by jury; stringent restrictions on the right to bail (Diplock said troops’ morale would suffer if they could see a ‘known’ terrorist on the streets on bail, the reference to ‘known’ terrorists showing Diplock believed accused persons were automatically guilty); the admission of hearsay evidence; admission of confessions even if the prosecution cannot prove them to be voluntary; onus of proof in possession of weapons cases to be placed on accused person.
The tenant of a house in which a weapon is found must prove he/she didn’t know it was there; abolition of the right of accused persons to stay silent; unlimited powers of stop, search and arrest given to soldiers and police; right to refuse to be photographed and/or fingerprinted abolished.
Added to these measures is the 1974 Prevention of Terrorism Act, passed in the hysterical aftermath of the Birmingham pub bombs, which introduced the concept of ‘administrative detention’ – imprisonment without trial for as long as the Home Secretary feels like it; seven days’ detention on the decision of any senior police officer; deportation without stated reason, and so on.
The combination of these measures means that people can be held without bail for more than a year before charges are dropped. That tortured confessions can be used in court – Belfast University’s Department of Law estimates that as many as 90 per cent of persons jailed for ‘terrorist’ crimes since the passage of the Emergency Provisions Act were convicted on ‘confessions’ alone. Almost all these confessions have been extracted in the main torture centre at Castlereagh Barracks.
In other words the changes made in the name of liberalisation have resulted in more, not less, torture and unjust imprisonment.
Added to all this has been the straightforward killing of opponents of the regime. The most obvious example was Bloody Sunday in Derry on 30 January 1972, when paratroopers shot 14 unarmed anti-internment marchers dead. There were, and continue to be, other less-publicised but more sinister examples.
The SAS regularly kill ‘suspects’. Recent examples have been the killings of 16-year-old John Boyle on 11 July at Dunley, Co. Antrim, when he went to check whether a suspect parcel he had earlier told the police about had been removed from a graveyard near his home; and Danny Heaney, assassinated in the street in Derry in May this year a few days after being released from seven days’ detention and questioning in the local barracks.
And the Army and police have been involved directly and indirectly in a sectarian murder campaign against Catholics, particularly in Belfast. This was at its height in 1972, when 125 people were assassinated. In the cases of two killing – those of Patrick McVeigh and Danny Rooney – exposes in the press forced the Army to admit that plain-clothes soldiers had gunned the men down – although, of course, they soldiers were never named or charged.
At the same time military authorities were tacitly supporting the Ulster Volunteer force and Ulster Defence Association in a horrific spate of blood-letting. This can be dated as beginning on 4 May 1972 when the body of Victor. Andrews was found in the Antrim Road in north Belfast. He had been stabbed 15 times. This area was to become known as ‘murder mile’. Some of the Catholics killed there were tortured unspeakably before they died. Thomas Madden was suspended from above, stripped naked and slowly cut to pieces. He had more than 150 wounds when found.
Others had had fingers, toes, genitals cut off, or eyes plucked out.
Yet while all this was going on, not only did the RUC and the Army refuse to do anything about it – they repeatedly denied that it was really happening. Official statements spoke of ‘mysterious killings’ or ‘motiveless murders’, when it was obvious to every rational person in the North that they were neither mysterious nor motiveless, but part of a systematic campaign to terrorise the Catholic community.
The RUC then put out the line that all the killings were work of one madman, variously dubbed ‘Jack the Ripper’ or the ‘Shankill Butcher’, even when killings were taking place simultaneously in different parts of Belfast, some of the victims being bundled into cars by three or four men.
Liason between Army personnel and the UVF – responsible for more than half the assassinations – during this period has since been documented, at least in part. For example, the UVF itself has named Captain Anthony Ling, Captain Anthony Box and Lieutenant Alan Homer, all attached to Army Intelligence HQ in Lisburn, as having developed links with senior UVF men in 1972.
And it is of interest that the McVeigh and Rooney killings were so much part of the assassination pattern that Loyalists were assumed to be responsible until the truth unexpectedly and fortuitously emerged. (For example, the truth about Patrick McVeigh came out when one of the soldiers involved had a crisis of conscience much later and revealed all to the Daily Mirror).
The thinking behind Army involvement in toleration of the assassinations is hinted at in Brigadier Frank Kitson’s book Low Intensity Operations. His theory of ‘Gangs and Counter-gangs’ has been summarised thus: ‘Faced with a revolutionary grouping it may be advantageous for the state forces to develop those forces inside the society who are opposed to the revolution and whose antagonism, combined with their detailed local knowledge, would make them ideal for carrying out operations which for political or military reasons are beyond the scope of the Army’s activities.’
In 1972 Kitson was the Army’s chief strategist in Belfast.
And his strategy worked very well. The effect of the killing of Catholics in 1972 – from Bloody Sunday through the assassination campaign – was to terrify opposition to British rule off the streets. The year had begun with 10,000 mobilised against internment on the Bloody Sunday demonstration, and 50,000 in the Newry the next week. By December, with Catholics, particularly in Belfast, almost demented with fear, demonstrations were few, and few attended them.
As well, when, towards the end of 1972, a section of the Proves began to hit back in kind and kill Protestants at random, the British Army was able to pose as the representatives of decency standing above and between two contending sets of mad, Irish killers. The IRA was discrediting itself, and increasingly isolated from mass, public support. The Catholics were more cowed than before. Kitson was promoted to Major General. And the time was ripe for a political initiative. In March 1973 a White Paper promising ‘power-sharing’ was published and elections for a new Assembly scheduled for June ...
This close coordination of military and political tactics is evident at every stage since the Army intervened. Stormont had collapsed in March 1972 when it became evident that Catholics were never going to accept its writ again. ‘Direct Rule’ was introduced, with Whitelaw as Northern Ireland Secretary. But the search for stable, internal political arrangements which would keep the North within the UK with at least minimum Catholic support went on.
And browbeaten and battered as the Catholics were, a majority went along with the ‘power-sharing’ Assembly elected 1973. In December ‘moderate’ Catholic and Protestant members of the Assembly met in Sunningdale, Berkshire, with the Prime Ministers of the UK and the South, and signed the pact which was widely touted as a final, fair solution to the age-old Irish problem. At the same time some Loyalist paramilitaries who had been involved in the assassinations, their job done, were interned. The politicians were to share power and the paramilitaries share prisons ...
This didn’t work either, the most immediate reason being that the Protestant paramilitaries, thus scorned, reasserted their strength by forcing the ‘strike’ of May 1974, and planting bombs in Dublin and Monaghan which killed 30. Whether the Army could have broken the strike is open to question. Certainly, they didn’t try. When Catholic workers in Derry tried to march in body to work and were met with Loyalist barricades, the Army baton-charged the Catholics. The Assembly collapsed.
The search for a settlement started anew. And while the Loyalist hard-liners who opposed any Catholic involvement in Government occasionally got in the way of British plans and suffered as a result, the IRA remained the main obstacle, and thus it and the community it comes from took the brunt of repression – this despite occasional attempts to co-opt the Provo leadership by open or secret talks and officially recognised ‘ceasefires’. And, naturally, the repression has been combined with energetic support for any development – like the emergence in August 1976 of the despicably opportunist ‘peace women’ – which might help undermine Provo support.
Politically, there have been few notable developments in the last three years. A ‘Constitutional Convention’ elected in May 1975 had ceased to exist by September and is scarcely remembered. A stoppage called by Paisley in May last year in support of demands for greater repression of Catholics in general and the IRA in particular ended in fiasco: Roy Mason was able convincingly to show that he was as enthusiastic a represser as had ever sat in Stormont.
Stalemate continues. The Provos, less numerous than they were in 1972 but more tightly organised and tougher, probably have the capacity to carry on a campaign at its present level indefinitely. Mason shows no sign of having another stab at an ‘acceptable’ settlement. Local bourgeois politicians, both Catholic and Protestant, have either opted for lucrative ‘consultancies’ with local branches of multinationals or eye the rich pickings in Europe. And the Army keeps up its relentless surveillance and pressure on the Catholic community.
The one notable thing which has happened in the past year is a steady resurgence of resistance. It is centred on what is happening in the H Blocks in Long Kesh.
In January 1976 it was decreed that no ‘crime’ committed after 1 March would be regarded as politically-motivated and that political status – which was won by Republican prisoners after a long hunger strike in 1972 and which allowed them to wear their own clothes and associate freely with each other – would end. Prisoners would be held not in compounds but in isolated cells in H-shaped structures modelled on Stammheim prison in Germany, which houses members of the Baader-Meinhof group.
Republicans are fiercely determined to resist being categorised as ‘common criminals’ and there are now over 250 of them ‘on the blanket’. Having refused to wear prison uniform, they are left naked but for a blanket. And being thus in breach of regulations they are denied exercise outdoors, any reading material whatever, radios, TV, conversation with one another, regular visits, food parcels or anything else which it is in the capacity of the prison authorities to deny them. In a final, desperate act of defiance the ‘blanket men’ have now refused to ‘slop out’ as a result of which cells are swimming in excrement and urine.
The standard reaction by Mason to all protests about this has been the prisoners have created these conditions themselves, by their initial refusal to don prison clothes. But protests have mounted.
The first real sign of this came on ‘internment day’, 9 August last year, when 6,000 turned out in Belfast for a march down the Falls. The useful coincidence of a visit by the English Queen in the following week brought an even bigger number out.
And this year, for the first time, there have been specifically workers’ demonstrations. After the death of AUEW member Brian Maguire in May in the Castlereagh torture centre, 4,000 people left work in Belfast for a demonstration. Similar demonstrations have been mounted by the newly-formed Trade Union Campaign Against Repression. TUCAR now has branches in Dublin, Galway, Belfast, Limerick and Derry and a real presence in some workplaces, particularly in west Belfast. Simultaneously, relatives – overwhelmingly women relatives – of the ‘blanket men’ have formed their own Relatives Action Committees. On 27 August the Tyrone RAC called a march from Coalisland to Dungannon and was staggered when upwards of 10,000 people crowded into the tiny town from all over the North. The politics of mass action, with real involvement of the organised working class, is again on the agenda.
Ten years after 5 October, the march has not been stopped. And we are no longer marching for mere ‘civil rights’, but against the root cause of all our political ills: British domination. Because the main lesson to be learned from the last decade is that the real problem never was the way Britain ran the North. It was the fact that Britain ran the North. And until Britain leaves, there’ll be no end of trouble.
 

