 Gerard (Gerry) Healy (1913-1989): Trotskyist Leader by John McIlroy 


John McIlroy
Thomas Gerard (Gerry) Healy (1913-1989): Trotskyist Leader
Source: Keith Gilbert and David Howell (eds), Dictionary of Labour Biography, Volume 12, Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke, 2005, copyright (c) Professor John McIlroy. Reproduced here with the permission of Professor John McIlroy. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers. 
Gerry Healy was born in Ballybane, County Galway, Ireland on 3 December 1913. His parents, Michael and Margaret Mary Healy, eked out a living as small farmers on the bleak west coast. His hard early years, his father’s desertion and his Catholic education marked him for life. When he was 14 he went to England with his sister and subsequently he became a seaman. His sister’s early death from tuberculosis led him to break with his past and around 1931 he joined the Young Communist League (YCL). His much publicised recollections of his father’s death at the hands of the Black and Tans, of acting as a Comintern courier and quitting the Communist Party (CPGB) after disputation with Harry Pollitt over the USSR’s role in Spain, have left no trace on the historical record. In a near-contemporary comment and letter, he states only that he had been a member of the YCL, that he had spent ‘several years in the CP’ and that his political development was ‘amateurish’ (Archer Papers, Militant Group Aggregate, 14 November 1937; MRC, Deane Papers, A41(11), Healy to J Deane, nd [1941]).
Healy first enters history in 1936 as a member of the Westminster branch of the CPGB. The following year he was recruited by Jock Haston, who exercised a lasting influence on him, into the Militant Group, one of Britain’s three small Trotskyist organisations. In August 1937, nominated by Denzil Harber and seconded by John Archer, Healy became a member of the group’s Paddington branch. He was soon known for that combination of organisational energy and theoretical naïveté that would endure throughout his career, and he quickly experienced the first of the numerous splits that would stud his political trajectory. In the face of unsubstantiated allegations about his misappropriation of trade-union funds in his native South Africa, Ralph Lee led his supporters out of the Militant Group to establish the Workers’ International League (WIL). Healy joined the new organisation and endorsed its decision to remain outside the Revolutionary Socialist League (RSL), the newly-unified Trotskyist organisation, and thus outside the Fourth International, founded in September 1938.
The WIL had only 50 members before the 1939-45 war. But its emphasis on activism, going directly to the workers and breaking with the propagandist traditions of earlier Trotskyist organisations, as well as the opportunities small-group politics offered, appealed strongly to Healy. He was a firm supporter of the WIL’s attempt to combine Labour Party entrism with work in the trade unions. And he approved of its increasing emphasis on the latter as Labour Party activism declined during the war. He was successively editor of the group’s duplicated journal, Searchlight, and the more sophisticated Youth for Socialism, and was briefly National Organiser and later Industrial Organiser.
In the late 1930s temporary work setting up advertisement displays, punctuated by periods of unemployment, enabled him to travel. His success in winning recruits to the WIL in Liverpool and Scotland was appreciated. But the same could not be said of his domineering, choleric temperament and self-centred Manichean view of the world, which were already observable by those who knew him in the 1930s. From the start Healy’s conspiratorial approach was far from comradely. As early as 1937 he was raising the question of police informers in the Trotskyist movement. He called the RSL, the WIL’s opposition, ‘swine... agents of the lowest order... a bastard organisation’. His competitor as the organising dynamo of the WIL, Millie Lee, was ‘a little intriguer... Jock licks her boots’. His puritanical fury at her liaison with Jock Haston contrasted with his own future tendencies; his use of the issue inside the group was indicative of his future methods (MRC, A40 (47), Healy to Deane, nd [1940]; A41(2), Healy to Deane, nd [January 1941]).
No match politically for the WIL’s leaders – Haston, Lee, Andrew Scott and Ted Grant – and temperamentally incapable of working collectively with them, Healy was drawn to conflict and factionalism. When a section of the WIL leadership moved to Dublin in 1939 to avoid possible state suppression, Healy quarrelled with his comrades and was sent back to London. In 1940 he was removed as National Organiser for engaging in factional activity aimed at changing the group’s constitution. The following year, in his only alliance with Ted Grant, he attempted to organise young members of the WIL against Haston, who argued that the group’s line on the war, with its demands for workers’ self-organisation in the Army and Home Guard, was making concessions to patriotism. His early attempts at opposition were compromised by a series of impulsive resignations. In February 1943 he forfeited most of his credibility when he threatened to resign and join the ILP in the midst of a dispute over the establishment of a national rank-and-file movement. He was expelled from the WIL. Although he was later readmitted, he was excluded from its leading committees.
On 13 December 1941 Healy married Betty Russell, the 25-year-old daughter of a South London estate agent. Betty, who was working as a shorthand typist in the Ministry of Aircraft Production, had been expelled from the CPGB a year earlier because of differences over the war. She subsequently joined the WIL and acted as a leader of its fraction work in the ILP. During the war, Healy worked at the Hoover factory in Tottenham and the Park Royal Coachworks, part of the London Aircraft Production Consortium, as well as training briefly as a draughtsman. He was active in the Amalgamated Engineering Union (AEU). Surveillance reports from CPGB informants in the Trotskyist movement convincingly described him as: ‘An extreme individualist... Very vain, hot-headed and touchy... Good demagogic speaker... Has considerable personal following.’ (CP/CENT/ORG/12/1, NMLH)
The last comment was somewhat exaggerated. Healy, smarting at his demotion in the WIL, became in Haston’s words ‘a professional oppositionalist’. He was adept at exploiting the grievances and inexperience of those who were disaffected with the organisation. But he was distrusted by the majority and found it difficult to discover a compelling issue, given the WIL’s relative success in wartime conditions (A43(50), F Ward to Deane, 4 February 1943; A43(165), Haston to Deane, 11 November 1943). Hitherto a critic of James P Cannon, the leader of the American Socialist Workers’ Party (SWP) which anchored the Fourth International, Healy now executed a volte face. He latched on to the International’s demand that the WIL reverse its ‘nationalist deviation’ of 1938 and fuse with the British section, the RSL, a demand he had long opposed. However in September 1943 the International accepted that the policy of a fused organisation would be decided by majority vote. This ensured the dominance of the WIL, whose membership now approached 400 and far exceeded that of the RSL. Healy was once more a factionalist without a platform.
The International leadership and Cannon’s man in Britain, the Time magazine correspondent Sherry Mangan, were determined to install leaders of their own choice in the new, 500-strong Revolutionary Communist Party (RCP), launched in March 1944 as a result of the fusion of the two main Trotskyist groups, the WIL and the RSL. Cannon’s original pretender, John Lawrence, leader of the SWP-supported group in the RSL, preferred a full-time party post in Wales. The leadership of the Fourth International turned to Healy. They sponsored him to head a minority faction inside the RCP that challenged the policies of the party’s General Secretary, Jock Haston. For the next 15 years Healy’s enthusiasm for American popular music and films, as well as American Trotskyist literature, was complemented by hero-worship of Cannon – an Irish-American from Rosedale, Kansas, and veteran of the International Workers of the World and the Communist Party – and pedestrian emulation of his persona, politics, platform manner and writing style.
The RCP was initially largely united in predicting an impending capitalist collapse, revolutionary opportunity and thus the need for an open party. Postwar realities prompted rethinking. The Trotskyist movement worldwide was divided into those who attempted to comprehend economic and political change and those who clung to Trotsky’s catastrophic prewar predictions. Mentored by Cannon, Healy was conspicuously in the latter camp. As British capitalism revived, he claimed that it was hurtling towards oblivion. As the Labour government nationalised basic industries, he insisted that reforms were impossible. The coming cataclysm, he argued after a brief flirtation with the ILP, necessitated total entry into the Labour Party. There was no time to build an open party. The workers were turning to Labour in search of revolutionary solutions and a fermenting Labour left wing was already reaching beyond reformism.
Healy was backed not only by the SWP but also by the leaders of the International in Paris, Michel Pablo and Ernest Mandel, who brushed aside the arguments of the RCP leadership. The latter argued that capitalism was moving into a temporary boom, that the workers supported Labour’s reforms and that no organised left, still less a revolutionary current, was emerging in the constituencies. When the British leadership resisted the demand for total entry, Cannon and Pablo determined to remove it. In September 1947 the International leadership split the RCP, recognised two British sections and blessed the minority’s entry into the Labour Party.
Healy’s organisational acumen now came into its own. Using contacts made by members of the entrist organisation, ‘the Club’, inside the London Labour Party, he convinced Jack Stanley (General Secretary of the Constructional Engineering Union) and subsequently Tom Braddock (MP for Mitcham) to put money into the Labour Publishing Society, and later into a printing company, John Stafford Thomas, which from December 1948 brought out an entrist paper, Socialist Outlook. This was edited by Lawrence, who had belatedly joined the minority, and appeared first as a monthly then as a fortnightly. It drew on contributions from left-wing MPs such as Ronald Chamberlain, Harold Davies and Ellis Smith, and less frequently from Bessie Braddock, SO Davies, well-known party activists such as Fenner Brockway and Frank Allaun, and prominent trade unionists such as Jim Figgins, Bernard Dix and Ernie Roberts.
Further cover for the Club was provided by the Socialist Fellowship, which was launched by Ellis Smith MP, its first President, in June 1949. With Healy’s supporter Fred Emmett as Secretary, Braddock as Vice-President and Lawrence on its Executive, the Club animated Socialist Fellowship groups in the constituencies. But Socialist Outlook’s support for the Soviet Bloc in the Korean War ensured that most left-wing MPs and erstwhile supporters kept their distance. The Socialist Fellowship was now heavily dominated by Trotskyists and their presence and influence were more obvious. It was banned by the Labour Party Executive in April 1951, although Socialist Outlook initially escaped proscription.
The RCP collapsed in June 1949, squeezed out by the successes of Labour in Britain, Stalinism in Eastern Europe and China, and the CPGB’s Cold War left turn on the industrial front. Healy became the acknowledged leader of British Trotskyism. The 150 or so remaining RCP members were instructed to join the Club and enter the Labour Party. They outnumbered Healy’s supporters. But an atmosphere of triumphalism, intimidation and disdain for dissent among Club members, as well as demoralisation on the part of the newcomers, ensured that within months only a handful of the latter remained. The rest of the supporters of the RCP leadership retired from revolutionary politics or laid the foundations for the groups led by Tony Cliff and Ted Grant. Socialist Outlook developed as a deep entry paper. Its analysis was underpinned by predictions of economic catastrophe and world war. Centrally, it embraced the ‘two camps’ theory of the Cominform. In the decisive struggle between imperialism and Stalinism, it stood critically with the Soviet bloc, although the criticism was muted and oracular. This was sometimes justified by deference to Braddock and Stanley, who were to varying degrees idiosyncratic fellow-travellers of Stalinism. The attempt to ‘clarify’ Bevanism sometimes produced the optimistic verdict that this current was oscillating between reform and revolution: if pushed hard enough, Bevan and his followers would create socialism through parliamentary means. This in turn was justified by the need to talk the language of the left-wing constituency activist.
The irony was that the Club was now attempting to create the centrist current on whose prior existence its entry had originally been predicated. It attained influence in only a handful of constituencies and areas: St Pancras, Norwood, Streatham, Leeds and Salford. It had a vocal presence in Birmingham, Exeter, Leicester, Nottingham and Edinburgh. From 1948, Labour Party conferences were enlivened by the colourful contributions of Trotskyist delegates, whose numbers could run into double figures. Healy’s defence of Konni Zilliacus at the 1949 conference was particularly effective. But there were clear limits: Healy and Lawrence were both refused endorsement as parliamentary candidates. Only Karl Westwood at Richmond, Surrey, in 1950 and John Archer at Scarborough and Whitby in 1955 stood in general elections in the Labour and, surreptitiously, Trotskyist interest; the most the Club ever had in local government was nine Labour councillors.
With fewer than 100 members, this still represented a tremendous achievement. But nationally it was a drop in the ocean, attained by hyperactivity spurred on by the perceived imminence of a capitalist crisis, a practice that restricted recruitment. Although he described himself variously as a ‘journalist’ or ‘commercial agent’, from the late 1940s Healy was a full-time politician, paid by his members and the SWP. Directing operations from his home at 77 Sternhold Avenue, Streatham, he was immersed not only in the business and political affairs of the Club, but also in a wide range of time-consuming labour movement activities. He was Chair of the Streatham constituency party and his ward party, the constituency’s election agent in 1950 and 1951, a council candidate and a delegate to the party conference in 1949-51, as well as campaigning for adoption as a parliamentary candidate and playing an organisational role in the AEU. However in the spring of 1953 he was forced with the utmost reluctance to turn his attention to wider political horizons.
From 1950 both Healy and Cannon had accepted almost without question Pablo’s theorising of a coming war between the two camps, a war that, in conjunction with growing radicalism in the colonial world, would erupt into revolutions led by the Stalinist parties. They would produce societies in transition from capitalism to socialism, lasting for several centuries. At the World Congress of the Fourth International in August 1951, Healy had voted for this perspective. Given the strength of the Labour Party in Britain he had not had to confront its practical, for some unpalatable, implications: in countries with strong Communist parties, Trotskyists should enter them. When in 1952 Pablo had suspended the leadership of the French section for refusing to endorse this tactic, he had had Healy’s active support. Problems had only arisen when a group of Pablo’s American supporters, led by Bert Cochran and George Clarke, had taken issue with Cannon in the SWP.
Since the war, Healy had happily served two masters, Cannon and Pablo, while retaining practical autonomy on his own turf. Until 1953 he had been a Pabloite. Now he was faced with an unpleasant choice. Impelled by organisational considerations, Cannon confronted Pabloism which – he suddenly discovered – undermined the raison d'être for Trotskyist parties, except as cheerleaders for hitherto counter-revolutionary Stalinism. Under pressure Healy attempted prevarication and conciliation, registering no objections to Pablo’s document, The Rise and Fall of Stalinism, despite an understanding with the Americans that he would do so. He wanted to avoid a split. He openly sided with the SWP only when Pablo’s determination and sponsorship of an alternative leadership around Lawrence became threatening. His attitude towards Pablo passed in a few weeks from respect and liking to ‘physical revulsion’. His more intense and longstanding political, financial and personal dependence on Cannon won the day.
A messy factional fight followed. Lawrence and his supporters were expelled from the Club. Healy, who wanted an emergency World Congress to be held, was swept along by the SWP’s insistence on a split and the formation of a new International Committee of the Fourth International. Any clarification of the political issues was prevented by Healy’s bitter struggle with Lawrence and Braddock over ownership of the printing and publishing operation. Healy gained control of the paper and the printing press but his victory was pyrrhic. The affair had attracted unwelcome attention and Socialist Outlook was proscribed. Bevan, seconded by Richard Crossman, unsuccessfully moved the reference back of this decision at the Labour Party National Executive in July 1954. Despite widespread support from the Labour left and protests from 119 constituency parties, it ceased publication after the reference back of the Executive’s decision – moved with passion by Jennie Lee – was defeated by 4,474,000 votes to 1,596,000 at the 1954 Labour Party conference. The consequent expulsions from the party were largely limited to London. But divested of half its members, who had gone with Pablo, the Club was reduced to competing with Lawrence in writing for the Tribune and selling it.
Healy’s one success in this barren period lay in the trade-union field. Around 1950 the Club recruited a number of influential dockers in London and Merseyside, and established a rank-and-file paper, The Portworkers’ Clarion. Resentment against the Transport and General Workers Union and a desire to break away from it was strong in the Northern ports. Healy now provided leadership and organisation for the initiatives on Humberside and Merseyside, which resulted in thousands of dockers leaving the TGWU in the autumn of 1954 to join the National Amalgamated Stevedores and Dockers. His relations with the far from radical NASD leaders under Dickie Barratt were close and he even spoke at mass meetings of ‘the blue union’. His ambition to take the struggle of Bevanism into the industrial wing of the movement – the TGWU leaders under Arthur Deakin were amongst the Labour Party left’s most strident opponents – ignored hard facts, particularly the power that the TGWU wielded in the TUC and the latter’s visceral opposition to breakaways. The Trotskyists gained important positions in the NASD in Birkenhead, Liverpool and Manchester and played a significant role in developing the union’s strategy. But the result was a debacle. After the defeat of the NASD’s strike for recognition in May 1955, the union’s leaders broke with Healy. They subsequently attempted to return their new recruits to the TGWU, which even before the election of Frank Cousins as General Secretary in May 1956 was moving to the left. Among the results of the exercise were non-unionism on Merseyside, protracted litigation and the weakening of Healy’s base in the ports.
In contrast, the events of 1956, Khrushchev’s Secret Speech to the Twentieth Congress of the Russian Communist Party, the Soviet invasion of Hungary, and the consequent turmoil in the CPGB marked Healy’s finest hour. Backed by a new printing press and plates of Trotsky’s writings provided by the SWP, Healy travelled the country to hold intense and often convincing discussions with ex-CPGBers and dissident members. An early and indispensable collaborator was Peter Fryer, who had been the Daily Worker’s correspondent in Budapest. Fryer typified many of those who, disillusioned with Stalinism, had turned to the Trotskyists in search of a purer Leninism.
Together with Fryer, Healy intervened in the April 1957 CPGB Special Congress, producing a daily bulletin that became the Newsletter, edited by Fryer. It had a significant influence in the socialist forums that had been organised to discuss the crisis of ‘official communism’. For many, Healy’s critique of Stalinism was compelling. His attitude at that time was restrained, constructive, almost exemplary: ‘This is the season for reading books, not burning them... Let us have no label-sticking in advance... Let us get rid of demagogy. Don’t put anybody on a pedestal. Read and study. Examine every point of view.’ (Newsletter, 10 May 1957) The Labour Review, which Healy had produced infrequently in the early 1950s, was relaunched as a discussion journal and the result in terms of recruitment was impressive. Some 200 former CPGB members replenished the ranks of the Group, as the entrist organisation was now called.
It could not last, and Healy’s fundamentalism and impatience soon reasserted itself. The decline of Bevanism, the sobering aftermath of Labour’s second successive general election reverse in 1955 and the advent of Gaitskell as party leader intensified the unfavourable climate for Trotskyist permeation of the Labour left. On the other hand, a small increase in industrial action affirmed for Healy the possibility of economic cataclysm and revolution. The 1958 strike at the Shell-Mex site on London’s South Bank, in which the Group’s leading trade unionist, the experienced ex-CPGB activist Brian Behan, played a central role, paved the way for an impressive national rank-and-file conference, with some 500 delegates. Healy’s new delusions of grandeur were accompanied by demands from former CPGB militants for an open party that could relate directly to union activists, and by increased pressure from the Labour Party, with calls for the National Executive to investigate Healy’s activities in Streatham.
In February 1959 he formed the Socialist Labour League (SLL), an open organisation that grandiosely demanded the right to affiliate to the Labour Party. The consequences were predictable. The SLL and its newly-adopted paper, the Newsletter, were proscribed by the Labour Party Executive and experienced Trotskyists who had spent a decade building a presence in the Labour Party were unceremoniously bundled out. When the Streatham party refused to exclude Healy it was dissolved and reorganised. He received the news of his expulsion in a personal letter from Labour’s General Secretary, Morgan Phillips, in late 1959.
Healy railed against the Labour Party’s lack of democracy and its intolerance. Inside the SLL he replicated the expulsions. A dogmatist who was incapable of sustained, creative political thinking, he was now faced with people with minds of their own. While he sometimes showed surprising awareness of his own shortcomings as a political thinker and his reliance on others for political ideas – for many years he continued to take advice from his erstwhile bitter antagonist, Jock Haston – he was not prepared to allow parvenus to challenge his hard-won grip on the organisation. When challenged his vulnerability made him go for the jugular. If the primitive politics of eternal crisis could not ensure domination, Healy could draw on the administrative methods and personal manoeuvrings that were by now second nature to him. Between 1959 and 1961 Fryer, the translator and historian Brian Pearce, ‘the Stamford Faction’ which included CND pioneer Peter Cadogan, Ken Coates, the educationalist John Daniels, the faction led by Brian Behan incongruously supported by the philosopher Alasdair McIntyre, the group around the old Club member Bob Pennington and the brain surgeon Chris Pallis were all expelled.
The SLL emerged as a sect in which Healy was ascendant. Peter Fryer observed at the time that the SLL demonstrated ‘the rule of a clique, the General Secretary’s personal clique’. He noted that Healy ‘will not tolerate free discussion any more than John Gollan’. He remarked on Healy’s growing obsession with infiltration by the security services, which was used to justify his personal control and methods and was bred of lack of political confidence, and on his slandering and attempts to isolate those whom he saw as a threat: ‘I have enough on Pennington to get him sent down for seven years... [He] could be a police agent... Behan is a primitive Irish peasant... he is trying to take over... A is quite mad – he beats his wife.’ (Fryer, 1959, 11-12) Celia Behan criticised Healy’s ownership of the SLL’s assets and documented the growth of spy mania, threats of physical assault and Healy’s rages. There was ‘a whole hour during which Cde Healy shouted and raved... he kicked the wall and banged on it with his fist. He said I had no right to criticise him, that he had been 30 years in the movement.’ (Behan, 1960, 9)
In his relations with his members, Healy was capable of blending insight and understanding with bullying and intimidation. He was capable of circumscribing his crisis-mongering, as he did in his fight with Behan. There were minor achievements. The rank-and-file conference was followed by a National Assembly of Labour, which was less successful but still attracted prominent militants. Healy organised opposition to racist attacks on black workers in London and recruited a small group of Nigerians and black steelworkers. Initially he was able to take advantage of the CPGB’s opposition to unilateralism and the resolution on nuclear disarmament moved by Vivienne Mendelson at the 1957 conference, which had galvanised debate in the Labour Party, although the energy with which supporters sloganised ‘Ban the Bomb! Black the Bases’ was handicapped by Healy’s critical support of the Russian ‘Workers’ Bomb’.
In essence the theoretically impoverished SLL became the bearer of a messianic politics of anger and consolation in the face of revitalised capitalism, improved living standards, a debilitated left and the ideological weakness of orthodox Trotskyism. The fundamental problem that produced sectarianism and isolation was the contradiction between capitalist stability and active revolutionary politics. In boom-time Britain the SLL was sustained by the unevenness of prosperity, the lure that ‘apocalypse tomorrow’ briefly held for a small minority of young people, hyperactivity, temporary and relatively successful projects, the demonising of all competing left-wing tendencies, and the dependency on Healy of key activists who identified him as the only person capable of organising the members, raising funds and keeping the operation afloat. However, some claimed that ‘Healy’s heart... is not in socialism at all; but in his print-shop which he loves as a peasant lusts for land’ (Cadogan, 1960).
In the early 1960s his main concerns were work with young people and changing international alignments. The SLL’s membership, recorded as 600 at its foundation, had quickly halved. The launch of the resurrected Labour Party youth section changed matters. Healy’s supporters in the Labour Party Young Socialists (LPYS), organised around the paper Keep Left, brought a stream of recruits into the League. By 1963 the SLL controlled the LPYS Executive and its membership was heading towards the thousand mark. The new members were largely inexperienced workers who had been attracted to Keep Left by its socials, dances, football matches and demonstrations, its doomsday economics and its raw, rebellious élan. As the Labour leadership took counter-measures, Healy repeated his experience with the adult party, pulling out his supporters and establishing his own Young Socialists.
This final withdrawal from the Labour Party bolstered the SLL’s world of toy-town Bolshevism and its burn-out routines of countless meetings, serial demonstrations, relentless paper selling, remorseless recruitment targets and revivalist summer camps. The stern prohibition on joint initiatives, even fraternisation, with other political groups to avoid ‘contamination’ strengthened the SLL’s isolation from working-class institutions. This was reinforced by growing international seclusion. Since 1953 the International Committee of the Fourth International had marked time. There had been only one World Congress, held in Leeds in 1958. The approach had essentially been one of federalism and peaceful coexistence. Initially this had suited Healy and Cannon, as well as the French leader, Pierre Lambert: it had left each of them relatively unimpeded in their own national zone of influence. When the Committee had made some progress, as in Latin America, Healy had demonstrated little interest, failing to reply to correspondence or correctly remembering the names of Trotskyist caudillos in the faraway Andes.
Despite his persistent protestations of internationalism, Healy was politically Anglocentric and personally had little time for foreigners. But in New York internationalism was stirring. The discussions on unity between the Mandel-Pablo Fourth International and the SWP posed a new, if small, threat to his control of British Trotskyism. Disdaining unity with the tiny group of British ‘Pabloites’ and conquering his personal anxiety about a breach with the Americans, he did his best to derail the move for reconciliation. When the two organisations came together in 1963 to form the United Secretariat of the Fourth International, Healy was left out in the cold, with only the French and Hungarian sections for comfort. He demonised the new International and his imprecations against ‘Pabloite revisionism’ intensified as the years went by. Cannon washed his hands of Healy, and Healy became an even more coarse caricature of Cannon.
There were two consolations: a new headquarters in Clapham High Street and a new printing plant. The Healy who confronted the Wilson administration with the advice to ‘bring down the Labour government’ was becoming a distinctive, even mythic figure, familiar – if only by repute – to generations of labour movement activists. Five foot five inches tall, squat, bald and with the countenance and temperament of a bulldog, he glared suspiciously at a hostile world through black-rimmed glasses with what Brian Behan termed ‘the little sore eyes of a new-born pig’. He worked an 18-hour day and travelled over 1000 miles a week to supervise all aspects of his organisation. He devoured cakes and spy stories and his consumption of drink increased. Betty Healy, fully engaged in bringing up two children, was no longer politically active and the marriage was not happy. These years of the Young Socialists saw the growth of the sexual predatoriness that would finally bring about his downfall.
Politically, Healy produced old wine in new bottles. He fed his members on a diet of dogma – the SLL embodied the one true faith. As the economic boom peaked, Healy saw only impending slump, the death of reformism and the ripening of a pre-revolutionary situation. The SLL put forward the slogan, ‘Make the left MPs fight!’, but it had nobody left in the Labour Party to attempt the task. It boycotted the Vietnam Solidarity Campaign once it was clear that it would not be allowed to use it simply as a vehicle to denounce Stalinism. It distributed a leaflet at the October 1968 Grosvenor Square demonstration, explaining ‘Why the Socialist Labour League is not marching’. Walled off from new developments, the SLL ended the decade in internal triumph and splendid isolation. In 1969 the Workers Press, ‘the world’s first Trotskyist daily paper’, was unveiled. The SLL’s split with its French co-thinkers in 1971 – overtly over the revolutionary programme, the need to rebuild the Fourth International and the role of the Trotskyists in Bolivia, but fundamentally over the refusal by Healy and Lambert to qualify their autonomy – reduced Healy’s International Committee to a rump.
But he still had what were, or at least in the world of small-group politics, important successes. These were achieved by painstaking personal investment and brought in recruits who related to the General Secretary rather than the SLL. From 1967 he built a showcase industrial branch in the Cowley Assembly Plant of the British Motor Corporation (later British Leyland) in Oxford. This was based on a group of leading convenors and shop stewards politically nurtured by Healy and constituted an important bridgehead into industrial struggles. The following year the classes he conducted for actors, writers, producers and directors began to bear fruit. The classes were a tribute to Healy’s skills as propagandist, showman and exploiter of middle-class insecurities, and produced a flow of recruits and hard cash, plus entrée into Equity and the Association of Cinematograph, Television and Allied Technicians. Encouraged by the writer Jim Allen, a Club member in the 1950s, significant figures in the entertainment industry, including Stuart Hood, Tony Garnett, Ken Loach, David Mercer, Frances De La Tour and Corin Redgrave, entered the orbit of Healyism.
As Trotsky remarked, a clock that has stopped is still right twice a day. The waning of the economic boom and growing militancy in Britain suggested that at long last, at the eleventh hour, a recalcitrant world and its workers were aligning themselves with Healy’s persistent vision. Inspired by the collapse of the Bretton Woods agreement, international monetary problems and the big strikes of 1972, in November 1973 Healy transformed the SLL into the Workers Revolutionary Party (WRP). For its leaders, the struggle for power now seemed to be firmly on the agenda. But the new organisation was far from a party. Although the WRP claimed 7000 adherents, the majority were paper members, activated only for the rallies, pageants and pop concerts that became a hallmark of the organisation. The life of real activists was dominated by the incessant demands of selling the daily paper, signing up new recruits, raising cash and organising party events. The WRP’s leverage in the labour movement was negligible. Its lack of political influence was illustrated by the derisory votes accorded its candidates in the 1974 and 1979 general elections. Its membership was increasingly middle class, as personified by the actress Vanessa Redgrave, who joined the party in 1973 and attributed all her subsequent political and artistic growth to Healy’s influence.
The WRP’s trade-union arm, the All Trade Unions Alliance, was little more than a party front. Healy’s national following in the unions was marginal, albeit highly visible and strident. In 1974 the WRP received a blow from which it never recovered when the Oxford car-workers, led by Alan Thornett, were expelled. In this dispute the issue of the WRP’s undemocratic internal regime was intertwined with criticism of the consequences of Healy’s intoxication with the oil crisis and his prognostication of a military dictatorship or ‘socialism now’. Finding this approach impossible to apply in the unions, the opposition urged a return to the more traditional fundamentalism of Trotsky’s 1938 transitional programme and a critical orientation towards workers’ support for a Labour government. The expulsion of more than 200 active members confirmed the nature of Healy’s tyrannical control. His use of violence, openly discussed on the left since the beating of an American SWP supporter, Ernie Tate, in 1966, an incident that finally snapped Isaac Deutscher’s always limited toleration of Healy, was now confirmed in relation to his own members.
Healy’s talents, organisational dynamism, oratory, ability to convince young people and dispense to his members both the brutal and the benign, had been the keys to his political control of his party. But he was now over 60 years of age and his powers were declining. His competitors, the International Socialists and the Militant Group, were surpassing him. Financial pressures were intensifying. As his energy dissipated he increasingly escaped into a world of gobbledygook, paranoia and political opportunism that transcended his earlier tendencies in this direction. As long ago as the 1940s, unable to answer Haston’s compelling factual analysis, Healy had accused him of ‘empiricism’. In the break with the French in 1971 he had conveniently insisted that the method of dialectical materialism, as opposed to some formal programme, constituted the heart of revolutionary politics. He now reinvented himself as a fully-fledged charlatan Professor of Philosophy, inducting WRP members at the party’s College of Marxist Education into quack dialectics. Those who had the patience to decipher Healy’s essays discovered much that was unintelligible and some that derived from Stalinist brochures on the subject, such as the Progress Publishers’ Dictionary of Philosophy, which was considerably indebted for its sensible sections to Bertrand Russell’s History of Western Philosophy.
In similar fashion, Healy’s earlier obsession with security – when Fryer had left the SLL, Healy had claimed he was having the ports watched – now blossomed into full-blown psychosis. In 1974 the leadership of the WRP’s American satellite, the Workers League, was purged on the ground that it had been infiltrated by CIA agents. The following year Healy initiated an investigation into Security and the Fourth International. This expensive operation concluded, on the most dubious evidence, that the veteran American Trotskyist Joseph Hansen was a long-term double-agent of the FBI-CIA and GPU-KGB, and that the current leadership of the SWP was made up of agents whose controllers had been recruited by Hansen when students at Carleton College, Minnesota.
When the WRP’s membership dropped to around 2000 the professionally printed Workers Press was closed down, to be replaced by the Newsline, produced by WRP members in Runcorn. But long-term solutions were necessary and Healy’s eyes turned to the Middle East. In 1975-76 he established contact with the PLO and the Libyan regime of Colonel Gaddafi. Healy visited Libya, Kuwait and the Gulf states, trading financial subventions for political advocacy. An incomplete accounting showed that between 1977 and 1983 the WRP received donations totalling more than £1 million, most of it from Libya, Kuwait, Qatar, Abu Dhabi, the PLO and Iraq. Together with tribute exacted from the WRP’s satellites in the International Committee, this kept Healy buoyant. The price was eulogistic political support for the despotic regimes of Gaddafi, Saddam Hussein and the Arab sheikhs.
The WRP leadership indulged in ostentatious expenditure, including the creation of an apparatus of more than 90 full-timers, lavish printing facilities, expensively produced videos, a chain of youth training centres and Healy’s opulent lifestyle. Despite the WRP’s disastrous election attempts, the membership was kept going on well-worn scenarios of general strikes and civil war, with the decisive choice between fascism and the WRP always lying just around the corner. Healy stepped down as General Secretary months before his sixty-fifth birthday to take charge of cadre training. He was replaced by his long-time lieutenant Mike Banda, but he still pulled the strings.
In January 1977 he achieved the remarkable feat of briefly uniting the warring tribes of Trotskyism. From all over Europe and America they gathered en masse in London unanimously to condemn Healy’s campaign against Hansen and the SWP. Shrugging off opprobrium from Trotskyists from Iceland to Venezuela, as well as CLR James, Tamara Deutscher, Raya Dunayevskaya and Ken Coates, for some at least, Healy stole the show with a typically dramatic entrance, although he was refused the right to speak. In 1978 the WRP attracted further unwelcome publicity when Healy became embroiled in a libel case against the Observer, arising from revelations by the actress Irene Gorst about her treatment at the College of Marxist Education, which had prompted a police raid on the college in 1975.
By 1983 financial problems were again looming. Healy suffered a serious heart attack and his vigour was sapped. Renewed intervention in the Labour Party through support for the Labour Herald and the left-wing local government opposition to the Thatcher government achieved little. The failure of the 1984-85 miners’ strike plunged the WRP into terminal crisis. For the first time in decades, organised dissatisfaction with Healy’s leadership developed as part of the widespread demoralisation among the members. There was a chain reaction. Revelations surfaced of Healy’s sexual abuse of at least 26 women members over a sustained period. On 19 October 1985 the 71-year-old Healy was expelled from the WRP by the unanimous vote of the Central Committee.
As the WRP fragmented and re-fragmented he spent his remaining years as the figurehead of the tiny Marxist Party established by the Redgraves. He had never been adept with a pen. Starting with the Americans George Novack and Sam Gordon in the 1950s, he had relied on ghost writers. Yet he continued to publish work on dialectics. He travelled to Greece and Spain, lecturing to a dwindling band of disciples. He also visited Russia, where he pronounced that Gorbachev’s perestroika reforms were the harbinger of Trotsky’s long-awaited political revolution. He died in St Thomas’ Hospital, Lambeth, London on 14 December 1989.
For four decades Healy was part of the furniture on the British left. He associated with its leading figures, ranging from Konni Zilliacus and the Bevanites to Ken Livingstone, an enduring admirer. His former followers were legion, indeed they came to challenge disillusioned Communists as the biggest party of the left. A philistine whose favourite television programmes were Dynasty and Dallas, he was portrayed in plays – Laurence Olivier played John Tagg, modelled on Healy, in Trevor Griffiths’ The Party at the National Theatre – and novels, for example as Frankie Hood in Tariq Ali’s Redemption. He was a powerful orator, a successful organiser, an accomplished showman and, for some, a compelling socialist propagandist. He remained a primitive Marxist, schooled only in dogma, which in times of trouble, and suitably cloaked in dubious philosophical formulations, he was pragmatically prepared to discard. Although he was capable of composed, meticulous political work, as in 1956-57, sooner or later he always surrendered to his impulsive, impatient temperament, his political short-termism and his drive for organisational control. To claim that he sustained an important political tradition in difficult times is to beg the essential political question of exactly what tradition he sustained. In his long journey from Stalinism to Trotskyism to cultism he abused his limited gifts and betrayed those who placed their trust in him. He did more than anybody else in Britain to discredit Trotskyism, as an alternative to Stalinism.
Writings
Articles in Youth for Socialism, The Torch (Dublin), Socialist Appeal, Socialist Outlook, Tribune and Newsletter
Pamphlets include The Way to Socialism in Britain (1952), Hands Off the Arab People (1956), Stop the Tory War – Throw Them Out (1956), Stalinism Unmasked: Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Hungary (1957), Workers’ Defence Squads for Notting Hill (1958), Our Answer to the Witch-Hunt and Our Policy For Labour (1959), After Scarborough, The Battle Begins (1960), Plan to Beat the Tories (1961), Problems of the Fourth International (1966), No Laws Against Trade Unions (1967), Studies in Dialectical Materialism (1982), Leninism 58 Years On (1982) and Materialist Dialectics and the Political Revolution (1990)
Sources
I: MSS
Deane Papers, Harber Papers, Purdie Papers, Tarbuck Papers, MRC, University of Warwick
Haston Papers, Harber Papers, University of Hull
Communist Party Archive, NMLH
P Fryer, ‘An Open Letter to Members of the SLL’, Internal Bulletin of the International Secretariat of the Fourth International, December 1959
C Behan, ‘Appeal Against Suspension From the Socialist Labour League’, SLL Internal Bulletin, 5 June 1960
Internal Bulletins of the Group, SLL and WRP, 1957-84 (in author’s possession)
T Polan, ‘The SLL: An Autopsy’, International Socialists internal document, 1970 (mimeo in author’s possession)
II: Books and Articles
Solidarity, By Their Words Ye Shall Know Them (1960)
P Cadogan, ‘Has the Socialist Labour League a Future?’, Socialist Leader, 25 January 1960
Anonymous, ‘The Disunity of Theory and Practice: The Trotskyist Movement in Britain since 1945’, nd, c1964, reprinted in Revolutionary History, 6, 2/3 (Summer 1996)
B Behan, With Breast Expanded (1964)
E Mandel, Marxism vs Ultra-Leftism (1967)
T Whelan, The Credibility Gap: The Politics of the SLL (1970)
C Slaughter (ed), Trotskyism Versus Revisionism, six volumes (1974-75)
SWP (USA), International Secretariat Documents, 1951-1954, four volumes (New York, 1974)
T Griffiths, The Party (1974)
The Battle for Trotskyism: Documents of the Opposition Expelled from the Workers Revolutionary Party (1974)
D Widgery, The Left in Britain, 1956-1968 (Harmondsworth, 1976)
SWP (USA), Healy’s Big Lie: The Slander Campaign Against Joseph Hansen, George Novack and the Fourth International (New York, 1976)
M Jenkins, Bevanism: Labour’s High Tide (Nottingham, 1979)
WRP, Security and the Fourth International, Volume One: How the GPU Murdered Trotsky (1981)
J Callaghan, British Trotskyism: Theory and Practice (Oxford, 1984)
S Bornstein and A Richardson, Against the Stream: A History of the Trotskyist Movement in Britain, 1924-1938 (1986)
S Bornstein and A Richardson, War and the International: A History of the Trotskyist Movement in Britain, 1937-1949 (1986)
A Thornett, From Militancy to Marxism (1987)
E Shaw, Discipline and Discord in the Labour Party (Manchester, 1988)
T Ali, Redemption (1990)
D North, Gerry Healy and His Place in the Fourth International (Detroit, 1991)
B Pitt, ‘The Rise and Fall of Gerry Healy’, Workers News, series (1990-91)
V Redgrave, Vanessa Redgrave: An Autobiography (1991)
H Ratner, Reluctant Revolutionary: Memoirs of a Trotskyist, 1936-1960 (1994)
T Wohlforth, The Prophet’s Children: Travels on the American Left (New Jersey, 1994)
C Lotz and A Feldman, Gerry Healy: A Revolutionary Life (1994)
T Brotherstone and G Pilling (eds), History, Economic History and the Future of Marxism: Essays in Memory of Tom Kemp (1996)
B Hunter, Lifelong Apprenticeship: The Life and Times of a Revolutionary (1997)
J McIlroy, ‘Always Outnumbered, Always Outgunned: The Trotskyists and the Trade Unions’, in J McIlroy, N Fishman and A Campbell (eds), British Trade Unions and Industrial Politics: The High Tide of Trade Unionism, 1964-79 (Aldershot, 1999)
Other information and papers from J Archer, B Behan, B Buitekant, D Gibson, B Hunter, A Jennings, B Pitt
IV: Obituaries
Guardian, 18, 22, 28, 30 December 1989
Daily Telegraph, 19 December 1989
Independent, 21 December 1989
The Times, 23 December 1989
 


Writers Index










Arthur Essex Edgeworth Reade (1902-1971): Communist, Trotskyist, Labour Party Candidate, National Labour Activis by John McIlroy 


John McIlroy
Arthur Essex Edgeworth Reade (1902-1971): Communist, Trotskyist, Labour Party Candidate, National Labour Activist


Source: Keith Gilbert and David Howell (eds), Dictionary of Labour Biography, Volume 11, Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke, 2003, copyright © Professor John McIlroy. Reproduced here with the permission of Professor John McIlroy. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers. 

Arthur Reade was born at 24 Bolton Street, Piccadilly, London, on 22 January 1902. His father, Essex Reade – an international banker of independent means – came from an Anglo-Irish background and had strong professional connections with Latin America. Reade’s mother, Sheelah Chichester, was a granddaughter of the Earl of Galloway. Reade’s early life was spent in London and at two summer residences: Wrotham Rectory in Kent and a house near Shillingstone in Dorset. After his father’s death in 1908 he travelled in Europe with his mother and sometimes stayed with his aunts in Suffolk. He attended Gibbs Preparatory School in Sloane Street, London, and Stonehouse Preparatory School in Broadstairs, Kent. In 1915, when he was 13 years old, he was sent to Eton, where at the end of the war he encountered ‘the queer revolutionary feeling of the time’ recorded by his contemporary, George Orwell, who remembered ‘it was all the fashion to be a Bolshie as people then called it’. He experienced a range of socialist ideas through the radical Eton Political Society, fostered by the young Earl De La Warr (Orwell, 1937, 129-30; Smith, 1969, 137-39).
Reade’s subsequent studies at the University of Strasbourg in 1919-20 brought him into contact with the revolutionary unrest that had swept through Germany to Alsace-Lorraine. At that time he took his first steps in journalism with articles for the Daily Mail. On his return to London, attendance at labour movement meetings reinforced his growing commitment to the left, and when he went up to Worcester College, Oxford, in October 1920 to study history he already regarded himself as a socialist. With the zeal of the neophyte, he was soon playing a prominent part in the University Labour Club and the smaller, more radical Socialist Society. By January 1921 he was editor of a journal, The New Oxford, which was associated with the Labour Club. He was also moving from adherence to the Independent Labour Party (ILP) towards identification with direct action and the politics of the infant Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB).
Reade was always a rebel. His new allegiance was sustained by the intense social conflicts in Britain after the cataclysm of 1914-18, by the extremes of affluence and oppression he witnessed in London and Suffolk, by the romance of the Russian Revolution and by his fierce opposition to Britain’s role in Ireland. He was influenced by the Communists he met through the University Socialist Federation (USF), which had come under the control of the CPGB through the efforts of Rajani and Clemens Palme Dutt and of Mary Moorhouse – former Guild Socialist, friend of Ellen Wilkinson and Comintern courier. He was particularly close to Charles Gray, the brilliantly precocious Secretary of the Oxford Socialist Society who was studying history at Balliol and who had been influenced by his predecessor as Brackenbury Scholar at the college, the young Communist Andrew Rothstein. Reade also worked with two Cambridge undergraduates and lifelong members of the CPGB: Allen Hutt and Maurice Dobb, to whose journal, Youth, he contributed a regular ‘Oxford Letter’.
Black Friday (15 April 1921, when the leaders of the railway and transport unions retreated from industrial action in support of their partners in the Triple Alliance – the locked-out miners) was a key event in Reade’s conversion to Communism. Without consulting his comrades in the Labour Club, he put together an issue of The New Oxford that in rich invective attacked the trade-union and Labour Party leaders for their role in Black Friday and asserted that Communism offered the only viable future for British workers. In the consequent furore Reade resigned the editorship and proclaimed his intention to produce a Communist journal for students that would completely eclipse The New Oxford.
The Free Oxford burst like a firecracker over the university in the long, hot summer of 1921. Reade’s rustication for failing his exams simply provided him with more time to devote to the journal. Its six issues, which ran into 1922, took up university matters and scathingly criticised the administration of the Vice-Chancellor, Lewis Richard Farnell, an unbending Victorian who had been in Oxford since the 1870s, latterly as Rector of Exeter College. There were poems and criticism from the future CPGB member Edgell Rickword, the Queens College student and published novelist Louis Golding, and the future novelists and short-story writers Richard Hughes and AE Coppard. The political coverage was largely ‘party line’, with contributions from two ornaments of the Communist International – Karl Radek and Eugen Varga – and the leader of the Red International of Trade Unions, Alexander Lozovsky. Nearer home, there were controversial articles by the socialist clergyman Conrad Noel and the ethical socialist Edward Carpenter, as well as pugnacious debates with the former Liberal and soon to be Labour MP Arthur Ponsonby, and the partisan of the Russian revolution Gerald Gould of the Daily Herald.
The Free Oxford had an instantaneous and extensive impact. It was sold in all British universities and on the continent, and even reached the United States. Reade – a striking figure, powerfully built, six feet three inches tall and with a luxuriant red beard and a strong attachment to the corduroy trousers, clay pipes and heavy beer drinking that were de rigueur for 1920s Bohemians – was lionised by the small university left. Like several of his Eton and Oxford contemporaries, he was gay in his youth. He eagerly embraced an active social life and delighted in disregarding convention. He was criticised and lampooned in the mainstream student journals, Cherwell and Isis. He was also under police surveillance as a dangerous revolutionary and soon attracted the hostile attention of the Vice-Chancellor. Farnell opposed all student political activities, but considered socialism to be particularly abhorrent and Bolshevism quite beyond the pale. He had recently banned Labour Club meetings that were to be addressed by George Lansbury and Bertrand Russell. Appalled by The Free Oxford’s advocacy of ‘Russian Bolshevism, the Red Terror, obscene licentiousness and the bitterest class hatred... gross insults against the authorities’, Farnell bludgeoned the Worcester College dons into submission (Farnell, 1934, 297). Reade was sent down from the university in December 1921 while Gray, who received greater support from his tutors at Balliol, was rusticated for two terms.
Partly because of Reade’s flair and his extensive press contacts, the expulsion stimulated a media storm. The Daily Herald declared Oxford ‘home of the inhumanities'; for the Daily Express Farnell was a ‘modern Canute'; for the Saturday Review he was the architect of ‘a modern inquisition'; and for the Daily News he was the perpetrator of ‘an academical pogrom’. Publications as different as the Spectator and the Manchester Guardian followed the Evening Standard in regretting the Vice-Chancellor’s overreaction to ‘merely youthful exuberance’, praising Reade as ‘a young man not yet 21, willing to undergo any sacrifice for his principles’ (Manchester Guardian, 18 and 24 January 1922).
A statement by the officers of the Oxford Union and three of the four political societies condemned Farnell and attracted wide publicity. The Chancellor of the university, Lord Curzon, wrote to The Times to disavow any responsibility. Reade received messages of support from the CPGB leader Arthur MacManus, and from Harry Pollitt, although the proletarian party itself, which was somewhat uneasy about such a bourgeois issue, did little openly to campaign on the question. The tempest quickly subsided and 19-year-old Reade was left to pick up the pieces.
He spent the next year working as a freelance journalist, writing poems – one appeared in Oxford Poetry 1922 – and an unpublished novel, studying Marxism and attempting unsuccessfully to resurrect The Free Oxford and pay off its debts. Inside the party he was a junior member of Palme Dutt’s faction, which, disaffected with the existing leadership, espoused a more thoroughgoing Bolshevisation of the CPGB. As an aide-de-camp of the party’s leading intellectual, Reade was involved in a wide range of party work. In 1923 he shared in the Herculean and unpaid labours on the party paper, the Workers Weekly, and Dutt’s Labour Monthly, which were soon to break his mentor’s health. There is no mention of Reade in the official party history, Forging The Weapon: The Struggle of the ‘Labour Monthly’, 1921-1941, but it is clear from the papers of Robin Page Arnot (who together with Dutt and the foreign editor of the Daily Herald, WN Ewer, shared control of the Monthly), from the memories of the London party activist Arthur Siffleet who recalled Reade as Dutt’s ‘right-hand man’, and from the Young Communist League leader Harry Wicks that Reade succeeded Joan Beauchamp as the journal’s business manager in early 1924. By that time he was a member of the party’s London District Committee and served as its training officer, running classes across the South-East.
Reade had always intensely admired Trotsky as a man of action and military genius, a coruscating polemicist and a brutal political thinker. Of course this was far from unusual in the young CPGB, particularly among youths and intellectuals. ‘Trotsky’, Reade had remarked in The Free Oxford, ‘whether as leader of the Red Armies or as the brilliant and biting controversialist, gives the revolution its inspiration.’ He had mused with awe: ‘Perhaps our imagination is dazzled by the grandeur of Trotsky’s attitude.’ (The Free Oxford, 26 November 1921, 4) Crucially he was no conformist, and unlike many in the CPGB he read widely, scouring not only the official Communist press but also socialist journals from France, Germany and the United States. In this context he studied the controversy over the Left Opposition, which developed in Russia from late 1923.
Reade tested out his ideas in classes he conducted for the Young Communist League (YCL). He also acquired background information from a first-hand source. A chance encounter with Andreychine – a supporter of the Russian opposition who worked in the Soviet delegation in London, which was headed by Trotsky’s close friend, the Bulgarian Bolshevik Christian Rakovsky – led to Reade being briefed in depth on the political situation in Russia. In November 1924, on instructions from the International and on the basis of a statement drafted by its representatives in London, the CPGB leadership condemned unread Trotsky’s preface to his 1917, The Lessons of October, which was seen as reopening the controversy. They went on to declare their ‘implicit faith’ in the International and the Russian party leadership. Reade came out as their solitary vocal opponent.
Others were uneasy. The London District Committee could not see the need for urgency and objected to the Political Bureau and the Party Council condemning Trotsky before more information was available and the matter had been discussed in the districts. At the London Aggregate called in response to this mild dissension, a motion to adjourn until more information was available was defeated by the relatively narrow margin of 81 votes to 65. Only Reade spoke out. In the face of the thunder of the party’s big guns – JT Murphy, Andrew Rothstein and Page Arnot – he moved an amendment to the leadership resolution. In this Reade not only endorsed the London District’s criticism of the Party Council’s condemnation of Trotsky on the basis of inadequate information, but also went much further: he expressed emphatic solidarity with the Left Opposition in their fight in the Russian party against bureaucracy, as well as congratulating their supporters in the French, German and other parties. The Russian leaders and the International, he argued with ardour, had suppressed Trotsky’s arguments while Lenin’s dying criticism of the leadership troika – Kamenev, Zinoviev and Stalin – had vindicated Trotsky’s blistering aspersions on their political qualities. Reade justified his position with lengthy quotations from the international socialist press and from Lenin’s testament. However the CPGB’s almost uniform adherence to orthodoxy – a tendency that already distinguished it from Communist parties in many other countries – won out. Reade’s resolution was heavily defeated, attracting on different estimates 10 or 15 votes.
Reade immediately became persona non grata with the party leadership. While those who had been audacious enough to request more information attracted opprobrium – ‘they have a terrible deal to learn before they become real Communists’ (Workers’ Weekly, 23 January 1925) – Reade was singled out for denouncement. He was dismissed as a romantic and a Bohemian; he had failed to overcome his Eton and Oxford background and had demonstrated his ‘anti-party attitude’ by reading Lenin’s testament. He was removed from the District Committee by the Political Bureau and pressure was put on branches that asked him to speak. He was also refused permission to visit Russia and subjected to petty harassment. In April 1925 his appeal to the Control Commission was rejected in a report that also questioned whether he should be allowed to remain in the party. That same month he was dismissed from his post on the Labour Monthly. He was barely 23 years of age but his career in the CPGB was over. There was negligible support for his views in the party and at its 1925 Congress Trotskyism was irrevocably pronounced a political deviation and disease.
Reade was the first British Communist to call himself ‘a Trotskyist’ when forcefully dissociating himself from those he regarded as Trotsky’s non-Communist admirers – such as Morgan Philips Price, Raymond Postgate and Frank Horrabin – around the Plebs journal and Lansbury’s Labour Weekly (Plebs, 17, 8 August 1925). Apart from arguing his case inside the CPGB, he made no attempt to develop an organised opposition, which in the circumstances would almost certainly have been an impossible task. His influence endured only through the youthful party activist and future Trotskyist Harry Wicks, who attended his classes and never forgot his arguments. Although he remained a party member until 1928, Reade’s Bohemian side reasserted itself. He spent much of the next three years travelling in the Balkans and Greece with Charles Gray, living in Athens with Evelyn Waugh’s ‘friend of the heart’ Alastair Graham, developing his interest in Hellenism and Greek politics and discussing Trotskyism with the Russian consul in Athens. Reade’s biography of the Greek political titan Venizelos was almost completed, but like so much of his writing it was never published. The interest in Albanian history and politics that his travels stimulated in him was consummated only in articles for the Daily Mail.
Reade’s inheritance, finally acquired after litigation against his mother, was quickly dissipated on travel, stock exchange speculation and an exuberant social life, whereupon he returned to the path of respectability. In 1928 he joined the Labour Party, where the MacDonald leadership smiled on new middle-class recruits. Reinvented in the Douglas Fairbanks / Oswald Mosley mould and active in the ILP, he was selected to fight the Abingdon division of North Berkshire in the 1929 general election. This was a scattered farming constituency and Conservative-held seat. On what was for Labour tough terrain, Reade mounted an imaginative and popular challenge under the banner ‘Reade for Merry England’. In the first fortnight of his campaign he spoke at 63 meetings, setting up his platform in towns on market days or simply motoring up to village greens and orating from the wingboards of his car. The Reading Mercury noted that ‘Mr Reade has a pleasing, far-reaching voice and has attracted good audiences’, while the North Berks Herald reported that, ‘All the candidates found it difficult to get a hearing with perhaps the exception of Mr Reade.’ (Reading Mercury, 18 May 1929; North Berks Herald, 31 May 1929) He expounded the ILP’s plans for the nationalisation of mines and better old-age pensions, and advocated increased government support for farmers, guaranteed prices and better wages for farm labourers. The old Reade also spoke out in favour of reversing Baldwin’s hostile policy towards the Soviet Union and declared his opposition to all forms of censorship. Reade was personally congratulated by MacDonald on his performance.
Abingdon, Berkshire, 1929: electorate – 36,758, turnout – 80.8 per cent
RGC Glyn (Conservative) – 14,094 (47.4 per cent)
EA Lessing (Liberal) – 11,896 (40.1 per cent)
AEE Reade (Labour) – 3,712 (12.5 per cent)
Majority – 2,198 (7.3 per cent)
Labour needed lawyers and Reade a living, so in January 1930 he joined the Inner Temple and spent the next three years reading for the Bar. However he clashed with Arthur Henderson at the 1929 Labour Party conference over the Executive’s control of candidates’ election addresses, and as the crisis of 1931 developed he resigned from the Labour Party. In The Fascist Movement in Britain (1972), Robert Benewick states that Reade joined Mosley’s New Party, which was launched in March 1931 and initially possessed a small constituency on the Labour left. It has proved impossible to assign specific authority to this statement or to obtain corroboration for it, apart from a vague and confused reference by Reade’s old pupil in the Young Communist League, Harry Wicks. On Reade’s own account, he rejoined the Labour Party only to become disillusioned once more with its stance on rearmament and the threat of fascism. By 1936 the politically volatile Reade had once again defected from the Labour Party. This time he decamped to MacDonald’s National Labour Group, where he was reunited with an old contemporary, the Earl De La Warr, and two figures who had influenced him in his early days at Oxford, Kenneth Lindsay, MP for Kilmarnock, and Malcolm MacDonald, MP for Ross and Cromarty and Secretary of State for the Dominions.
Having broken with MacDonald twice (in 1921 and 1931), Reade had come full circle. But his past still intruded. In 1934 Farnell published his memoirs, An Oxonian Looks Back, in which he injudiciously raked over the ashes of The Free Oxford affair. Flexing his muscles as a newly-qualified barrister, Reade issued a writ for libel. Farnell subsequently died, but the matter was settled to Reade’s satisfaction by the removal of the offending passages from the text, the payment of his costs and, in response to Farnell’s dislike of Germans, a small sum in damages to a charity that helped Germans to study in British universities.
Reade practised as a member of the Central Criminal Bar and subsequently the South-Eastern Circuit Bar and the London Sessions Southside. A chance encounter with Harry Wicks in Kleinfelds, a Bohemian pub in Soho frequented by a variety of Communists, fascists and the polymath magician Aleister Crowley, led to a renewed interest in Trotsky. In the face of the Moscow trials, Reade wrote supportively to The Times and The Spectator and at greater length in the National Labour press. He also provided legal advice to the Committee for the Defence of Leon Trotsky. Unlike his fellow barristers DN Pritt and Dudley Collard, who shamelessly whitewashed the show trials, he remained a critic of Stalinism. But this evolution had taken him far from Marxism. While he retained his old identification with the leader of the Russian revolution and creator of the Red Army, it was as ‘an old-fashioned bourgeois believer in individual liberty’ that he declared, ‘I should be proud to do anything I properly can to secure justice for Leon Trotsky who I regard as the most superb warrior in the cause of the working people in modern history’ (Reade to Wicks, Haston papers, University of Hull, DJH18/4, 2 December 1936).
Reade had matured as a man of the centre. Rejecting the class war, describing himself as a radical social reformer and praising the tradition of teamwork for which the National Government stood in Britain, he became Secretary of the Inns of Court branch of the National Labour Group and prospective parliamentary candidate for East Bristol – Stafford Cripps’ constituency and a stronghold of the Labour left. Lacking coherence and the resources and will to build a new party, National Labour remained a small, disparate ginger group. During its brief existence its members ranged from extinct volcanoes of the left, such as the former Communist JT Walton Newbold, through experienced politicians in new incarnations, such as the pioneer of the University Socialist Federation, absolutist conscientious objector and former Chairman of the ILP, Clifford Allen, now Lord Allen of Hurtwood, to the declining but resilient Jimmy Thomas. For Reade it was another lost cause. The 1940 general election never came. National Labour was increasingly a small fig-leaf for Conservative rule, and not surprisingly it failed to survive the war.
Another curious incident occurred in 1938, when three articles signed ‘Arthur Reade’ appeared in the British Union Quarterly, a journal of the British Union of Fascists. Attributed to an Englishman resident in Italy, they criticised the dark designs of international finance, praised Nordic racial consciousness, depicted communism as a Jewish creation and sought to appropriate William Morris for national socialism. As Reade was in England at that time and was relatively prominent as a National Labour candidate, writing in its press and signing articles and documents ‘Arthur EE Reade’, it is unlikely that he authored these pieces, particularly in light of the views expressed. Nonetheless this matter, as with so much about Reade, is intriguing. His restlessness and appetite for adventure certainly remained unimpaired. Agitated by Munich, he joined the Officers’ Emergency Reserve. When he was not called up he enlisted in the army in spring 1940 and was soon promoted to sergeant. A year later, after much string-pulling and circumvention of his MI5 file, he joined the intelligence services. He was appointed to the infant, unorthodox Special Operations Executive (SOE) in the Mediterranean and eventually became head of administration. Caught up in the Byzantine politics of the Rustum Buildings (the SOE headquarters in Cairo), he fell foul of the notorious Brigadier Mervyn Keble, who designated his vendetta ‘Operation Oxford’.
Quite improbably, for he was over 40, a poor swimmer and had no experience of marine sabotage, and moreover knew the true identity of most active SOE agents, Reade was chosen by Keble to blow up the damaged HMS York, which the Germans were trying to refloat in Suda Bay. Reade duly landed on Axis-occupied Crete in November 1942, but his mission proved impossible. One of his experienced colleagues later recalled: ‘The Brigadier must have known that the suicidal enterprise was doomed in advance to failure, so I could only conclude that he was less interested in destroying a top-priority target than in getting rid of a junior officer with whom he was on bad terms.’ (Fielding, 1954, 106) Reade saw action in Crete before a furious Keble ensured he was sent back to England in disgrace. However a nine-month wrangle and protracted representations by Cripps and Philip Noel Baker MP resulted in his exoneration and promotion to major.
Reade’s war ended in Germany, where he worked for the War Crimes Commission until the end of the 1940s. His rootlessness and wanderlust continued: he spent 1950-53 as a resident magistrate in Kenya and then practised as a barrister in another of the decade’s trouble spots, Cyprus, before retiring to Jersey in 1963. He died on 12 December 1971, leaving an estate valued at £3417.
Reade was married twice – to fellow barrister Bettina Morel in 1934, and to Cynthia Fowler, a lecturer in English literature, in 1948. Each marriage produced three children, but one child from each marriage died young. Reade was a flamboyant, mercurial, generous, caring character whose political impulsiveness was reflected in shifting allegiances, which was more common than is often thought in the first four decades of the twentieth century. He had his share of bad luck, and political stamina was not one of his virtues; he found it difficult to reconcile his appetite for life, laughter, wine, song and convivial company with the austere demands of political discipline. He will be best remembered for the events of 1924-25. His Daniel-like, prescient indictment of the degeneration of the revolution in Russia still stands in impressive contrast to the silences, apologetics and complicity in despotism of successive generations of Communist intellectuals.
Writings
Articles in the Daily Mail, The New Oxford, The Free Oxford, Youth, Workers’ Weekly, Labour Monthly, The News-Letter, The Challenger
Sources
I: MSS
Palme Dutt Papers, Hutt Papers, Communist Party Archive, NMLH
Page Arnot Papers, Haston Papers, University of Hull
Oxford University archives, Bodleian Library
Pollard Papers, Bodleian Library
Russian State Archive of Socio-Political History (RGASPI), Moscow
II: Newspapers and Periodicals
North Berks Herald, 1929
Oxford Mail, 1929
Reading Mercury, 1929
British Union Quarterly, April, July, October 1938
III: Other
AEER, ‘Trotskyism, etc’, Letters, Plebs, 17 (8 August 1925)
CH Gray, ‘Albania and Italian Imperialism’, Plebs, 19 (4 April 1927)
Labour Party, Report of the 29th Annual Conference, The Dome, Brighton, September 1929 (1929)
MP Ashley and CT Saunders, Red Oxford: A History of the Growth of Socialism in the University of Oxford (Oxford, 1933)
LR Farnell, An Oxonian Looks Back (1934)
George Orwell, The Road to Wigan Pier (1937)
X Fielding, Hide and Seek (1954)
B Pearce, ‘Early Years of the Communist Party of Great Britain’ (1958), in M Woodhouse and B Pearce, Essays on the History of Communism in Britain (1975)
B Pearce, ‘The Last Years of the University Socialist Federation’, Bulletin of the Society for the Study of Labour History, 4 (Spring, 1962) 45-46
G Smith (ed), The Letters of Aldous Huxley (1969)
R Benewick, The Fascist Movement in Britain (1972)
M Davie (ed), The Diaries of Evelyn Waugh (1976)
M Upham, The History of British Trotskyism to 1949, unpublished PhD dissertation (Hull, 1980)
I MacDougall (ed), Militant Miners (Edinburgh, 1981)
J Mabro, ‘I Ban Everything’: Free Speech and Censorship In Oxford Between the Wars (Oxford, 1985)
S Bornstein and A Richardson, Against the Stream: A History of the Trotskyist Movement in Britain 1924-1938 (1986)
A Beevor, Crete: The Battle and the Resistance (1991)
N West, Secret War: The Story of SOE (1992)
H Wicks, Keeping My Head: The Memoirs of a British Bolshevik (1992)
J McIlroy, ‘New Light on Arthur Reade: Tracking Down Britain’s First Trotskyist’, Revolutionary History, 8:1 (2001) 2-48
J McIlroy, ‘The Young Manhood of Arthur Reade’, in J McIlroy, K Morgan and A Campbell (eds), Party People, Communist Lives (2001)
IV: Personal Information and Papers
Julian and Viola Reade
Keith Gildart
David Howell
Brian Pearce
 


Writers Index



Thomas William Sara (1886-1953): Industrial Unionist, Anarchist, Communist, Trotskyist by John McIlroy 


John McIlroy
Henry Thomas William Sara (1886-1953): Industrial Unionist, Anarchist, Communist, Trotskyist


Source: Keith Gilbert and David Howell (eds), Dictionary of Labour Biography, Volume 11, Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke, 2003, copyright © Professor John McIlroy. Reproduced here with the permission of Professor John McIlroy. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers. 

Henry Sara was born on 24 August 1886 at 51 Essex Street, Islington, London, the son of John Henry Sara, a draper’s assistant from Falmouth, Cornwall, and his second wife, Amy Maude Sara, née Smith. Sara had little formal education and from an early age worked in an ironmongery store after school. In the early years of the twentieth century he was employed as a glassblower, as a process block-maker and for six years as a brewery engineer. He also worked in a property office and as a cinema projectionist. Like most working-class socialists of his generation he was self-taught; more unusually, he was intellectually self-reliant. From boyhood he was an omnivorous reader. He took a keen interest in labour history, popular science, Darwinism and the literature of free thought and secularism. He devoured the plays of Shaw and the novels of Eugene Sue. He studied everything he could lay his hands on in connection with telepathy, theosophy, spiritualism and the supernatural. He delighted in magic, at which he was adept, and was an enthusiast of silent films, boxing and later speedway racing. Throughout his life he was a bibliophile and an avid collector of socialist books and pamphlets.
His first acquaintance with socialist ideas came from Robert Blatchford’s weekly newspaper, Clarion. However, in 1905 he became interested in Indian self-government and began to question Blatchford’s social patriotism, which was confirmed when the Clarion joined HM Hyndman in denouncing the growing ‘German menace’. He met members of the Socialist Labour Party (SLP) and read its paper, the Socialist, but was critical of its dependence on the American thinker Daniel De Leon and its dogmatic emphasis on the role of the party. Nevertheless he admired De Leon’s economic writings and credited the Socialist’s serialisation in 1908 of Wage Labour and Capital with his initiation into Marxism. He became a partisan of industrial unionism, as propagated by the Advocates of Industrial Unionism, established in August 1907 and animated by the SLP, although formally independent of it. Sara’s socialism was nurtured in the eclectic, ecumenical, libertarian, syndicalist milieu of North London by an invisible college of proletarian autodidacts. He was influenced by Advocates such as Leslie Boyne, an Islington gas worker, and WGE Smith, a local sheet-metal worker, as well as anarchists, particularly the painter Victor Beacham and the turbulent Walthamstow activist Walter Ponder, who congregated in the electrical engineering shop of the Italian anarchist Errico Malatesta in Upper Street, Islington.
In 1908 Sara joined the Industrial League, which had broken away from the Advocates and taken most of the latter’s London membership. The League opposed SLP control, indeed any connection with political parties in the work of organising workers on industrial lines ‘into one big union’. With EJB Allen as editor of its paper, the Industrialist, and Boyne as General Secretary, it insisted that the economic organisation of workers should take precedence. It declared that it was in principle neither in favour of nor opposed to parliamentary action, but the demonstrative use of parliament should only be discussed after the revolutionary industrial union had been established. Intended to curtail disputation, this formula led to the secession of branches that wanted a decisive anti-parliamentary line.
Sara was a member of the Islington branch. Led by Smith, it attracted up to 200 members to its meetings on subjects such as internationalism, industrial unionism and anarchism, and anti-militarism at the Secular Hall, Essex Road, and organised speakers at Clerkenwell Green, Highbury Corner and Parliament Hill. At the end of 1908 Sara became business manager of the Industrialist. He was responsible for producing and circulating pioneering pamphlets such as AB Elsbury’s Industrial Unionism: Its Principles and Meaning (1909) and Allen’s Revolutionary Unionism (1909). He expanded his international interests, followed syndicalist developments in France and North and South America and studied both Marx and the anarchists Bakunin and Kropotkin.
The League held joint meetings with anarchist groups and enrolled anarchists in its ranks, although Ponder was expelled in 1909 for exploiting the organisation for anarchist purposes. It strengthened its constitution to condemn ‘the futility of parliamentary action’ in response to anarchist agitation and the climate of the times. By 1911 the expulsion of Allen and the League’s acceptance of a charter as the British branch of the Industrial Workers of the World (Chicago faction), which opposed De Leon, suggested a loss of élan and independence. Sara’s interest in anarchism was intensified by a growing friendship with its most vigorous British proponent, Guy Aldred, who studied industrial unionism and spoke at league meetings. When the Industrialist was forced to suspend publication in 1912, he offered the League space in his own journal, the Herald of Revolt. Sara assisted Aldred during the ‘Savarkar affair’. When Madanlal Dhingra, a student influenced by the Indian nationalist Vianyak Savarkar, assassinated the political secretary to the Secretary of State for India, the Free India Society’s journal, The Indian Sociologist, was suppressed by the courts. Aldred printed it and suffered imprisonment for his pains. Under Aldred’s influence Sara began to question the centrality of industrial unionism. He terminated his two-year membership of the League and moved into the orbit of the self-styled ‘Minister of the Gospel of Revolt’.
While Sara did not share Aldred’s extravagant declaration that ultimately there was no difference between industrial unionism and orthodox trade unionism, he no longer saw the former as a panacea. He came to believe that organisation was secondary to consciousness. Once propaganda had transformed workers’ consciousness, revolutionary action would follow spontaneously, with direction being provided by local communist propaganda groups if necessary. Capitalism would collapse. Meanwhile strikes, the eight-hour day and industrial unionism were all palliatives and potential distractions. Freed from the tyranny and partiality of party politics, the socialist gospel would embrace all shades of opinion – Marx as well as Bakunin – for Sara subscribed to the view that Marx was an anarchist and that communism means anarchy. He styled himself a communist or Marxian anarchist.
The Herald of Revolt, established by Aldred in 1910, drew on the anarchist tradition and published the writings of Bakunin, Kropotkin, Emma Goldman and Voltairine de Cleyre. It also reprinted the work of British radicals such as the pioneer of press freedom Richard Carlile, discussed industrial unrest and explored feminism, birth control and sexual politics. It carried reports of the work of local communist groups, played a significant part in the campaign against the deportation of Malatesta in 1912 and relentlessly publicised the connections between HM Hyndman’s stake in the Colt Gun and Carriage Company and his bellicose politics. By 1913 Sara was a prolific contributor and was increasingly involved in editing the paper. He moved from Pentonville Road in Islington to the flat that Aldred shared with his companion, Rose Witcop, in Richmond Gardens, Shepherds Bush. All three believed in sexual equality and free unions. The serious, studious Sara began an affair with Witcop, ‘a tall, pale Jewess, with an oval face and dark, wide luminous eyes... with a grand romantic air, like a Conrad revolutionary’ (Fox, 1930, 54-55).
Rose was the younger sister of Milly Witcop, companion of the German Rudolf Rocker. With Kropotkin in retirement, Rocker was the doyen of metropolitan anarchism. Centred on the clubs in Jubilee Street and Charlotte Street, the journals Freedom and Workers’ Friend, Henderson’s ‘Bomb Shop’ and Karl Lahr’s Holborn bookshop, it was a cosmopolitan world in which the Shepherds Bush ménage a trois became a colourful cameo. Aldred’s ‘missions’ strengthened the spread of communist propaganda groups in London and Scotland. Sara was increasingly popular as an open-air propagandist at Finsbury Park, Clapham Common, Putney Embankment and the Grove in Hammersmith, where he spoke on Marxism, revolutionary organisation, the value of the vote, anti-militarism and spiritualism. He gained a reputation for well-researched contributions and as ‘a calm dispassionate debater’ (Howard, 1916, 94).
In 1913 Sara became Secretary of the Revolt League, established to coordinate the activities of the communist groups. Like many such groups its existence was shadowy. Attempts to arrange debates with the Socialist Party of Great Britain, Guy Bowman’s Syndicalist League and the Anti-Socialist Union proved unfruitful. More productive was the North London Daily Herald League. Formed the same year, it provided a vibrant meeting place for most of the tendencies on the revolutionary left and Sara became one of its best-known orators.
When the Herald of Revolt was relaunched in June 1914 as the Spur – ‘because the workers need a spur’ – Sara was assistant editor. In its pages he argued the socialist case against the European War: it was a war for profit that would divide workers and provide capitalism with a new lease of life. He produced detailed reports of the activities of the armament combines, and took to task those socialists, notably Hyndman and Kropotkin, who supported the war as well as militant trade unionists who sought to exploit it. The only course of action, he argued, was point-blank refusal to participate in militarism or aid the war effort in any way. 
Sara, who was in the front line of the fight for free speech, was arrested and convicted three times in the first weeks of the conflict. On 28 September 1914 Sara – ‘28 years of age, a well-dressed man described as an engineer’ – appeared before the South-West London Police Court. The magistrates were told: ‘When the police removed the speaker Sara jumped on the platform and said to the crowd: “This meeting will continue. The police inspector has no right to stop a public meeting. I'll carry on...” The speaker’s remarks were against the King, the Government and the people.’ (Spur, October 1914) With the introduction of conscription legislation in January 1916 the attitude of the police and patriotic crowds hardened. Sara reinforced his growing reputation for fearlessness, urging the Herald League, whose meetings were being broken up, to resist intimidation. He offered to speak at any place at any time: ‘I think we were all surprised at the change that had occurred in him... he had developed into the passionate orator. Many a time after he had finished speaking I have seen khaki armleteers shamefacedly slip their badges into their pockets and then demonstratively cheer him to the echo.’ (Howard, 1916, 94)
The war engaged Sara fully, emotionally as well as intellectually and at the age of 30 it provided his greatest test. In February 1916 he returned his conscription papers, stating he could not serve because of his socialist opposition to the war. The Hammersmith tribunal held that it had no power to grant exemption for an objection based on political grounds. He was arrested on 3 April, taken before the South-West London Police Court and sentenced to a month’s imprisonment as an unlawful absentee. When he stated that his occupation was public speaker the magistrate told him the sooner his mouth was closed the better. The military authorities refused to allow him to serve his sentence or communicate with friends and he was immediately taken into army custody. Despite poor eyesight he was pronounced medically fit and taken to the Harrow Road Barracks of the 3rd (Reserve) Battalion London Regiment, where he was badly beaten and forcibly dressed in uniform. After refusing to parade he was again beaten, transferred to Hurdcott Camp, court martialled and sentenced to 28 days in Parkhurst Military Prison on the Isle of Wight. Returned to Hurdcott in May, he again refused to obey orders and served a further sentence in Parkhurst.
The case attracted wide publicity. It was raised in the House of Commons by Joseph King, the Liberal MP for North Somerset, and the Labour Party’s Philip Snowden. Harold Tennant, the Liberal Under-Secretary of State for War, promised a report but then announced that reports on individual soldiers could not be provided. Sara was transferred to Wormwood Scrubs and taken before the Central Tribunal, which accepted that as a conscientious objector he was entitled to perform alternative work under the Home Office scheme. As an absolutist who believed that nothing should be done to aid the state, he refused. He was again court martialled in October 1916 and January 1917, when he was sentenced to two years and transferred to Exeter Prison.
He endured his imprisonment stoically – ‘che sara sara’, as he wrote to his friends. A fellow prisoner, RM Fox, recorded with surprise that Sara had developed a sense of humour. He took inspiration from Rosa Luxemburg, Karl Liebknecht and, he insisted, the thousands of nameless Germans who were fighting against the war. His resistance was simple and adamantine: ‘conscience is not to be bargained with’ (Sara, October 1917, 154). He became suspicious of the No Conscription Fellowship’s attempts to play the system and extend exemptions. He felt isolated and at times disheartened: ‘To fight with the minority is always hard, when the odds are against you obstacles seem great, greater perhaps than they are in reality but that is little consolation.’ (Sara, January 1919, 110) He grew worried about his own weakness when, along with other long-term prisoners, he was transferred in September 1918 to Wakefield gaol and offered concessions. But the absolutists remained intransigent. They introduced a system of self-government, affirmed ‘the inviolable rights of conscience’ and refused to accept any work that would facilitate the war.
At the end of his sentence Sara again refused to put on khaki and again endured rough treatment. In an article in the Herald of Revolt he remarked: ‘Two and a half years of bitter struggle’, and at the end a disgusting retort, ‘You are a coward of the deepest hue.’ (Sara, January 1919, 110) In October 1918 he was once more court martialled. It was not until he went on hunger strike in February 1919 that he was finally released, and only then under the Cat and Mouse Act, which enabled the authorities to recall him at any time.
Sara emerged from his ordeal stronger and more self-sufficient. His moral stature was enhanced and he enjoyed a growing reputation in the labour movement. He plunged into propaganda, speaking all over the country for the Herald League, the SLP, the British Socialist Party and, in particular, anarchist groups throughout Scotland and Sylvia Pankhurst’s Workers’ Socialist Federation (WSF) in London. He was an enthusiast for the Russian revolution. Where he had earlier deprecated party organisation, he now considered Pankhurst’s organisation as the germ of a new libertarian, anti-parliamentary communist party. The minute books of the WSF record Sara’s attendance at meetings of the Bow branch in 1919. He was also active in the WSF-influenced East London Workers’ Committee.
In the summer of 1919 a fellow absolutist, Harry Thompson, whom Sara had befriended in Wakefield Gaol, invited him to spend a few weeks at the holiday home of his sister and her businessman husband, Connie and Percy Taylor, at Hawkshead in the Lake District. Their son, the future historian, AJP (Alan) Taylor, later recalled the ‘magnificent open-air orator with a tremendous voice’. He reflected:
Henry Sara talked Marxism all the time... [He] was extremely handsome, despite a wall eye. He was well over six feet tall, with curly black hair and a powerful physique. He had winning ways... Indeed he had already acquired a harem of feminine admirers in London. He now won my mother. She fell passionately, although of course, platonically, in love with Henry Sara and remained in love with him for the rest of her life. (Taylor, 1983, 54)
Connie became a fervent supporter of Sara’s politics. For his part Sara exerted a powerful and to some extent under-acknowledged influence on the young Alan, being instrumental in extending his interest in politics and history and stimulating his brief sojourn in the Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB). In turn Percy was always on good terms with Sara and became a militant pillar of the Independent Labour Party in North Lancashire. Thus for Sara it was a happy encounter. Until Connie’s long, final illness in the early 1940s she provided Sara with a home for part of the year, gave him money and bought his suits.
But this lay in the future. What urgently exercised Sara in 1919 was the relationship of the anti-parliamentary, libertarian tradition of socialism from below – in which he had spent a good part of his 33 years – to the Russian revolution and the development of the Third International (Comintern). He interpreted the revolution and its extension by the Comintern through the prism of his own politics, emphasising the centrality of insurrection, workers’ councils and their antagonism towards parliament. He participated in the short-lived Communist League formed in 1919 as a loose amalgam of dissident SLP branches, the WSF and Aldred’s communist groups, whose paper was now entitled The Spur – To Communism. He took another small step towards party when he moved into the orbit of Pankhurst’s Communist Party (British Section of the Third International, BSTI), although there is no evidence that he became a member. He was caught up in the same dilemma as Pankhurst: how to reconcile a passionate belief in the necessity of the Comintern with a profound antipathy to its emerging insistence on parliamentary action and affiliation of its British section to the Labour Party. Like many other communists he pondered whether to give his allegiance to Bolshevism. In the summer of 1920 he was still speaking for the Scottish anarchist groups. Russia – and perhaps their relationship with Rose Witcop – precipitated Sara’s final break with Aldred (Caldwell to author, 7 December 1999). Like most anarchists, Aldred made parliament the litmus test and was increasingly concerned about the strengthening of the state and growing authoritarianism in Russia.
Sara was not yet ready to turn away from what would become the submerged tradition of left-wing communism and embrace ‘official communism’. Prison had made him more careful, cautious and methodical. But despite doubts about its policy he chided critics: ‘If there is not a Communist International very soon, the time is not far distant when there will not be a Soviet Government.’ (Sara, January 1921) He determined to see for himself what the International and the Soviet government were doing. In January 1921, as the CP (BSTI) threw in its lot with the CPGB, he sailed for Russia.
In five hectic months he visited not only Moscow and Leningrad but also Samara, Tashkent and Samarkand. He toured factories, schools and soviets. He spoke with Comintern functionaries, ordinary communists and anarchists, and even unearthed Jacob Miller – ‘Peter the Painter’ of the siege of Sydney Street notoriety. Whether he travelled with or encountered Witcop, who was in Russia in 1921 to raise money for Aldred’s Anti-Parliamentary Federation, remains unclear. But his already intimate relationship with the CPGB was evident in a letter from a party representative in Moscow to the Comintern. It noted that while he had refrained from joining: 
There is no question... as to his loyalty to the movement. He was always in great demand as a lecturer by the branches of our organisation. He has given years of work for the cause. His record and influence is such that he would be undoubtedly an acquisition to our forces in Britain. (RGASPI, 495/100/42, Tom Quelch to Kobetsky, 12 April 1921)
In an account written for the Dreadnought on his return to London, Sara evoked the vitality of the revolution, its very real problems and the urgency of international solidarity. His conclusion – despite doubts about the Bolsheviks’ crushing of the sailors’ revolt in Kronstadt in March 1921 and Pankhurst’s ejection from the CPGB in September 1921, which had laid to rest the hope some had held for a left-wing faction – was that sustaining the Russian revolution was the priority for socialists, and that the revolution was best nourished from inside its official representative party. The working-class militancy of 1919-20 was in retreat across Europe, together with illusions of a revolutionary situation arising in Britain. Left communism was waning and, as the next few years would demonstrate, its organisational prospects were brittle. It was as a reluctant recruit who could see no alternative that Sara joined the CPGB in late 1922 or early 1923. Within a few months he was debating with Pankhurst at Essex Hall on the competing virtues of the Third and Fourth Internationals, the left-wing council communist grouping with which Pankhurst was associated (led by the Dutch critic of Lenin, Herman Gorter, and not to be confused with Leon Trotsky’s movement of the same name).
The CPGB made extensive use of Sara as a propagandist. In 1922 he toured the United States and Canada, lecturing on his experiences in the Soviet Union. The following year the CPGB districts urged the branches to engage him to speak on Russia, with the proviso that for open-air meetings he would expect a share of the collection. His hallmark was the lantern lecture, bred of his days in the cinema and facilitated by slides from his travels, which he pioneered while others persevered with chalk and talk. As well as Russia his other specialities were the Lives of Lenin, Luxemburg and Liebknecht, and the revolution in China. He also lectured widely on Marxism, labour history and current politics. His other significant arena was the National Council of Labour Colleges, a passion that united the extended Taylor family: Connie became secretary of the Preston Labour College, later the North Lancashire Labour College, while Percy lectured and wrote in the NCLC journal, Plebs, on the cotton industry. As the 1920s wore on, Alan commenced lecturing with Sara and defended the Comintern against Raymond Postgate in Plebs. Sara was in demand as a tutor and often spent most of the winter season at the Taylors’ Preston home, taking classes in Lancashire and Yorkshire. Two or three times a year Connie would visit London, where Sara would take her to the theatre and restaurants at her expense. In 1924 the couple, accompanied by Alan, toured France and Germany, where they encountered a wide variety of politicians although the highlight was a performance by the great clown Grock. In 1925 the trio travelled across Russia, meeting Kamenev and Litvinov, hearing Zinoviev speak and returning with their dedication to the Soviet experiment refreshed and reinforced.
Sara was a member of the CPGB’s St Pancras branch and then from 1925 the Tottenham and Wood Green local branch. He was also a member of the Hornsey Labour Party and sat on its Executive Committee from 1924 until he was expelled in 1926. He was a popular CPGB member and was active in party causes and a periodic contributor to its press, although he always regretted the fact that he never wrote as well as he spoke. He was a member of the Central Agit-Prop Committee, but he was on the whole, on a long leash. In 1925, for example, he was elected to the London District Committee but was excused service because of his other commitments. He could be a difficult customer and was enduringly critical of many in the leadership for their activities before and during the war, for he never accepted that militancy was a substitute for anti-militarism. In 1932 Willie Gallacher, whom he had always valued lightly, opined that Sara had never been a Communist. He was certainly never a Communist in the sense that Gallacher was as he never absorbed Bolshevisation, still less Stalinism. Rather he maintained a sturdy intellectual independence. He held himself aloof from involvement in the burgeoning machine, particularly after he was asked to keep an eye on former anarchist comrades Charlie and Esther Lahr, who had left the party in the early 1920s. Nonetheless he became a well-known figure in the CPGB:
I was aware of his history and his deep interest in the labour movement... and he was quite unusual, even though he was an orthodox Communist for a whole period. He had an unusual interest in the Trotskyist movement. He was one of the few people, I'd never seen anyone before, who had a little tiny button, which he got on one of his trips to Russia in 1921 or 1922 with a photograph of Trotsky in it. It was the only one I'd seen. He also had a sculpture by Claire Sheridan of Trotsky. (Wicks interview with Richardson)
All in all Sara was an austere figure and was perceived even by Communists who shared his working-class background as ‘an intellectual’ (Dowdall interview with Richardson), one whose outsiderism suited the leadership as well as himself. In 1926 he spoke all over the country during the miners’ lockout, sharing platforms with Arthur Cook. The following year he was despatched by way of Moscow and Vladivostok to represent the CPGB at the Fifth Congress of the Chinese Party – held at Hankow in April-May 1927 – in order to permit Tom Mann, who was on a Red International of Labour Unions delegation to China, to represent the Minority Movement. In China he saw at first hand the consequences of Stalin’s and Bukharin’s subordination of the Chinese party to the Kuomintang and its disastrous and stubbornly sustained misreading of Chiang Kai-Shek. He would later complain bitterly about the Russians’ attempt to scapegoat the party leader, Chen Duxiu, who had simply executed their policy. However, speaking as a delegate to the CPGB’s Ninth Congress in Salford in October 1927, he was critical only of those party members who failed to understand the importance of China to world revolution.
Sara was one of 25 CPGB candidates in the May 1929 General Election, standing in Tottenham South. He faithfully elaborated the new ‘Third Period’ line that capitalist crisis and working-class radicalisation had transformed Labour into the third capitalist party, hermetically sealed from proletarian pressure, and demanded a revolutionary workers’ government. He paid the price and lost his deposit. The seat was won by his old comrade in the Herald League, the Islington French polisher Fred Messer.
Tottenham South, 1929: electorate – 45,970, turnout – 67.5 per cent
F Messer (Labour) – 14,423 (46.4 per cent)
PB Malone (Conservative) – 9,701 (31.3 per cent)
W Stonestreet (Liberal) – 6,407 (20.7 per cent)
HTW Sara (Communist) – 490 (1.6 per cent)
Majority – 4,722 (15.1 per cent)
Perhaps the New Line stirred the old Sara, revived his leftism and fanned his resentment of labour fakirs and what he saw as men on the make. He contributed titbits to the Daily Worker that paid off old scores against the ex-ILP absolutist Clifford Allen and the ex-SLP impossibilist EE Hunter. But as he demonstrated when rebuking the CPGB novelist Harold Heslop for employing denunciation rather than textual criticism to dismantle Postgate in the Communist, he was essentially a man of argument, exactitude and tolerance. As such he cannot have been happy with Stalin’s proscription of Luxemburg in 1931 or the British leadership’s witch-hunting of the ideas of Arthur Horner, JT Murphy, Maurice Dobb and Tommy Jackson between 1930 and 1932.
On his way to China Sara had become embroiled in an obscure argument with Petrovsky, the Comintern representative in Britain, over trade-union policy. His first real brush with the party leadership, however, came in 1930 when, as part of the work of discrediting the fallen Bukharin, his differences with Lenin were magnified by the Russian leaders and their national epigones. Nonetheless Sara provided the Communist Review with a positive estimation of the new British edition of Bukharin’s Imperialism and World Economy. When it was unfavourably reviewed in the Daily Worker he wrote to the paper contradicting Hugo Rathbone’s verdict that there was a fundamental antagonism between Lenin and Bukharin over imperialism. The leadership switched the controversy to the Communist Review and encouraged Rathbone to expand and ‘sharpen’ his response to Sara and discredit his original piece. The real point in this engagement between the proletarian autodidact who remembered the past and respected truth and the orthodox, bourgeois intellectual who reflected the present power-struggles in the USSR, was the fundamental antagonism Stalin felt towards Bukharin. Lenin had never regarded the very real differences he had with Bukharin as sufficient to merit his silencing, stigmatisation or exclusion, indeed he had contributed a commendatory introduction to the first edition of the book, which until 1929 was generally accepted as a classic Bolshevik text. But Bukharin’s approach and, Rathbone suggested, Sara’s, was no longer permissible in the evolving Stalinist order.
Sara read Trotsky, studying not only earlier works such as Where Is Britain Going? but also ‘The Draft Programme of the Communist International: A Criticism of Fundamentals’, published in English in January 1929. He found the ‘Third Period’ claim that the Labour Party, ILP and trade-union leaders were going over to fascism disturbing and unsustainable. The new leadership was proving no better than the old in reversing the party’s fading fortunes. His belief, which had solidified in 1921-22, that the leaders of the Comintern and the CPGB could take the world revolution forward was foundering. He was still considered sufficiently acceptable to be sent to Vienna in August 1931 on behalf of the Friends of the Soviet Union, although he was arrested and deported from Austria. By that time he was a member of the opposition group led by Reg Groves and Stewart Purkis. He met them in 1929 and gradually strengthened his involvement, although it was only in 1932, when he moved from Crouch End to South-West London, that he became a member of the Balham group of the party. Groves later recalled Sara’s ‘eloquent, resonant voice and a commanding platform manner, incisive, informed in debate and discussion’, he ‘brought much to us in the way of knowledge of Marxism, socialist theory and labour history. His critical faculty had been toughened by early associations with anarchist ideas and the stricter industrial unionist groups, by his experience during the 1914-18 war.’ (Groves, 1974, 19-20)
The group’s ideas were disparate, to a degree contradictory and certainly still evolving. Opposition to the leadership’s ‘right-wing’ resistance to the Comintern line in 1929 gave way to resentment about the Comintern’s disastrous dictation and its espousal of ‘socialism in one country’ by 1931. Their belief that the new leadership of the CPGB was missing opportunities and their concern about the parlous state of the party was sustained. But their continued advocacy of ‘Third Period’ nostrums, such as the priority of organising in the workplace as opposed to organising in the trade unions, coexisted uneasily with their newly-acquired support for the united front, which had been stimulated by their experience of working with the ILP in South London and by studying Trotsky’s writings on Germany. Meetings with Trotsky’s emissaries Albert Glotzer and Max Shachtman produced only limited clarification of their politics, which in early 1932 remained at some distance from the conceptions of the International Left Opposition.
Sara’s pivotal confrontation with the CPGB leadership was characteristically bound up with his revulsion at its ‘unreal propaganda and cheap demagogy’. On 20 March 1932, when he was speaking at the St Pancras branch on the ‘war danger’, that had obsessed the party for the previous five years, he held up the previous day’s Daily Worker, which blazoned and attempted to justify the headline ‘The World War Has Begun’. He ‘asked his audience what sort of reply would be received were he to go down into the street and ask the passers-by whether they were aware that “world war has begun"?’ (Sara, 1939, 4) Party leader Harry Pollitt received a report of Sara’s speech and observed on behalf of the Political Bureau (PB): ‘This opportunist poison must be plucked out of the Party and all who disseminate it ruthlessly fought as objectively helping the war preparation of the imperialists by the doubts and confusions they create in the Party.’ (Daily Worker, 6 April 1932)
Sara was now a marked man. The Secretariat wrote to him asking for clarification of his comments. He retorted that they had already been sufficiently apprised about what he had said to denounce him demagogically and requested a copy of the report on which they had based their condemnation. In protracted correspondence he defied their instruction to put what he had said into writing. At the PB there was discussion of his expulsion, concern about the platform that his NCLC work provided and, when the Communist (anonymously circulated by the Balham group) appeared in May with a reprint of Trotsky’s Germany: The Key to the International Situation, suspicion that Sara was involved. Two stormy South London aggregates and a confused meeting between the London District Committee, Bill Rust from the leadership and the Balham group failed to resolve matters.
The affair moved to a close in August when, in response to a request to discuss the German situation, Groves, Sara and Harry Wicks were invited to meet the London District Secretary, RW Robson. Instead they were confronted by Pollitt, Gallacher and Kay Beauchamp. Sara’s prompt exit, explaining that he had been invited to meet Robson not Pollitt, provided a stay of execution. While Groves and Wicks were expelled, he escaped with suspension. The respite was brief. On 8 September 1932 he was expelled from the CPGB for membership of ‘an Anti-Party grouping’. The letter of dismissal stated that the final straw was the publication in the September issue of Plebs of his extended, laudatory review of the first volume of Trotsky’s History of the Russian Revolution. Sara was aware that Pollitt was trying to avoid publicity about Trotskyism in the party: ‘The article in Plebs was written deliberately (by arrangement with the Editor) as a challenge to the Communist Party – which I knew would lead to my expulsion, so that the membership could be made aware of the grounds of my expulsion.’ (MRC MSS15B/3/S, Sara to W Hill, 12 August 1941) His exit from the party was as calculated as his entrance.
In Trotskyism he sought a purer Marxism, based on a united front of working-class parties, political transformation in Russia and world revolution. He supported Trotsky’s verdict that its performance in respect of Germany had rendered the Comintern beyond repair. He viewed this as enhancing the argument for developing the British Trotskyist group, the Communist League, as an open organisation, albeit carrying out factional work inside labour movement bodies, including the ILP. He did not share Trotsky’s belief in the potential of the ILP and opposed the International Left Opposition’s advice that the League should enter the ILP en masse. Such an approach, he pointed out, would mean sacrificing the League’s new paper, the Red Flag, withdrawing members from the fruitful work they were still carrying out in the CPGB and putting the group’s future in the dubious hands of the ILP. At the League’s December 1933 conference he successfully moved that wholesale entry be rejected. He argued that Trotsky was more enamoured of the ILP than the tiny Communist League; Trotsky did not adequately appreciate developments in Britain, particularly the difficulty of revolutionary work inside the ILP. The refusal of the minority who supported Trotsky to accept the vote resulted in British Trotskyism’s first split. 
In this context, and with the Comintern’s turn towards a united front, depriving the Trotskyists of their best card, his hopes for an independent Communist League evaporated. However there were small successes. When the CPGB and its satellite, the International Labour Defence, refused to campaign over the imprisonment of Chen Duxiu, the former Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party who had embraced Trotskyism, Sara was able to draw on the goodwill he had accumulated with Tom Mann during their encounter in Hankow. Mann’s signature on a circular protesting about the imprisonment influenced Jack Tanner, Dick Beech, Alex Gossip, John Jagger and other prominent left-wing trade unionists to add their names to those of James Maxton and Fenner Brockway. Furthermore there was still a trickle of recruits from the CPGB and the ILP. But by early 1934 sales of the Red Flag were in decline and the League was wracked by internal divisions. There was some resentment about the behaviour of Groves, his monopolisation of international contacts and what some saw as his overemphasis on the British dimension. Still advocating independent organisation, Sara was less than impressed by the suggestion that the group prioritise work inside the Labour Party. In May 1934 he resigned from the Communist League.
Unlike most of his comrades Sara had an alternative outlet in the National Council of Labour Colleges (NCLC). As well as maintaining his base in Lancashire he had become popular in South Wales, where the NCLC organiser and future General Secretary of the Labour Party, Len Williams, helped with the sale of the Red Flag and tweaked Stalinist tails by presenting the best students with copies of Trotsky’s History. Even when CPGB stalwart Charlie Stead succeeded Williams in 1936, he proved unable to resist NCLC General Secretary JPM Millar’s sponsoring of Sara. The latter’s appointment as full-time winter tutor was branded as ‘provocation’ by the party’s Agitprop Committee, which remonstrated forcefully with the hapless Stead.
To the CPGB’s chagrin Sara was able to take Trotskyist politics into the NCLC. Statements such as ‘The June Tutors’ Council meeting listened with interest to Comrade Sara outlining the attitude of the Left Opposition (Trotskyism) and agreed to devote another evening to certain problems which cropped up in discussion’ (Plebs, July 1933, 167) were guaranteed to cause apoplexy in King Street. Throughout the 1930s Sara contributed to Plebs, in restrained, scholarly style, crossing swords on several occasions with fellow proletarian autodidact Tommy Jackson, who was increasingly marginal to the party but its man in the NCLC. But if all this strengthened anti-Stalinism among British workers, it did little to expand organised Trotskyism.
By 1936 Sara had returned to the fold. He was reunited with his old comrades from the Balham group in a looser organisation, the Marxist League, which worked inside the Labour Party and the Socialist League. He rigorously raked through the fictions and fables traducing Trotsky and the mendacities of the Moscow trials, and remarked of Stalin’s attorneys the Pollitts and Pritts, who slavishly justified them: ‘Like the gangs who used to concoct anti-Soviet forgeries with faked documents for circulation in the capitalist press, their work teems with stupid errors.’ (Sara, January 1937, 2) He was one of the tiny band who put all their energy into the Committee for the Defence of Leon Trotsky in 1936-37. He was on the platform at the handful of big meetings the Committee was able to mount at Essex Hall and the Memorial Hall in Farringdon. He also addressed gatherings of the ILP, NCLC and Left Book Club. He worked with CA Smith, editor of the ILP’s Controversy, priming him with anti-Stalinist ammunition. When the CPGB published a competitor, Discussion, he commented: ‘I find that really amusing. Particularly when one knows that the thing they fear most is discussion and controversy.’ (MRC MSS 15/3/1/63, Sara to Smith, 22 August 1937)
His earlier concerns about the Soviet state had proved prescient. The trials left him with mixed feelings: of vindication – in the trials’ unmasking of the nature of the Stalinism he had escaped – and demoralisation – the sense that for many this was the bleak terminus not only of 1917 but of the entire project of revolutionary socialism. He reflected:
Frame-ups against active revolutionaries in capitalist countries are bad enough but when the frame-ups can be staged in a country where a people have thrown off their oppressors things must be infinitely worse... the harm done to the cause of International Socialism through the Moscow trials of the alleged Trotskyist Zinoviite Terrorist Centre will be felt for many a long day. Its main value – but at what price? – is to expose still more clearly, to all who have the sense to see, what tremendous harm is being done to the working-class movement through the bureaucracy of Stalinism. (Sara, October 1936, 3)
With the majority of the Marxist League, Sara supported the fusion with CLR James’ Marxist Group in the ILP in early 1938. He welcomed the formation of the Fourth International in the autumn of that year, chaired the foundation conference of its affiliate, the Revolutionary Socialist League (RSL), which brought together the majority of British Trotskyists, and served on its Executive. Looking back on what had happened to Communism in the 1930s, on events in Russia and on the Comintern’s role in China, Germany, Spain and Britain, he succinctly observed: ‘Stalinism betrays the revolution, destroys the faith of the workers and makes socialism a mockery.’ (Sara, April 1938, 4)
Thereafter, together with his old comrades from the Balham group, he drifted away from mainstream Trotskyism. Like them, his impatience with ersatz Leninism and revolutionary posturing was enduring. He opposed the war as imperialist, arguing in the Labour Party in South London and in the Royal Arsenal Co-op that the struggle for peace was inseparable from socialist advance. His involvement with Groves and Wicks in the Socialist Anti-War Front, which was criticised as pacifist by most Trotskyists, led to a breach in 1939 with the RSL leadership, around Denzil Harber. Nonetheless he spoke with Fenner Brockway at the Trotsky Memorial Meeting in September 1940, commending Trotsky’s murderers and their apologists, such as JR Campbell, to ‘the execration of humanity’. He was now 54 years of age. He had travelled far from his political roots, but remained faithful to the vision of workers’ self-emancipation and the belief in the power of the word in which he been nurtured. He was captured for posterity at Clapham Common one Sunday morning in 1940, much as he had been in 1914:
... he began with four or five of us around his platform... there was a sizeable crowd around an Economic League speaker. Sara boomed out in measured tones, ‘Travelaars in Indiaah... tell a tale... of Indian fakirs... who... throwing a rope into the air... make it stand the whole length... suspended from nothing.’ In this manner he spoke about mass hypnotism and the Economic League speaker’s attempt to practise it. In five minutes or less he had stripped the audience away from the Economic League and they were gathered around him. (Hunter, 1997, 36-37)
He was still working in the Labour Party, although his bid to become parliamentary candidate for Wimbledon in 1941 proved unsuccessful. Connie Taylor was terminally ill and in May 1942 Sara married Eleanor Pembrook, a Tooting woman 17 years his junior. In the winter of 1941-42 he acted as NCLC tutor for South Wales, and in March 1942 he was appointed to the full-time post of South London divisional organiser, with the brief to develop classes with trade-union bodies and members of the Labour Party and the cooperative movement. Following surveillance of its revolutionary socialist opponents the CPGB recorded that: ‘Henry Sara, ex-Party member and a virulent Trotskyist, is now an NCLC organiser in London. George Phippen, the other London official is very much under his influence and facilitates the work of the Trotskyists as NCLC lecturers.’ (NMLH, CP/CENT/ORG/13/4, Report on Trotskyite Activities, May 1943) But Sara was a teacher, not an organiser, and problems disguised by wartime dislocation emerged into the open as the postwar era dawned. JPM Millar, who was intensely loyal to the Labour government, demanded greater efficiency, a more contemporary, ‘constructive’ approach, more union affiliations and more students in order to win the relentless competition with the state-aided Workers’ Educational Association.
In the face of Sara’s alleged failure to develop courses, Millar claimed that the appointments committee had doubted his capacity as an organiser. He attempted to involve Sara in alternative work: training new tutors and marking correspondence courses, interspersed with periodic reviews of his student figures. Conflicts between organisers and the Stakhanovite Millar were a regular occurrence. But the anti-authoritarian Sara compounded matters by acting defiantly, drumming up support from London NCLC activists and requesting permission to stand for Wandsworth Borough Council. In the face of harassment he hung on, but Millar’s persistence paid off. Despite support from divisional delegations and the Organisers’ Association, he was dismissed in February 1948. At that year’s NCLC conference an emergency motion calling for his reinstatement was ruled out of order on the ground that the dismissal of staff was an administrative issue and beyond the remit of NCLC democracy.
That was Sara’s last battle: his life as an activist was drawing to a close. Connie Taylor, whom he visited to the last, died in 1946. Her son recorded that he and Sara were her only mourners and that the 60-year-old Sara felt that life had finally caught up with him. According to Taylor, Connie had left Sara a small annuity. Nonetheless he was forced to take a poorly-paid post as a temporary Post Office worker. He remained active in Wandsworth Labour Party, kept in touch with British and American Trotskyists and in 1951 and 1952 regularly reviewed books for the ILP’s Socialist Leader. He disparaged Lysenko and his British disciples, excoriated ‘Stalin’s Empire’ and ‘Red Imperialism’, and wrote favourably of Tony Cliff’s early work on Eastern Europe. In the autumn of 1952 he contracted lung cancer. He died aged 67 on 19 November 1953. Most of the mourners at his funeral were members of the Balham group. He left an estate valued at £442 6s 2d.
Sara was representative of the irreconcilable, anti-statist strain in the autodidactic, propaganda-driven tradition of early-twentieth-century socialism, which insisted that workers must secure their emancipation through direct action. He always maintained this position, and unlike many other pre-1914 irreconcilables never succumbed to the imperatives of the burgeoning but degenerating Russian state. He embraced official Communism reluctantly, and when he realised it was a cul-de-sac his deep and direct knowledge of other communisms helped him to find another path. In the midst of wartime martyrdom he complained about how hard it was to fight with the minority – but he always did so. Apart from his years in the CPGB, he stood with the minority of the minority, the real underdogs.
Sara was a Trotskyist when it was hardest to be a Trotskyist: when Trotskyism was weak and persecuted, yet arguably at its most inspiring as a compelling critique of Stalinism at midnight in the century. Even here he was fully an individual: his early years as a syndicalist and anarchist sustained an inherent independence; he was never comfortable in disciplined organisations; and his early self-education taught him to trust his own judgement. In the end he could find no place in the transformed labour movement. He possessed an unbending political rectitude. If, in more personal terms, as Alan Taylor asserted, he exploited his appeal for women he did so, as Taylor also suggested, with a certain innocence and loyally sang for his supper. If at times he felt that the world owed him a living, it was so that he could turn his entire energy to winning the world for the working class.
Writings
I: Articles in the Herald of Revolt
‘The Limit’, October 1912
‘Revolution and the Strike’, November 1912
‘What Makes War?’, December 1912
‘Berkman’s Memoirs’, February 1913
‘Theosophy’, ‘The Workers and the War’, March 1913
‘Industrial Unionism’, April 1913
‘Our Policy Stated’, May 1913
‘Fly Away Gill’, June 1913
‘We Must Have Eight’, July 1913
‘Are Strikes Reformist?’, September 1913
‘Are Anti-Socialists Mad?’, October 1913
‘Hyndman’s Confession’, December 1913
‘Blasphemy!’, December 1913
II: Articles in the Spur
‘Daniel de Leon’, June 1914
‘The Luxury of Poverty’, July 1914
‘Most and Tucker’, August 1914
‘Armaments and Profits’, October 1914
‘The War on Nietzsche’, November 1914
‘Behind the War’, December 1914
‘The Two Classes’, February 1915
‘Playing the Game’, April 1915
‘The Present Socialism’, May 1915
‘Sorgue!’, June 1915
‘Below the Surface’, August 1915
‘Notes and Queries’, February 1916
‘The Yellow Streak’, July 1916
‘A Moral Outlook’, October 1917
‘The Wakefield “Concession"? A Diary’, October 1918
‘Recognition’, December 1918
‘Uncowed Conscience’, January 1919
‘The Logic of War’, February 1919
‘A Plaint of Peace’, April 1919
‘They Speak for Themselves’, May 1919
‘The Force of Parliament’, July 1919
‘Direct Action’, August 1919
‘Who Are the Communists?’, January 1921
III: Other Articles
‘The Grief And Glory of Russia’, Workers’ Dreadnought, 23 July, 6, 13, 27 August 1921
‘The March Past’, Communist Review, March 1926
‘The Class War’, Communist Review, April 1926
‘Further Jottings on RW Postgate’, The Communist, May 1928
‘An Anarchist With A Temper’, Sunday Worker, 14 October 1928
‘Dietzgen – The Tanner Who Confounded The Pundits’, Sunday Worker, 9 December 1928
‘New Light on Chartism’, Communist Review, January 1930
‘The Leisure Class’, Communist Review, February 1930
‘About Marx and Engels’, Daily Worker, 15 February 1930
‘The Revolutionist: A Glance at the Past of a Labour Hack’, Daily Worker, 9 April 1930
‘The Stage of Imperialism’, Communist Review, April 1930
‘A Communist Textbook’, Communist Review, May 1930
‘Laying the Ghost of Karl Marx’, Plebs, May 1930
‘Organised Capital: Rathbone Replies to Sara’, Communist Review, September 1930
‘Communist Education’, Daily Worker, 2, 3 October 1931
‘Trotsky and the Russian Revolution’, Plebs, September 1932
‘Trotsky on the Revolution’, Plebs, May 1933
‘William Gallacher: Notes for Autobiography’, Red Flag, June 1936
‘The Deportation of Mrs Muhsam’, Red Flag, September 1936
‘Trotsky’s Traducers’, Red Flag, October 1936
‘The Novosibirsk Trial’, Red Flag, January 1937
‘Behind the Popular Front’, Red Flag, March 1937
‘Marxism and MacDonaldism’, Plebs, March 1937
‘Maxim Gorky, Lenin and Trotsky’, Red Flag, May 1937
‘Needs or Deeds – A Rejoinder’, Plebs, August 1937
‘China and the Comintern’, Controversy, October 1937
‘Histories of the CPGB’ Controversy, December 1937
‘The Prince of Anarchists’, Plebs, March 1938
‘Murder in Moscow: Another Gigantic Frame-Up’, Fight, April 1938
‘Could Be Improved: Engels on Capital’, Plebs, April 1938
‘Soviet Purge Continues’, Fight, June 1938
‘Jackson Versus Sara’, Plebs, June 1938
‘Japan: Weakest Link in the Chain’, Controversy, August 1938
‘Engels on Capital’, Plebs, August 1938
‘The Chinese Revolution’, New Leader, 21 October 1938
‘Pollitt and the Party Line’, Call of the Socialist Anti-War Front, November 1939
‘Not State Capitalism’, Left, January 1940
‘Is Anarchy the Answer?’, New Leader, 26 August 1944
‘Warfare and Words’, Plebs, December 1944
‘Frederick Engels’, Plebs, September 1945
‘Science and Heredity’, Socialist Leader, 24 March 1951
‘Pathways in Science’, Socialist Leader, 23 June 1951
‘Marx, Hegel and Russia’, Socialist Leader, 16 February 1952
‘The Peasants and Marx’, Socialist Leader, 29 March 1952
‘Stalin Said No’, Socialist Leader, 5 April 1952
Sources
I: MSS
Sara-Maitland Papers, Wicks Papers, MRC, University of Warwick
Aldred Papers, Mitchell Library, Glasgow
Communist Party Archive, NMLH
NCLC Papers, National Library of Scotland
Russian State Archive of Socio-Political History (RGASPI), Moscow
Harry Wicks, interview with A Richardson, 11 March 1978
Steve Dowdall and Daisy Groves, interview with A Richardson, nd but 1982 (in author’s possession)
II: Other
Parliamentary Debates, Fifth Series, Commons, 1916, Volumes LXXXI, LXXXH
P Howard, ‘Henry Sara: An Appreciation’, Spur, June 1916
‘Henry Sara Stands in Tottenham’, Workers’ Life, 19 April 1929
RM Fox, Drifting Men (1930)
RM Fox, Smoky Crusade: An Autobiography (1938)
G Aldred, A Call to Manhood: 26 Essays (1944)
R Groves, ‘Farewell To A Rebel: The Life and Death of Henry Sara’, Socialist Leader, 28 November 1953
G Aldred, No Traitors’ Gait (1963)
R Groves, The Balham Group: How British Trotskyism Began (1974)
B Holton, British Syndicalism, 1900-1914 (1976)
R Challinor, The Origins of British Bolshevism (1977)
J Quail, The Slow Burning Fuse: The Lost History of British Anarchism (1978)
AJP Taylor, A Personal History (1983)
K Weller, Don’t Be A Soldier! The Radical Anti-War Movement in North London, 1914-1918 (1985)
S Bornstein and A Richardson, Against The Stream: A History of the Trotskyist Movement in Britain, 1924-1938 (1986)
John Taylor Caldwell, Come Dungeons Dark: The Life and Times of Guy Aldred (Barr 1988)
M Shipway, Anti-Parliamentary Communism: The Movement for Workers’ Councils in Britain, 1917-1945 (1988)
C Tsuzuki, Tom Mann, 1856-1941: The Challenge of Labour (1991)
H Wicks, Keeping My Head: The Memoirs of a British Bolshevik (1992)
A Sisman, AJP Taylor: A Biography (1994)
B Winslow, Sylvia Pankhurst: Sexual Politics and Political Activism (1996)
B Hunter, Lifelong Apprenticeship: The Life and Times of A Revolutionary (1997)
M Davis, Sylvia Pankhurst: A Life in Radical Politics (1999)
K Burk, Troublemaker: The Life and History of AJP Taylor (2000)
III: Obituaries: Socialist Leader, 28 November 1953
Plebs, January 1954
Information and papers from JT Caldwell, A Campbell, T Crawford, J Greenway, A Richardson, J Quail, K Weller and C Wrigley
 


Writers Index




 Ritchie (Jock) Haston (1912-86): Trotskyist Leader and Workers’ Educator by John McIlroy 


John McIlroy
James Ritchie (Jock) Haston (1912-86): Trotskyist Leader and Workers’ Educator


Source: Keith Gilbert and David Howell (eds), Dictionary of Labour Biography, Volume 12, Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke, 2005, copyright © Professor John McIlroy. Reproduced here with the permission of Professor John McIlroy. Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers. 

Jock Haston was born in Edinburgh on 13 April 1912, the son of Joseph Haston, a cooper and brewery worker, and Henrietta Haston (née Ritchie). He was the second of ten children, five boys and five girls. His early life was one of poverty and harshness. The family lived in the teeming Victorian tenements around Easter Road, and four of his sisters died in infancy. His family were nominally Church of Scotland, but religion played little part in his upbringing. Rather he was inspired as a schoolboy by a teacher who had been a member of the Social-Democratic Federation and the British Socialist Party, and from the age of 12 he was involved in the activities of the Communist Party (CPGB), which had a cell in the street where his family lived. In 1927, when he was 15, he followed his older brother into the merchant navy. He subsequently joined the Seamen’s Minority Movement (SMM) and the CPGB.
Haston was a member of the short-lived Marine Section of the Transport and General Workers’ Union (TGWU), created by Ernest Bevin after the expulsion of Havelock Wilson’s National Union of Seamen (NUS) from the TUC in 1928 in retaliation for its funding of George Spencer’s ‘non-political’ breakaway union in the mines. He was involved in the strikes in 1929 – led by the TGWU and supported by the SMM – against the notorious ‘PC5’, a system that required the signature of an official of the NUS before seafarers could be employed on Shipping Federation vessels. It was a practice that provided Wilson’s union with a closed shop and the ability to victimise militants and supporters of bona fide independent trade unionism. Matters were only partly resolved in September 1930 with the readmission of the NUS to the TUC. Intermittently at sea, Haston also worked as a builder’s labourer, steeplejack and butler to Sir James Wood. Dismissed and blacklisted in 1932 during a dispute over shipboard conditions, he eventually found regular work on a Dutch line that flew the Panamanian flag and traded with Germany.
After the advent of National Socialism in January 1933, Haston was involved in carrying Communist literature to Hamburg. He was struck by the number of Russian ships in German ports and began to ponder the extent of trade between the Soviet Union and the Third Reich. He became aware of the disjunctures between the Comintern’s denunciations of the German regime and the accommodating stance the Russian state adopted towards the new order, and he began to reflect on the part that the Comintern’s prohibition of a united front between the Communists and the German Socialists had played in paving the way for Hitler. Laid up after an accident and with plenty of time to read, his doubts crystallised into disillusion. He recalled: ‘... it didn’t really make any impression until I was injured and, recovering in hospital, at home, I began to think the problem over and began to draw away from any active party work.’ (Haston, interview, 1978)
But like many others he was critical of the Labour Party and could see no revolutionary alternative to the CPGB. He left sea and married his first wife, Jessie Strachan, a young fellow Scot from Stonehaven, a fishing village south of Aberdeen. They had two children, Karl and Leonora, named for Marx and Trotsky. In 1934 the couple went to London to seek work and new experiences. An enhanced understanding of exploitation, duodenal ulcers and deep-vein thrombosis were enduring legacies of his years as a sailor. He still sold the Daily Worker. Unemployment and a series of casual jobs with limited supervision enabled him to read more extensively and more critically. For the first time he pored over basic Marxist texts such as Wage Labour and Capital and Value, Price and Profit, the volumes of the Little Lenin Library and Brockway’s Socialism at the Crossroads, as well as CPGB pamphlets and journals. Drifting away from the party and hungry for new ideas, he haunted the speakers’ pitches at Marble Arch and Hyde Park Corner. There he came into contact with the Socialist Party of Great Britain, whose speakers strongly impressed him. He could not answer their arguments: the CPGB had not taught him to think. Throughout 1935 he attended their meetings and began a more systematic examination of Marxism. In Charlie Lahr’s socialist bookshop in Red Lion Square, Holborn, he came across Trotskyist material from the United States. He formed a discussion group of some dozen people from the Paddington area and studied Trotsky’s articles on Germany and the American Socialist Workers’ Party’s New International. The ‘Marble Arch Group’, cemented by a shared critique of the CPGB’s turn to the Popular Front, which they perceived as class collaboration, graduated to discussions with the competing British Trotskyist organisations. In 1936 they joined the Militant Group, which under the leadership of Denzil Harber and Starkey Jackson was working inside the Labour Party.
As Haston found his feet in the organisation he was drawn to the contingent from the Workers’ Party of South Africa, led by Ralph Lee, who had arrived in London and joined the Militant Group in the summer of 1937. Lee (1908-1946) was significantly more politically experienced: he had joined the South African Communist Party as long ago as 1922 and had subsequently served as General Secretary of the Workers’ Party. He exercised a profound influence through his insistence on practical work and agitation among workers. Haston found this approach a refreshing contrast to the tendency of the British groups to emphasise propaganda work inside the structures of the Labour Party and to concentrate on debate among the already initiated. Together with his wife, Millie Kahn Lee, a talented administrator, and his precocious protégé, Ted Grant, who could write effectively, Lee had an immediate impact. He was coopted to the Executive but was quickly perceived by the leadership of the Militant Group as a threat to its dominance. Their circulation of a rumour that Lee had absconded with the strike funds of the South African Laundry Workers’ Union led to an exodus from the organisation. This included Haston and concluded in the formation in December 1937 of the Workers’ International League (WIL).
Rejecting propagandism and the traditional Trotskyist milieu, and rebuffing the unity initiatives mounted by the leadership of international Trotskyism, Haston and Lee determined to go it alone. They built up a small working-class base by direct recruitment and drawing in new members from the youth organisations of the Labour Party, the Independent Labour Party (ILP) and the CPGB. Working inside the Labour Party, they emphasised the need to approach factory workers on the basis of dialogue, listening to their problems and learning from them. Membership meetings were held in Haston’s house in Warwick Avenue, Paddington, where he installed an ancient printing machine. Their paper, Youth For Socialism, which replaced the duplicated Searchlight, heralded their aspirations. Despite condemnation by the founding conference of the Fourth International in September 1938, the outbreak of war found them in a position to compete with the official British section, the Revolutionary Socialist League (RSL).
Lee was the WIL’s guiding light, Haston his leading acolyte. In legend at least, Lee initiated the former steeplejack in the art of cat burglary. Haston certainly possessed an adventurous streak and felt less than reverence for the law. He rarely thought twice about commandeering private property in pursuit of the British revolution (Ratner to author, 23 April 2002). Matters were complicated in early 1939 when Millie Lee left her husband and began an affair with Haston. Upon the outbreak of war Haston headed a group of WIL cadres who moved to Dublin. They intended to establish an alternative headquarters and printing operation to pre-empt the expected outlawing of left-wing organisations in Britain, as heralded by a Scotland Yard raid on Haston’s house. They revived old Dublin Trotskyists such as Paddy Trench, worked in the Irish Labour Party with James Connolly’s daughter, Norah Connolly O'Brien, produced several issues of a paper, the Socialist Appeal, and made contact with the IRA.
In April 1940 Haston returned to London. His affair with Millie Lee continued, and Jessie Haston took their young children to Scotland. Lee, who was increasingly susceptible to illness, went home to South Africa. Haston filled the vacuum. Although they did not marry until 1953, Haston and Millie had become lifelong political partners. Born in Johannesburg on 19 January 1914, the daughter of immigrants, Meyer and Bertha Kahn who ran a millinery business, Millie had travelled to Palestine and lived in a kibbutz in the early 1930s before returning to South Africa. She had been attracted to Trotskyism by a friend of her mother, Fanny Klenerman, the wife of Frank Glass, a founding member of the Communist Party and South Africa’s first Trotskyist. Haston demonstrated an invaluable ability to orchestrate a collective leadership in which Millie provided the organising ballast, Andrew Scott and, more enduringly, Ted Grant elaborated jointly developed ideas in writing, and Haston provided direction, personnel management, recruitment skills and increasingly powerful platform oratory.
From the commencement of hostilities until the spring of 1940 the WIL produced a daily Workers’ Diary, which was duplicated and circulated to all members and contacts. In 1941 Youth For Socialism was replaced by the monthly, eventually bi-monthly, Socialist Appeal. A journal, Workers’ International News, was devoted to theory, albeit initially in the form of Trotsky’s writings. It carried the first material on the WIL’s Proletarian Military Policy. Haston argued that the war was being fought between competing imperialisms, and that sustained struggle by workers against British imperialism would encourage German workers to struggle against Hitler. From late 1940 he emphasised, against pacifist calls to ‘Stop the War’, the need to turn the war into a workers’ war against both democratic imperialism and fascism. Socialists should join up or work in the factories, campaigning for trade-union rights in the forces, the election of officers and their training by the unions, the creation of a democratic workers’ militia instead of the Home Guard, and workers’ control of war production. He had little time for conscientious objectors, as illustrated by the WIL’s treatment of the man who was to become, with T Dan Smith, its most famous member, the composer Michael Tippett, who was expelled for pacifism in 1940. Haston urged socialists to crusade for Labour to end the coalition and electoral truce, and to push for power on the basis of the nationalisation of industry under workers’ control. This position, he insisted, was an essential means of recognising the vitality and validity of the workers’ opposition to fascism and their natural desire to defend their families and freedom. But as he stressed in debates inside the group, opposition to capitalism at home should not be subordinated to fighting fascism abroad (Haston, 1941).
Haston heard about the German invasion of the USSR when he was serving a jail sentence of two months’ hard labour for using a National Registration Identity Card in the name of JF Gloster, which he had procured in Eire to enable his return from Dublin the previous year. He had given his own papers to a comrade who was threatened with call-up: Haston was registered as Medical Grade 4 and exempt from the draft because of his general health problems. Moreover, as the Ministry of Labour ruefully acknowledged, he had ingeniously and persistently circumvented various attempts to find him industrial work. He believed that in order to keep the organisation functioning it was necessary to preserve the leading cadres from the rigours of the forces and the factory. Operation Barbarossa, he urged, changed nothing. The best way for British workers to defend the USSR was to defend their own class and its conditions. They should make every effort to gain control over the workplace and the war machine. Policies of workers’ control should be counterposed to the CPGB’s support for joint production committees and should be raised within them.
The CPGB’s support for the Churchill government and the status quo in industry and its antagonism to strikes, provided the WIL with an opportunity to attract a small group of militant trade unionists who were disillusioned with the party and the conduct of the war on the home front. The Royal Ordnance Factories provide a good example of the potential of this – and its limits. In 1940 Haston recruited Bill Elliott, a leading shop steward in the Enfield factory, and built a small group around him. This provided an avenue into the Nottingham factory, where the WIL enrolled John Pemberton (the engineering union convenor), Claude Bartholomew (the branch president and secretary of the ROF stewards’ combine committee) and Eric Nightingale (the branch chair). From this base they gained some purchase in the Dalmuir plant and an influential position in the shop stewards’ combine. But they were never able to dominate it. The stay-in strike at Nottingham in April 1942 over the transfer of workers demonstrated the mobilising effect of demands for workers’ control over management decisions. The partnership provided the WIL with an understanding of the way in which shop stewards and union members were thinking. Subsequent experience in the Nottingham factory suggested that high output and increased wages and improved conditions could be simultaneously attained through union control over production, rather than subordination of the union and its members to management. And it suggested to Haston that the WIL could achieve a decisive influence over important sections of industrial workers.
But the Nottingham success was never emulated. From 1941, when 4000 women struck over the victimisation of a WIL supporter at Rolls-Royce in Glasgow, the organisation ‘intervened in all major industrial disputes and was more successful than any other party in its attempt to fill the vacuum left by the Communists’ (Upham, 1980, 335). Significant recruitment and decisive influence were different and more difficult matters. Workers appreciated the WIL’s energetic and efficient support of their struggles, but they remained at a distance from its revolutionary politics. In the Vickers dispute at Barrow in the summer of 1943, the stewards removed local CPGB activists from the strike committee. While they welcomed the WIL industrial organiser, Roy Tearse, as an adviser, they made it very clear that this was on the basis of the tactical and technical expertise he could provide in support of their objectives, not his Trotskyism. Although the local CPGB reported that the Socialist Appeal enjoyed ‘a mass sale’ in Barrow, the WIL could only enrol a handful of temporary adherents.
Haston believed, with some justification, that recruitment from the CPGB provided the best opportunity for growth, although his expectation that the real communists would displace His Majesty’s Communist Party would prove exaggerated. By 1941, Labour Party activity had significantly declined and advising potential recruits to the WIL to join their local Labour Party was becoming counterproductive. Haston pushed the group towards the CPGB. In 1942 membership passed the 300 mark and sales of the Socialist Appeal amounted to as many as 12,000 copies an issue. This far exceeded the performance of earlier Trotskyist groups, but it was not without problems. The WIL’s increasingly high profile drew fire from the press, the authorities and the CPGB. There was sensational coverage of its activities in the Daily Mail and Sunday Dispatch. In April 1942 questions were asked in the House of Commons about suppressing the Socialist Appeal, and it is clear from Home Office papers and CPGB archives that, as well as intercepting mail and phone-tapping, Special Branch and Stalinist informers were reporting regularly on its internal affairs. The Secret Service had two agents inside the WIL between 1942 and 1944, and five provincial police forces infiltrated local branches (PRO, KV4/56). Moreover members were subject to intimidation and violence from CPGB activists incited by demagogy by their leaders. JR Campbell excoriated the Trotskyists as ‘loathsome political degenerates’ and ‘agents of the Gestapo’. William Wainwright urged workers who encountered a Trotskyist to ‘Treat him as you would an open Nazi’, and Trotskyists, including Haston, were assaulted in London, Liverpool, Birmingham and Bristol (Campbell, 1941; Wainwright, 1942).
Abandoning his earlier insistence on the necessity of working within established union structures rather than creating malleable paper organisations, Haston became an advocate of the Militant Workers’ Federation (MWF), a joint endeavour with ILP activists and anarchist groups that superseded the more shadowy Committee to Coordinate Militant Trade-Union Activity. It attracted some support in Barrow, Nottingham, the Glasgow industrial belt and the London engineering factories, where the WIL had begun to pick up support among active individuals rather than groups of workers, but it never constituted a viable national rank-and-file movement or posed a real challenge to the CPGB’s Shop Stewards’ National Council.
The growth of the WIL outstripped that of the RSL and changed Haston’s mind about unity with it. He was a prime mover in the fusion of the two groups. On the formation in March 1944 of the Revolutionary Communist Party (RCP) as the British section of the Fourth International, he was elected its first and only General Secretary. The rejection of substantial entry work and the appellation of the new organisation, which he chose against some opposition, affirmed his optimistic view that wartime success would persist. His faith in the open party tactic and his belief that the RCP could outflank the official Communists and emerge as a new British Bolshevik organisation overlooked hard facts. The RCP remained a propaganda group that directed the endeavours of no significant section of the working class. Nevertheless, within weeks of the founding conference, the RCP would be in the headlines and Haston in jail.
The engineering apprentices’ strike, which began on 28 March in the North-East of England, West Yorkshire and Glasgow, was part of a small wave of militancy, focused on the mines, that erupted in the spring of 1944 as the Allies prepared the second front and war weariness and confidence in victory took hold. The RCP had established close links with Bill Davy, a leader of the Tyneside Engineering Apprentices’ Guild, an unofficial body that campaigned against young engineers being drafted into the mines under the ballot scheme introduced by Ernest Bevin, the Minister of Labour. Davy had been expelled from the Young Communist League for his militant stance. While they counselled against the stoppage, Haston, Tearse and local members, notably Ann Keen and Heaton Lee, had been advising the apprentices on strategy. Amid a virulent press campaign, the Special Branch and police raided the RCP headquarters in London and houses in London, Nottingham, Newcastle and Glasgow on 5 and 6 April, questioning members and removing documents. A Daily Mail correspondent, Harry Procter, confronted Haston – ‘a 32-year-old, wiry little Scotsman who describes himself as the National Organiser of the Fourth International’ – in the RCP’s Kings Cross office, where he was photographed sitting under a large painting of Trotsky. Procter, who obviously believed he had stumbled into a John Buchan melodrama, ‘put to him the question: “Where does your money come from?” Haston responded: “Tell your readers Hitler drops me the money in packets when he raids London."’ (Daily Mail, 6 April 1944)
Keen and Lee were arrested two days later and Tearse on 11 April. Jimmy Maxton moved an emergency resolution at the ILP annual conference in Leeds condemning the arrests. Bevin took advantage of the furore to introduce the draft of a new Regulation 1AA, which provided for the prosecution, with a penalty of up to five years’ penal servitude, of anyone declaring, instigating or participating in a strike among workers in essential services. Home Secretary Herbert Morrison’s memorandum on the Trotskyist movement, which was laid before the War Cabinet on 13 April, was on the whole a sober document. It noted that while the RCP had influence in some areas and its members had been involved in strikes in Barrow, Glasgow and the Yorkshire mines, overall support for it remained slight. Morrison concluded that the RCP’s relative success lay in the fact that it was providing one of the few outlets for discontent, but observed presciently that such favourable circumstances were unlikely to continue (Cab 66/49, WP (44) 202, 13 April 1944).
When a warrant was issued for Haston’s arrest he travelled to Tyneside to meet the apprentices, and then to Edinburgh, where he turned himself into the Scottish CID on 26 April in the hope of improving his prospect of bail. He was brought before the Newcastle magistrates’ court, committed for trial and remanded in custody for 21 days. He and his comrades were charged under the 1875 Conspiracy and Protection of Property Act and the 1927 Trade Disputes and Trade Unions Act, which Bevin had so passionately denounced less than two decades earlier. They were charged with conspiring together to act in furtherance of a strike that was illegal under Section 1 (2) of the 1927 Act, and with individually acting in furtherance of this strike. They were also charged with aiding and abetting the commission of an illegal strike. Haston was belatedly granted bail on 9 May 1944. The prisoners were defended by the ILP and Commonwealth, and supported in the House of Commons by Aneurin Bevan. Bevan risked withdrawal of the party whip. He cited ‘telegrams from shop stewards’ committees all over the country’ declaring solidarity with ‘these poor people’, and condemned the press and ‘this venal government’. They were attacked by the CPGB fellow-traveller and supporter of civil liberties, DN Pritt, who demanded they should be interned under Regulation 18B, which had been used against the recently released Sir Oswald Mosley and other members of the British Union of Fascists (Hansard, 28 April 1944, column 1068 for Bevan, column 1107 for Pritt). In the CPGB press, Campbell vindictively claimed of Haston, ‘all this man ever did in the working-class movement in his native city could be put on the back of a penny stamp’ (Daily Worker, 10 April 1944). The National Council for Civil Liberties, in which CPGB influence was strong, refused to aid the prisoners.
The trial at the Newcastle Summer Assizes began on 12 May. Haston was enthused by the formation of an Anti-Labour Laws Victims’ Defence Committee. It involved the ILP MPs, Commonwealth MPs and nine Labour Party MPs, including Bevan and SO Davies, although only the ILP’s MPs Maxton and John McGovern appear to have played an active part. The defendants scored a propaganda triumph when they subpoenaed Bevin to give evidence, while witnesses such as Tom Trewartha, the convenor from Vickers Barrow, and the boys themselves, who were called by the prosecution, gave evidence that was largely favourable to the prisoners. The chief police witness described Haston as ‘the brains behind the Trotskyist movement’ (Manchester Guardian, 20 June 1944). Moreover the Trotskyists were able to use the dock as a platform to explain their politics. Mr Justice Cassels’ summing up to the jury on 19 June was hostile. Nonetheless the defendants were found not guilty on the charges of conspiracy, but they were convicted of aiding and abetting others in the furtherance of an illegal strike and acting in furtherance of an illegal strike. Portrayed by the judge as a dupe of the men, Keen received only 13 days in prison. Of the others Cassels remarked, ‘they were dangerous persons to be allowed their liberty at such a time’. Tearse and Lee were sentenced to 12 months and Haston to six months in Durham gaol. Asked by the judge if he had anything further to say, Haston replied: ‘My Lord, I hope that I have served my class as well as you have served yours here.’ (Daily Mail, 20 June 1944; The Times, 20 June 1944)
An appeal was lodged but the court refused bail, despite Maxton and McGovern offering to stand surety. In gaol Haston – who had registered his religion as ‘dialectical materialist’ and was duly listed with the ‘C of Es’ and ‘RCs’ as a ‘DM’ – studied labour law. The case argued before the Court of Criminal Appeal on 24 August 1944 proved successful. The court upheld the defence’s argument that to perform an act in furtherance of a strike presupposes the prior existence of a strike. Nothing that took place before the strike’s commencement on 28 March, including the RCP members’ acts of advice and preparation, could be in furtherance of a strike that did not yet exist. Most students of labour law had understood this to be the position since the landmark case of Conway v Wade in 1909. Mr Justice Cassels, however, had misunderstood the law and the trial jury’s verdict was struck down.
After his release in September 1944, Haston spoke at meetings across the country with Sidney Silverman MP, Rhys Davies MP and Maxton. The trial had provided the RCP with invaluable publicity and they were now able to recruit a small group of disillusioned Communists such as Davy, Alec Riach (an Invergordon mutineer, now deputy convenor at the Dalmuir ordnance factory) and the well-known Welsh miner and Spanish Civil War veteran, Bob Condon. There was no breakthrough but the episode was regarded as a triumph and one that raised the question of the RCP mounting an electoral intervention – another first for the British Trotskyists. An opportunity arose with the death in late 1944 of Sir William Jenkins, Labour MP for Neath.
Initially Haston favoured the idea of supporting an ILP candidate in the by-election. He suggested that this should be Trevor James, a popular miners’ agent who opposed the CPGB’s industrial stance. This failed to materialise, so in January 1945 the RCP decided that Haston himself should stand as their candidate. The pit-boy strikes of 1942-43 in West Wales and the stoppages over the Porter Award to miners in March 1944, suggested that Neath, a Labour stronghold, offered fertile terrain. While the RCP had few supporters in South Wales and John Lawrence had only recently been appointed as a full-time organiser, the Anti-Labour Laws Committee had attracted some support in Merthyr and Swansea. The by-election was seen as a potential short cut to building a base in a class-conscious area. Haston later recollected that he had been convinced he would garner no more than 400 votes. Such prudence was in order. In Labour’s DJ Williams, a long-time, respected activist in the South Wales Miners’ Federation, the RCP faced a powerful opponent. Williams – a former anthracite miner who had studied both at Ruskin and at the Central Labour College, a former organiser of the National Council Of Labour Colleges (NCLC) and the author of the pioneering Capitalist Combination in the Coal Industry (1924) – was at least as well versed in Marxism as Haston and just as disdainful of Stalinism. He would subsequently exercise an enduring influence on the younger man’s future political development. By the time the contest occurred on 15 May 1945, the war in Europe was over, the coalition was in question, and a general election and a new political configuration were on the immediate agenda. Haston’s programme had lost much of its earlier appeal.
In the event, the campaign largely resolved itself into a factional fight between Trotskyists and Stalinists. Jack Maunder, the leader of the West Wales CPGB, asserted with an uncertain grasp of jurisprudence that the Moscow Trials had unmasked the real nature of the Trotskyists. Alun Thomas, soon to become Secretary of the CPGB in South Wales, claimed: ‘They are a greater menace and far more dangerous than a Fascist paratrooper.’ (Thomas, 1945, 2) Haston responded with a detailed critique of the CPGB’s twists and turns since the Hitler-Stalin pact and its unconditional commitment to war production and the Coalition. He took up the issue of the Moscow Trials and quoted extensively from the report of the Dewey Commission, which had exonerated Trotsky. He was particularly scathing about the CPGB’s attempt to implicate German workers in war guilt. The RCP, in contrast, had attempted to establish fraternal links with German prisoners of war in Britain. He impressed many who listened to him. Bill Gregory, the Workers’ Educational Association organiser and ILP activist, remembered Haston’s  appeal to the workers who attended his classes: ‘Jock was a very able man... bloody magnificent speaker... most Communists hadn’t read,... not scholarly people. But this fellow Jock and people like him, they had really read it, they knew it.’ (McHugh and Ripley, 1981, 73-74) However, Gregory concluded, loyalty to Labour was such that admiration was rarely translated into a vote for the RCP. 
Haston held 70 meetings across the constituency, while the RCP distributed more than 100,000 leaflets and sold 7500 of an election issue of the Socialist Appeal. A victory of sorts came when the CPGB – which had resolutely refused to debate with the RCP, reiterating ‘A vote for Haston is a vote for Hitler’ – backed down. In an eve-of-poll rally he traded his by now well-choreographed verbal offence and riposte with Alun Thomas. Despite the mobilisation of the entire RCP, the party lost its deposit in a sobering verdict. With the voters’ emphatic endorsement of Labour, the poll constituted a warning for the future. Moreover the campaign had brought the RCP fewer than 20 recruits. Branches were established in Neath and Pontypridd, but the only transient industrial gain in a landscape dominated by the CPGB was a small group of anthracite miners, headed by Johnny Crown Jones, in indomitable Gwaun-Cae-Gurwen.
Neath by-election, 15 May 1945: electorate – 67,083, turnout – 58.0 per cent
DJ Williams (Labour) – 30,847 (79.2 per cent)
WI Samuel (Plaid Cymru) – 6,290 (16.2 per cent)
JR Haston (Revolutionary Communist Party) – 1,781 (4.6 per cent)
Majority: 24,557 (63.0 per cent)
Haston was 33 years of age at the end of the war. He was weathered, matured and not a little tired. He had spent six years in incessant activity, working full-time and at full stretch. He had little private life and less money: he was paid £1 a week at the start of the war and 30 shillings at its conclusion. He divided his time between the WIL centre, a loft in Northdown Street, Kings Cross, and, after 1944, the RCP headquarters at 256 Harrow Road, Paddington (he and Millie had a flat nearby in Marylands Road) and criss-crossing the country on party business in his battered porkpie hat. He had become an effective organiser. Unlike other British Trotskyist leaders, he was a skilled manager of people: he listened to and he took pains with the problems of the party’s members, and he favoured internal consensus and conciliation, although, as the record of expulsions from the WIL and the RCP attests, he still ran a tight ship. He was a slight, dark, handsome figure of about five foot eight inches in height. He resembled the contemporary Scottish film actor John Gregson, or even the young James Mason, his head thickly crowned with wavy black hair. He was a personable, gregarious and humorous man: he liked to be liked. He was not a naturally gifted speaker and he always had to prepare well, but he was an increasingly impressive one. Thus far he had exhibited little originality as a theorist: one young RCP member later recalled that Haston’s lectures on dialectics had drawn heavily on TA Jackson’s book on the subject. And he remained a Leninist, albeit a humane, pragmatic one:
I can remember once at an informal meeting at the Centre suggesting to Haston that an advanced working class, such as we had in this country, would, following a revolution, throw up its own organisation and leadership. Haston, who was always well-disposed towards me as I was a young comrade and majority supporter, stiffened, his face angry and he shut me up with a few sarcastic words. I was depriving him of his dream. (S Leslie to author, 5 March 1996)
Haston believed that the end of the war would provoke a capitalist crisis, substantial working-class radicalisation and a debilitated Stalinism (RCP Conference Decisions, 1945). He was wrong on all counts. Until 1945, he later remembered, ‘the theoretical bag and baggage that we had wasn’t very great, we were mainly followers rather than initiators, you know, of the broad Trotskyist view’ (interview, 1978). The WIL had adopted even the distinctive Proletarian Military Policy from Trotsky and the American Socialist Workers’ Party (SWP). The Trotskyist point of view, however, congealed into dogma in a postwar world that stubbornly refused to acknowledge Trotsky’s prewar prognostications. Haston’s virtue, in the face of this failure of expectations, was that he knew he had been wrong. Conceiving empiricism as fundamental to Marxist theory, the working-class activist and organiser turned to analysing and understanding the changing world, and interpreting it for his members.
With Ted Grant and others he read, studied and argued. In 1946 he declared, against the leadership of the Fourth International, that British capitalism was entering a boom, albeit a temporary one, and there would be a period of decline in the class struggle (Haston, 1946; Workers International News, December 1946). He faced the fact that, in contrast to what he had believed earlier, the Labour government was delivering significant reforms in nationalisation, social welfare and decolonisation, and concluded that it was taking some steps towards socialism, albeit in a halting, uneven and unsatisfactory fashion. Moreover, he was forced to accept that far from the war undermining Stalinism, its conquests in Eastern Europe and the surge forward of the French and Italian parties had strengthened it. He judged that there was an immediate need to develop Trotsky’s thinking. At first he tended towards the view that Russia had become a state capitalist formation, a notion he had fleetingly embraced in the 1930s. By 1947 he had decided that if, as Trotsky had judged, Russia was a degenerated workers’ state because of its statified property relations, then the European satellites it was recasting in its own image must, in all logic, be bureaucratically deformed workers’ states (Haston, 1946).
Haston was a member of the Fourth International Executive and aired these views at its meetings in Paris. He made a minimal impact. The leadership – Michel Pablo, Ernest Mandel and Pierre Frank – and the power behind the throne – James P Cannon, the SWP leader – maintained that capitalism was in deep crisis. They religiously affirmed the revolutionary nature of the period and the trauma and counter-revolutionary essence of Stalinism. This ensured, a priori, that the East European satellites remained capitalist. For Haston, ‘it was a very disillusioning experience. It was disillusioning because they couldn’t recognise reality... In every major situation on which there was a debate, there was a complete failure to look at the facts. On a whole range of questions we were on collision course.’ (Interview, 1978)
Haston incurred the enmity of the Paris-based leadership. Cannon had never forgiven his refusal to bring the WIL into the International. This hostility was reaffirmed when Haston supported Albert Goldman and Felix Morrow, Cannon’s antagonists in the SWP, who also insisted on rethinking Trotskyist politics. By 1947 he had reluctantly concluded that the International leaders were determined to depose him as leader of the RCP and replace him with Gerry Healy, who led a minority faction in the party that staunchly adhered to the International’s perspective. The strongest point in their case was their demand that the RCP should direct the major part of its membership to conduct entry work in the Labour Party. While the rationale for this project – impending economic crisis and a turn towards revolution inside Labour’s ranks – was unsustainable, so too, it increasingly appeared, was the maintenance of an independent party.
The RCP had entered 1945 with more than 500 members. By 1947 it had fewer than 300. With the absence of significant strikes, sustained support among the working class for Labour’s reforms and the CPGB’s turn to the left in response to the Cold War, the future seemed bleak. Despite intense activity, the RCP made no gains from the biggest strike of the period: the 1945 stoppage on the docks. It recruited key leaders of the 1946 building workers’ campaign but could not hold them. In 1947 the Militant Workers’ Federation finally faded away. However, there were still imaginative campaigns. For example, Haston wrote to Attlee requesting that the RCP be allowed to instruct counsel to interrogate the Nazis on trial in Nuremburg about their alleged links with Trotsky. But the initiative, which attracted the support of HG Wells, was unsuccessful. The handful of rich supporters who had donated generously to the RCP became more parsimonious. The Socialist Appeal appeared monthly instead of fortnightly and the number of full-time workers was reduced from 16 to six. Yet Haston’s ability to face the facts stopped short of facing the fact that the basis for an open party did not exist.
Haston was enough of a pragmatist to accept the Fourth International’s decision to split the RCP in September 1947 so that the Healy minority could enter the Labour Party. He felt that this was a lesser evil than continued factional conflict, but the split failed to arrest the decline of the RCP. Rather it exacerbated the RCP’s isolation in the Fourth International. At the 1948 World Congress he again clashed with the International leadership over Eastern Europe. Afterwards he began to think through the practical consequences of his theorising. If Stalinism, which he had deemed to be counter-revolutionary, could overturn capitalism and create workers’ states, whatever their bureaucratic deformations, then the basis for an independent revolutionary party and Trotskyist International was at least questionable. But his support for the view that the Stalinists’ adoption of the Russian model for the Czechoslovak economy had created a workers’ state after the coup of April 1948 drew an angry response from Czechoslovak Trotskyists, who were suffering under the new despotic regime, and deepened his uncertainty. Their criticism turned his thoughts towards the issue of democracy and his growing belief that Labour was democratically ‘doing the job’ in Britain. Despite political differences, his friendship with DJ Williams and the dissident American Trotskyist, Max Shachtman – whose overtures to the Fourth International had been rejected at the 1948 Congress and who now emphasised the importance of the Labour Party – strengthened his heretical inclinations, his turn to left-wing social democracy and his distance from the leaders of global Trotskyism.
At some point in 1948 those close to him sensed that he had given up on the Fourth International and the RCP. He needed respite from the attritional task of holding the RCP together, and was weary after a decade of relentless activity and factionalism. He still attended Fourth International meetings but increasingly sat shrouded in silence. He wanted to escape, but felt a responsibility to his past and to those he had guided, to whom he referred as his younger brothers and sisters. The RCP membership was now below the 150 mark; demoralisation and internal differences were deepening. When his proposal to move towards entry into the Labour Party as a means of holding the group together was rejected by the majority of the leadership, he threatened to resign as General Secretary, although he still declined to break openly with Trotskyism. After a prolonged debate, the RCP was dissolved in August 1949 on the basis that its members would join Healy’s ‘Club’ in the Labour Party. Haston became a member of the Club’s Executive.
He left the entrist group in February 1950, although it was some three months before he committed to writing the reasons for his resignation. His statement criticised the ideological collapse of the Fourth International, its failure to analyse postwar developments and its retreat into dogma. The debate on Yugoslavia, transformed in Mandel’s analysis in a matter of months from capitalism to a workers’ state on the basis of Tito’s break with Stalin, had been the last straw: the International and its British section were making significant concessions to Stalinism. Haston now believed that he had been mistaken to exclude parliament as a vehicle for socialist advance and to dismiss the idea that the Labour Party could be remade by socialists. This was in the realm of the possible, as was the alternative – that a socialist current would split the party. Revolutionaries, he now believed, should work within the Labour Party to test out these possibilities, not as a secret group but as an open, organic part of the left. He now wanted to ‘devote myself to doing straightforward, simple socialist traditional teaching and activity in the movement’ (Haston, 1950). He was ritualistically expelled by the leadership of the ‘Club’, and his ‘shameful desertion’ was denounced by the Executive of the Fourth International. Yet he later expressed few regrets about his years in the Trotskyist movement:
... they were the only people who established the falsehood of the Moscow Trials and the degeneration of the Russian leadership and the Communist International... I had great happiness, I thought that what I was doing was the right thing and I did it to the best of my ability... I learned to some degree how to swim against the stream, how to live in a minority situation, and, I think, how to handle people under very difficult circumstances. I learned something about internationalism. I learned how to read, how to develop ideas and how to defend ideas. (Interview, 1978)
For at least some of his former comrades, his contribution deserved enduring acknowledgement, despite his defection: ‘Haston was a giant of a man. I have no qualms about saying this, despite his later abandonment of Trotskyism. He had without doubt tremendous qualities.’ (Grant, 2002, 182) DJ Williams nurtured his ideas and encouraged him to apply for a full-time post with the NCLC, for which he had taken classes. Not surprisingly he got the worst of both worlds. Healy insisted that his former comrades break off not only all political but also all personal relations with him, announcing: ‘Haston has to be driven out of the labour movement and especially out of the National Council of Labour Colleges.’ (Haston, 1950) But the problem was getting into the movement, for, not unnaturally, he was suspected as an entrist. He acted as a full-time propagandist for the Labour Party in Acton during the 1950 general election. But his application for Labour Party membership in Paddington was referred upwards and came before the National Executive twice – in July 1949 and February 1951 – before he was finally admitted. The Labour College leaders, in their turn, ‘feared the Labour Party might take strong exception to his gaining access to party and trade-union branches under the flag of the NCLC. It was left to JPM Millar [NCLC General Secretary] therefore to make two visits to AL Williams [Labour Party National Agent] in order to convince him that Haston was a genuine convert.’ (Millar, 1979, 180) Unsuccessful in his initial application for an NCLC organiser’s post, he was appointed an honorary organising tutor in recognition of the number of classes he was taking. It was only in the summer of 1951 that he became the organiser for the NCLC’s London (South) Division.
Haston spent the next 12 years working for the NCLC in what was to prove its terminal decline. He became close to its General Secretary, JPM Millar. He was soon his trusted adviser, initially on the CPGB, Millar’s bête noir, but increasingly on the labour movement and NCLC policy in general. By the 1960s he had emerged as primes inter pares among the staff. He organised and taught evening classes and day, weekend and summer schools for Labour Party and union branches, shop stewards’ committees and the Cooperative movement across South London, Surrey, Sussex and Kent. Classes in Marxism were in decline: the tendency now was to teach the skills required by the movement’s functionaries and shop stewards. He became a gifted workers’ educator. He was a good listener who identified with trade unionists and understood their difficulties (Ward, 1986). His past helped in more ways than one. Locked in his room by boisterous students at a residential school for engineering apprentices, the former steeplejack and cat burglar clambered out of the window and descended three storeys down the drainpipe to greet his startled charges at breakfast (Millar, 1979, 203). His attitude towards education was ecumenical and he used tutors from all wings of the movement. He remained on good terms with many of his former comrades and indulged their current political preoccupations by hiring them to teach classes, although some recalled with a certain bitterness that ‘Haston remained friendly and affable but it was the friendliness of a paternalist cynic’ (Levy, 1996, 186).
He briefly nursed parliamentary ambitions. He was admitted to the ‘B’ list of potential Labour Party candidates but never took matters further (Labour Party Executive Minutes, 14 December 1955). He experienced periodic bouts of ill health: in 1955 he was hospitalised after an internal haemorrhage. Shaking off his past, he moved from Paddington to Clapham, where he held open house for comrades old and new. He moved from the left to the right of the movement, always justifying his position theoretically and preserving an intransigent anti-Stalinism at the centre of his concerns. He taught classes for the Electrical Trades Union (ETU) and took a close and persistent interest in the struggle of the group under John Byrne and Les Cannon against Communist control and corruption in the union, viewing it as a necessary complement to the new phase of the struggle against Stalinism that had opened in 1956. He was unhappy about the planned takeover of the NCLC by the TUC Education Department in 1964. He could not envisage himself being comfortable within the cramped constraints that Congress House placed on its employees. He chose to accept the offer of a post as Education Officer with the ETU, where he did feel at home. He wrote to Millar:
It gives me no pleasure to tender my resignation. I owe a great deal to the NCLC and to the Executive for appointing me at a difficult stage in my political evolution. It gave me a wonderful opportunity of turning my back on the sectarian battles and going into straightforward socialist educational work. During the last twelve years I have learned a great deal in the process of teaching others. (Plebs, March 1964, 69)
He started work with the ETU in March 1964. The new leaders, Cannon and Frank Chapple, followed their CPGB predecessors in emphasising the importance of education as an arm of union policy and a weapon in committing activists to the apparatus. In the classrooms of the ETU College in Esher, Surrey, he trained thousands of shop stewards in the theory and technique of collaborating with management, and enthusiastically elaborated the details of ETU policy and collective agreements. He became an expert in management techniques, a powerful advocate of the union left’s pet hate, the ‘productivity deals’ of the 1960s and early 1970s, and a pioneer of joint courses for managers and union representatives. He invoked ‘the rule of law’ against militants who urged direct action against anti-union legislation and incomes policies. He placated the bosses he had once savaged: ‘I'm a socialist but we have a common interest to see the job is run efficiently.’ (British Industry Week, 30 October 1967)
His genuine convictions were lubricated by the exciting sense that he could now exercise real influence and get at least small things done, as well as the undoubted pleasure he took from rubbing shoulders with the power brokers of the labour movement. He became a great raconteur and the embroidered events of his youth were re-assembled as audacious adventures, a picaresque prelude to the safe harbour of the right wing of the Labour Party. He savoured a cigar and enjoyed a drink. He was a keen amateur carpenter. He was portly now, and greying, with bushy black eyebrows and a taste for good living. His former comrades critically registered how far he had travelled from his roots in working-class Edinburgh and the WIL loft in Kings Cross (Cliff, 1970, 166). The ETU’s historian recorded with affection and admiration: ‘He was an inspirational teacher who applied his charm and offered his Glenfiddich whisky to all-comers.’ (Lloyd, 1990, 529)
There was one last factional battle. In the early 1970s he grew critical of what he saw as the right-wing fundamentalism and conservatism of the now entrenched ETU leadership, as well as their increasingly cavalier attitude towards democracy. He was friendly with Mark Young, who possessed an impeccable anti-Communist record and was a longstanding member of the leadership faction. But Young now embraced a modernising, more democratic agenda for the union, including the election of all officials. Haston shared Young’s thinking and campaigned for him in his at times acrimonious contest with Frank Chapple for the post of General Secretary.
When Young was heavily defeated and left the union, Haston was so disappointed that he resigned his post in October 1972. Thereafter he worked for the General and Municipal Workers Union – which leant to the right but was more in the trade-union mainstream than the ETU – at its training college in Woodstock, outside London. He retired in 1978 but continued to offer his services as a management consultant.
On 9 June 1986 Jock Haston died of cancer after a painful illness. He was a charismatic figure and a shrewd, probing thinker. His dedication to the labour movement was lifelong and unquestionable. Although he was almost completely self-educated, one Labour Party veteran who knew him in the 1940s recalled him as singularly impressive and believed he was destined ‘to develop into one of the major Marxist thinkers of Europe’ (Derer, 1982). That promise was never fulfilled, but his analysis of the political landscape of the late 1940s and early 1950s was certainly superior to that of Mandel and Pablo, let alone the sterile ideologists of Stalinism. He was without doubt ‘a very impressive worker intellectual’ (Cliff, 2000, 51) in the real and sometimes prosaic sense of the term. Rather than proceeding dogmatically and relying on the conclusions of others, he learned to think for himself. In collaboration with his comrades, notably Grant, he attempted to understand the world afresh, utilising all the limited tools at his disposal. As a Trotskyist he was a beneficiary of the distinctive conditions of the 1939-45 war, and thereafter a victim of the successful restructuring of capitalism. He followed the pattern of the times, moving from left to right in tempo with the waning of the socialist impulse and the long postwar boom. His political transformation owed more to conviction than hardening of the arteries. Unlike some others on the right of the movement, in the 1960s and 1970s he still believed in progress towards a socialist society. However, he increasingly came to perceive the left, whose interests he had relentlessly pursued with adamantine conviction in the first part of his life, as a barrier to this objective.
Writings
Articles in Youth For Socialism, Socialist Appeal, Workers’ International News and Plebs
Sources
I: MSS 
Haston Papers, University of Hull
Deane Papers, Harber Papers, MRC, University of Warwick
Public Record Office, Cab 66/49, WP 44/202, 13 April 1944, War Cabinet, The Trotskyist Movement in Great Britain, Memorandum by the Home Secretary; Public Record Office, KV4/56, The Trotskyist Movement, 1945
Labour Party, Minutes of the National Executive Committee, NMLH, Manchester
‘A Step Towards Capitulation’, WIL Internal Bulletin, 21 March 1941 (in Haston Papers)
‘The Military Policy As Applied to the Home Guard’, WIL Internal Bulletin, 27 April 1941 (in Haston Papers)
‘Dear Comrades’, 10 June 1950 (in author’s possession)
Jock Haston and Millie Haston, interview with A Richardson, 30 April 1978 (in author’s possession)
S Booton, ‘Wartime Trotskyists’, unpublished mimeo, nd (in author’s possession)
I Hunter, ‘The Ten Years for the Locust Reconsidered: The Legacy of the RCP’, unpublished mimeo, 1981 (in author’s possession)
Vladimir Derer, interview with J-P Steffen, 1982 (in author’s possession)
Frank Ward, interview with author, 12 December 1986
Sheila Leslie, correspondence with author, 1996, 2002
Harry Ratner, correspondence with author, 2002 
II: Newspapers and Periodicals
Socialist Appeal, 1941-49
Workers’ International News, 1938-47
Plebs, 1949-64
Hansard, Fifth series, Volume 399 (1944)
III: Books and Articles
JR Campbell, ‘How Leftism Helps Hitler’, Labour Monthly, December 1941
W Wainwright, Clear Out Hitler’s Agents! (1942)
Workers’ International League, Clear Out the Bosses’ Agents! (1942)
Workers’ International League, The Communist Party and The War – Look at Their Record! (1942)
Anti-Labour Laws Victims’ Defence Committee, A Victory for Labour! The Case of Jock Haston, Roy Tearse, Heaton Lee and Ann Keen (1944)
A Thomas, Trounce the Trotskyists (1945)
Revolutionary Communist Policy: RCP Conference Decisions (1945)
‘The Dual Character of the USSR: Marxism Versus Phrasemongering’, in RCP Conference Documents, 1946 (1946)
‘Fourth International World Conference Discussion Material: Proposed Line of Amendment of the RCP (British Section)’, Workers’ International News, November-December 1946
J Higgins, ‘Ten Years for the Locust’, International Socialism, 14 (1963)
‘Interview’, British Industry Week, 3 October 1967
T Cliff, The Employers’ Offensive (1970)
JP Cannon, Speeches to the Party (New York, 1973)
P Jenkins, Where Trotskyism Got Lost (Nottingham, nd [1977]
JPM Millar, The Labour College Movement (1979)
J McHugh and B Ripley, ‘The Neath By-Election, 1945 – Trotskyists in West Wales’, Llafur, 3, 2 (Spring 1981)
R Croucher, Engineers at War, 1939-1945 (1982)
J Callaghan, British Trotskyism: Theory and Practice (Oxford, 1984)
S Bornstein and A Richardson, Against the Stream: A History of the Trotskyist Movement in Britain, 1924-1938 (1986)
S Bornstein and A Richardson, War and the International: A History of the Trotskyist Movement in Britain, 1937-1949 (1986)
T Grant, The Unbroken Thread (1989)
A Marsh and V Ryan, The Seamen: A History of the National Union of Seamen, 1887-1987 (Oxford, 1989)
J McIlroy, ‘The Demise of the National Council of Labour Colleges’, in B Simon (ed), The Search For Enlightenment: The Working Class and Adult Education in the Twentieth Century (1990)
J Gale, Class Struggle in the Second World War: The 1944 Police Raid on the RCP (1991)
D North, Gerry Healy and his Place in the Fourth International (Detroit, 1991)
J Lloyd, Light and Liberty: The History of the EETPU (1990)
H Ratner, Reluctant Revolutionary: Memoirs of a Trotskyist 1936-1960 (1994)
N Fishman, The British Communist Party and the Trade Unions, 1933-1945 (Aldershot, 1995)
S Levy, ‘A Footnote for Historians – The Open Party Faction, 1948-49’, Revolutionary History, 6, 2/3 (Summer 1996)
J McIlroy, ‘"The First Great Battle in the March to Socialism”: Dockers, Stalinists and Trotskyists in 1945’, Revolutionary History, 6, 2/3 (Summer 1996)
B Hunter, Lifelong Apprenticeship: The Life and Times of a Revolutionary (1997)
T Cliff, A World To Win: Life of A Revolutionary (2000)
T Grant, History of British Trotskyism (2002)
IV: Thesis
M Upham, The History of British Trotskyism to 1949 (Hull University PhD, 1980)
V: Other 
Information and papers from R Challinor, M Hasten, S Leslie, A Richardson
 


Writers Index




