


The Communist Political Association, once known as the Communist Party, has traveled, in three short years, from an alliance with Hitler and the Gestapo to one with Eric Johnston and his United States Chamber of Commerce. They are ready also to work with the police: federal, state or municipal. Their leader, Earl Browder, has come out full blast for capitalism, especially big capitalism (and the bigger the better).
Browder is opposed to Dewey for President because this is a big capitalist country and Dwey is not big enough to be President of a big capitalist country! He would do all right for Sweden, Costa Rica or Belgium perhaps! But for the United States, Roosevelt is their man. He is the only man big enough to head such a big capitalist country as the United States.
President Browder of the Communist Political Association is mightily concerned today with the European invasion by the United Nations. “The great day of liberation has struck,” according to Browder. The Allies have already “liberated Rome.”
On the home front Browder’s advice is:
“Everybody in his place, everybody doing his share. Not one minute must be lost; not one ounce of effort wasted.” Anyone who wastes a minute “does the enemy’s work.” This admonition presumably is for all the people.
But Browder has some special advice and warning for the labor leader:
“His is the supreme obligation to produce and produce and produce. History has called upon him to weld all men and classes who want victory, into the indissoluble whole. The working class will cast from its midst any false leader who seek to interrupt production ...”
 
Traitors to Labor
Browder and his Communist Political Association set the example by joining hands with the big capitalist oppressors of labor, the WLB and the whole Roosevelt government. Harry Bridges, one of Browder’s men, joins in the chase by proclaiming that unions should agree not to strike even after the war is over.
Browder wants the working class to suspend the class struggle and “weld all men and classes ... into the indissoluble whole.” He and his Communist Political Association tell the workers at Ford’s to forget this old scoundrel’s blackjacks, sluggers and anti-Semitism.
He tells the Negro and white sharecroppers of the South to make their peace with the cotton planters, to be willing to go back to their seventy-five cents a day wage of three years ago and to be satisfied with the miserable hovels of the cotton plantations.
The steel workers are admonished to forget about their demand for a seventeen cents an hour wage increase and toil away in the mills for whatever wage the steel barons see fit to pay.
The shipyard workers, who have been given the bum’s rush by the WLB, are to grin and bear it. All labor is to “produce, produce and produce” like slaves, for “the great day of liberation has struck.”
Browder, like some of the pro-war labor leaders, has nothing to say about the big employers and the war profiteers. He can’t because he is now on their side. He is a defender of capitalism and has forced himself into bed with Morgan, Ford, Mellon, Rockefeller, Weir and duPont. He and his Communist Political Association want to “weld all men and classes ...” together: tenant farmer and cotton planter, shipyard worker and Grace of Bethlehem Steel steel worker and corporation president. Browder and the Communist Political Association have a cure for any worker who is not willing to submit. He knows a way out for the big capitalist employers. The workers are to be called “seditionists” and “traitors”; “their place is behind bars; theirs must be a traitor’s fate.” This is Browder’s hint to the government and the big capitalist employers on how to handle militant workers who refuse to be slaves.
Browder didn’t invent this little scheme, but he knows how it operates, the big capitalist knew these oppressive tactics before Browder was born, the capitalist ruling class has used the club, the gun, the jail and the gallows against militant and revolutionary workers all through the history of capitalism.
Browder is fully aware of the ways that can be used to strangle unions and oppress militant workers and revolutionists. He knows how Stalin did it. He understands how to use the police, .the frame-up, kidnapping and murder. That’s the way Stalin did it in Russia when he faced opposition from militant workers and revolutionists. Browder and his Communist Political Association want to Import Stalin’s methods into the U.S.
 
Before the Line Changed
But while Browder and his ex-“Communist” Party are yelling for the “doom of the Hitlerites,” about “our national destiny,” “the unity of our nation,” “our Commander-in-Chief, President Roosevelt,” “our troops,” and “we Communists” who “stand sjde by side with all patriots,” we can’t forget another Browder another period of “we Communists.” Listen to this same Earl Browder speaking in Philadelphia on September 29, 1939:
“What kind of war is this, for what is it being fought ... The Communist Party has issued as the slogan of the day: ‘Keep America Out of the Imperialist War.’ ... Both sides (England and Germany – Ed.) are equally guilty ... The American people do not want to cast in their fate with the rotten and corrupt British and French Empires ... The fight for a peace policy in the United States today is ... a fight to keep the United States out of any involvement in this imperialist war, that means, to keep the United States from any involvement not only in a military way but from any involvement in economic and political support and sympathy. The victory of either one of these gangs of imperialist bandits will be a defeat for the people of their own country and for the people of the world. The only possible victory of the people will be the overthrowing of the bandits at the head of both camps. We can support neither one side nor the other in the imperialist war. The former distinction between the fascist and democratic nations has lost the meaning it once had, and is rapidly losing any serious political meaning at all.”
On the matter of war profits, Browder had the following to say in this same speech: “The longer it lasts the more profits. Even President Roosevelt made his bow to this motive in his message to Congress ... Profits from this war will not do America any good ... Forces ... will drag America into the war when profits can no longer be made only from Europe but will have to be squeezed out of the blood of American boys. ... Stop this imperialist war! – before they have a chance to drag us into it.” This was Browder in 1939.
At its 1940 convention, the Communist Party told its members to oppose the war. The party platform said that its members were to “combat the imperialist policies and acts of the President, the State Department and Congress to spread the war and to involve the United States in it .... Not a cent, not a gun, not a man for war preparations and the imperialist war ... Resist the militarization and armaments program of the Administration and Congress.”
This was Browder and the Communist Party in 1940. Then the cry was “Stop this imperialist war!” Now “he who whispers ‘negotiated peace’ is a traitor and deserves a traitor’s end.”
Then it was “resist the militarization and armaments program” of Roosevelt, today it is “produce and produce and produce ...”; cast out “any false leader who seeks to interrupt production.”
 
The Hitler-Stalin Pact
Those were the days of the Hitler-Stalin pact which Browder and the Communist Political Association would like to have us forget. They would like us to forget this blood pact between the fascist butcher Hitler and his friend in the Kremlin, Stalin. Browder today would like to wipe put the fact that this criminal contract between Stalin and fascism gave the go-sign to Hitler to invade Poland and initiate the Second Imperialist World War. Browder would like us to forget that Molotov, Stalin’s Foreign Minister, said that “fascism is a matter of taste.”
Why this double talk from Browder and the Communist Political Association? Why was this war imperialist in 1940 and a war of liberation in 1944. Wasn’t England fighting Germany in 1940 and wasn’t the United States supporting England then, even before Japan attacked at Pearl Harbor? Aren’t American capitalists seeking profits today from the war just as they were in 1939-40? Are the Chamber of Commerce and the Nation’al Association of Manufacturers any friendlier to labor today than they were in 1939-40? Is Roosevelt a greater democrat than he was in 1939? Is the Roosevelt of the national service act more pro-labor than the Roosevelt of the New Deal? How can the British army in Greece or Africa be an imperialist army and suddenly become a democratic army of liberation in Italy and France? What had changed capitalism in the past four or five years? The workers should have been against capitalism and monopolies in 1939, but according to Browder we should support Eric Johnston and his United States Chamber of Commerce in 1944.
Browder can chant once more: “Our line’s been changed again.” The line was changed when Germany crossed the border into Russia in June 1941. When fascist and imperialist Germany attacked totalitarian Russia in 1941, the war changed, according to Browser and the Communist Party. It was no longer an imperialist war but a great crusade for world democracy, with the totalitarian butcher, Stalin, wearing the crown of the world’s greatest democrat. England still held India and Africa, the U.S. was out to grab whatever could be wrenched from England or any other power; the kings and queens and .presidents of Norway, Holland, Belgium and Czecho-Slovakia were panting to return to Europe and resume operations exploiting their own workers and the colonial peoples. But, according to Browder, the war was now no longer imperialist but a magnificent crusade for democracy, religion, the rights of small nations and the brotherhood of man. And all this was true because, and only because, Germany had invaded Stalin’s Russia!
The only answer that can be given to this swift somersault is the one we give: Browder and the American Communist Party changed because Stalin changed.
 
Labor Must Spurn Them
How can labor have any confidence in these people? How can any worker join with or follow them? What shall it profit the working class to follow a gang like Browder’s, which seeks to tie them to “imperialist war,” to the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the National Association of Manufacturers and to American capitalism?
Who are the real traitors? The Browders with their Communist Political Association and their praise of capitalism and imperialism. They are the traitors whom the working class “will cast from its midst”!
 




President John Green of the Industrial Union of Marine & Shipbuilding Workers (IUMSWA) made a Report to the Membership on The State of Our Union in the May 19 number of the Shipyard Worker. Brother Green begins with the question, “Where do we go from here?” The IUMSWA is “today at the crossroads ... our organization enters into probably the most critical period in its history.” The days ahead are “as grave as those early formative years of struggle, when the employers aligned themselves against us in their unsuccessful attempt to throttle the rising aspirations of the oppressed and exploited shipyard workers.”
President Green has learned that the employers are at it again. They want “an open shop, low-wage shipbuilding industry.” The AFL Metal Trades Council, he says, is “working together with the employers to undermine the foundations of our organization.”
Everything that President Green says here is true. True, not only of the shipbuilding companies but of all the employers in the United States. Of course they want the open shop, low wages and long hours.
The shipbuilding companies want to boost their profits, dividends and salaries of company officials. That’s what capitalist corporations exist for. Brother Green surely must remember some of these very elementary things about capitalism from the days when he was a member of the Socialist Party. Also, he should remember how he applied some of these ABC political lessons when he was leading strikes on the Clydeside during the First Imperialist World War.
 
Where Is Green Going?
One would think, therefore, that in his “report to the membership” Johnny Green would follow through on what he has to say about the plans of the capitalist shipbuilding employers. It might be presumed that Green would label the employers as the main enemy to be watched and fought by the shipyard workers. But not so. Brother Green has discovered “provocateurs of the enemy” right in the ranks of the IUMSWA who are ready to “sow the seeds of dissension.” The national officers of the IUMSWA-CIO “see this peril ... and will devote their every effort to root out these threats, expose those responsible and fight to the last ditch against any attempt to undermine what the nation’s shipyard workers have built.”
We might say that these were brave words and well said if we only knew what and whom Green is talking about. He doesn’t say, and we are only left to guess. Why does he not speak right out and tell his members who are the “provocateurs of the enemy,” who is making “threats” against the IUMSWA and who is attempting to “undermine” the IUMSWA?
If President Green would inform Labor Action or the Workers Party who these people are we would join with him to “expose” them. We have been exposing the enemies of the labor movement for many years, week in and week out. We have never compromised on this and never will.
 
What We Stand For
Labor Action has exppsed and will continue to expose the capitalist employers and their machinations against labor. Labor Action has exposed and will continue to expose those inside the labor movement who act contrary to the interests of the working class. We will expose capitalism and its beneficiaries because capitalism and the capitalist employers are class enemies of the working class. They remain class enemies in wartime just as they were in peacetime. John Green ought to know this unless he has forgotten all the socialism he learned in past years, when he called himself a socialist.
Labor Action will adversely criticize those inside the labor movement when they deserve it; that is when they take positions or act in ways detrimental to the interests of labor. When we criticize the labor leadership we make an important distinction between them and the capitalist employers. We do not call Green nor other genuine labor leaders “provocateurs of the enemy.” Nor will we charge them with attempts “to undermine” what the workers have built. We will not do this for several reasons. For one, we are not cowards fearing to express what our real differences are with them and neither are we liars seeking to establish prestige and influence by distortion and innuendo. The Workers Party is a revolutionary socialist party. It has a program. It defends that program and seeks to have workers accept that program, including the workers in Johnny Green’s IUMSWA.
We oppose the capitalist employers and expose them before the working class because the employers are our class enemy and the working class of which we are a part has nothing in common with them. John Green knows this; he was a socialist, or claimed to be a socialist once. The labor movement is our movement, because we are workers and toilers. We defend that movement against any attacks from capitalism, its stooges and beneficiaries. When we adversely criticize or differ with the leadership of labor we do so from the inside and as an integral part of the labor movement and of the working class.
We ask again whom and what is Brother Green talking about in his “report to the membership”? Is he talking about the Stalinist Communist Political Association (CP)? Yes or no? We can believe that he isn’t talking about them since he joined with them at the IUMSWA convention three years ago to attack the Workers Party and Labor Action as “anonymous vermin” and “a scurrilous sheet,” carrying on “traitorous fifth column activity.” In his resolution Green urged the IUMSWA locals “to track down and stamp out” any activity of “this irresponsible gang” that came “within their reach.”
 
Green Is Double-Talking
President Green says further that there are “some short-sighted people who question now the policies of organized: labor and of our parent CIO. ... There are some who cannot see turther than their noses, and who thus fall easy victim to the provocateurs and disrupters in our midst. None of these internal enemies will be any longer tolerated.”
Now we ask a few questions.

Is President Green talking about the thousands of members of the IUMSWA who remain away from union meetings because they have become discouraged with the do-nothing policies of their leaders in the face of the refusal of the government to grant them wage increases?
 
What does Green think is the reason that in yards and locals with ten, twenty and thirty thousand workers only a couple of hundred or less attend union meetings?
 
Why is it that in any number of yards the vast majority of the workers have no interest whatsoever in the union?
 
Why was it necessary for Green to have to appeal to the WLB to force several hundred workers to pay their dues at one big yard?
 
Is Green talking about the thousands of workers of Locals 9 and 16 who have been trying these many months and years to get their autonomy back and to escape from the dictatorship which Green has imposed on them?
 
Is Brother Green talking about the thousands of shipyard workers on the Pacific Coast who went into the AFL unions because these workers were not given enough incentive for joining the IUMSWA?
 
Is Green talking about the thousands of sorely harassed workers in the shipyards who go on strike because they have learned that they cannot get even their simplest grievances settled otherwise?
 

Politics and Unionism
Labor Action and the Workers Party sympathize with all these workers, and we are on their side. We do not agree with all their acts. We decidedly do not agree with them when they refuse to join a union, or attend union meetings and be active in the locals. We believe they should join, become active and fight for their democratic rights. They should fight for higher wages, shorter hours and better working conditions. They should fight for autonomy and to throw out the little dictators John Green has placed over them. Is this what Brother Green calls being “provocateurs” and “disrupters”?
The shipyard and all other workers should get into the unions, be active and fight for democratic discussion and the democratic administration of the locals and the internationals, they should fight “for the institution of programs of labor education in the IUMSWA and for a real and aggressive campaign against AFL craft union penetration of the yards. They should fight against and not be intimidated by any threats made by President Green against militant workers who want to see this kind of working class trade union program carried out. Is this what John Green calls being “provocateurs” and “disrupters”? Perhaps President Green has other ideas in mind. Are the “provocateurs” and “disrupters” those who disagree with him and other CIO leaders on the war and Roosevelt? Are these the “internal enemies” of the IUMSWA?
Labor Action and the Workers Party are against Roosevelt, and we are against imperialist war. This is no secret. It has been printed in millions of copies of Labor Action. We do not speak of the war With weasel words. We never gave up our principles. We are not EX-socialists. We are against the no-strike pledge. This is not a secret. We do not boast of our PAST militancy as strike leaders while telling the sorely oppressed workers today that strikes are a crime or a luxury which the working class cannot afford.
We are against Roosevelt because he is the defender of capitalism and the chief spokesman for the capitalist employers. We are against him because he is the head of a capitalist government: a government of the Little Steel formula, the anti-labor WLB and NLRB. He heads a government which guarantees high profits to capitalist employers and demands a national service slave act for labor.
We are against Roosevelt or any of the other aspirants for the White House, Republican or Democratic, because they and their kind in Europe helped bring on the Second Imperialist World War.
 
For Powerful Unionism
We are for strong, powerful and militant unions and a strong, powerful working class political party. We are for this today and after the war. We need that party today because this is the only way that we can get what we want and what we must have. That is the only way now that we can establish collective bargaining, establish a higher standard of living and defeat the efforts of the capitalis class and its government to destroy our unions. The puny and shrivelled efforts of President Green will never accomplish this.
As revolutionary socialists we want to see our class establish a political party, of the toilers that will inspire the masses to a victory over capitalism and capitalist oppression. We want to see the world delivered from capitalist imperialist wars, from fascism and any threat of fascism. We believe that only the working class can do this and that the time to start is now.
President Green pretended once to believe these things because he once claimed to be a socialist. He has become a turncoat to his principles.
Are we to be condemned because we have not?
 




In the May issue of The New International I discussed the trade union leadership in relation to the war, the no-strike pledge and the stabilization of wages. This article is to consider trade union leadership in relation to the economic and political needs of the working class and the programmatic reorientation of the labor movement. This question arises very acutely today and in a very practical way out of the most recent experiences of the organized labor movement not only with the trade union leadership but with industry and government. The main question is: how shall the working class secure the economic and political leadership which will provide that program necessary for promoting class-consciousness and raising the political level of the masses.
We do not ask: how shall the masses be made aware of the necessity for participating in politics, for even the trade union bureaucracy of the CIO is today conducting a nation-wide campaign to dispel political disinterestedness and inertness. This leadership has established a Political Action Committee for the purpose not only of engendering interest in “politics” in general but for concrete action in support of a particular party and a certain candidate. We pose the more restricted question of class-conscious political action, procedure and organization.
 
Policy of Political Action Committee
Under cover of vague but profuse statements on the necessity for labor to become interested in “politics,” the PAC of the CIO and various internationals endorse President Roosevelt for a fourth term; before he has announced his intention to run, before the national committee of the Democratic Party has indicated its campaign platform and before the convention has met to decide the platform and select the candidates. Their announcement in support of Roosevelt came also of course before the meeting of the Republican Party convention. This means that so far as the CIO bureaucracy is concerned, neither party will be faced with the necessity to do more than utter the ancient platitudes and shibboleths on “the dignity of labor,” “labor is not a commodity,” and “labor is entitled to its just reward.” Furthermore, the CIO leadership is willing to commit five million workers to the support of the Democratic Party, whose Administration comes increasingly under the domination of the Southern section of the party. The CIO opposes the poll-tax while at the same time endorsing the party of the poll-tax. It fights against anti-labor legislation and simultaneously supports the party of the framers of the Smith-Connally Act. Murray, Thomas, Hillman et al. speak out for Negro equality while in the next sentence they endorse the party of Eastland of Mississippi, who proclaims boldly in the Senate that the “white boys in the South Pacific are fighting for white supremacy.” They endorse the party of Bilbo, whose teaching is that “all history and biology for the past six thousand years have established the superiority of the white race.” Murray sneered at national service legislation, calling it “quack medicine,” but a few months later insisted that the CIO endorse the party whose leader proposed that “slave legislation.”
 
And the Policy of the AFL
The AFL claims to follow a wiser course: they do not put all of their eggs into one political party basket. They are more realistic. They put all their eggs into a basket let down by Eric Johnston of the United States Chamber of Commerce and Robert Gaylord of the National Association of Manufacturers. Green, Johnston and Gaylord are seeking an “economic trinity – of agriculture, management and labor ...”
They are a holy family proclaiming the deification of “free enterprise.” The AFL will find itself in the very embarrassing position of seeing its saintly president seated not only at the same banquet table with Johnston and Gaylord but with Earl Browder, who has become a prophet of free enterprise and one of capitalism's most fervid defenders and well-wishers.
Moving out from its alliance with the Chamber of Commerce and the NAM, the AFL will support both parties. Two of its pillars, Tobin and Hutcheson, are already spokesmen for the Democratic and Republican Parties respectively within the ranks of the AFL. Whereas the NAM and the Chamber of Commerce will contribute money to both parties and both candidates, the Federation will act in a more modest manner and content itself with endorsing and voting for the candidates of both parties.
 
The Lewis Enigma
John L. Lewis, who is called wiser this year than in 1940, has not announced his “politics” yet. In many respects Lewis' UMWA Journal has been serving a strange and somewhat cryptic conglomeration to its readers. The editorial utterances of Editor Adams quite often leave us in a quandary and with many questions that we would like to put to this Horatio at the bridge. What does all this radicalism mean that we read in the UMWA Journal? Much of it sounds like mere street-corner ranting: against the “monopolies,” against “Wall Street,” against the “invisible government” which, according to the UMWA Journal, is headed by the investment firm of Lehman Brothers, who, as everyone knows, is the banking house of former Governor Herbert Lehman, who, as everyone also knows, is a Jew. While we have the feeling that the recent number of the Journal which contained the editorial on the “invisible government” sounds too much like Henry Ford's old Dearborn Independent, we do not intend to go into this question here. We are more concerned now with the general political line of Lewis and the Journal.
This is not clear and we may have to wait until the miners' convention next September, when Lewis may be expected to bring up the whole matter of the elections. If the Journal gives any line, Lewis is still violently anti-Roosevelt. Whether or not he would have supported Willkie again cannot be known now since, as the Journal says, Willkie “was given the bum's rush.” Some editorials sound as though they had been influenced by the opinions of the Chicago Tribune. Most of them are strongly nationalist and at times the flavor of “America First” can be detected. A great deal of the opinion expressed in the Journal is in language that reminds one of some of the strong language of the IWW. All in all, it is quite a mixture and so far it is impossible to tell just what the Journal is trying to say. On the question of the war, Lewis, like all the other labor leaders, is in full support. He only expresses himself on occasions when he evidently feels it necessary to make this point clear for tactical reasons. Despite the fact that Lewis is regarded as the ablest leader in the country, politically he is no less reactionary and opportunist than all the rest.
This is how the matter stands with the labor organizations and in the ranks of the leadership. It is necessary to examine more closely the “politics” of the trade union bureaucracy and the type of leadership it is giving the labor movement. One fact stands out clearly: the politics of the labor bureaucracy is a declaration against the class independence of the unions and of the working class. It is a declaration that the unions shall fee independent only in the administrative sense and independent only in so far as they are encouraged from time to time to shift their allegiance from one bourgeois party to the other. This is the type of “independence” advocated by the AFL.
The unions, according to the bureaucracy, must have the right to elect their own officials, to administer their own affairs and to bargain collectively with the employers. Added to this administrative independence is the demand of the trade union bureaucracy that there shall be no “politics” in the unions. Trade unions, they say, are economic organizations of labor to be concerned with employer-labor relations which involve collective bargaining for the purpose of improving the economic position of the working class.
 
The Source of Labor Difficulties
While this is at least in part a correct estimate of the role of trade unions in capitalist society, the trade union bureaucracy sees the trade union only as it is today and envisages the labor movement as functioning eternally within the framework of bourgeois society. For the orthodox trade union leader the highest point in the development of trade unionism is the successful establishment of collective bargaining. Whenever and wherever the unions win the “right of collective bargaining,” these leaders take the position that peace and harmony will reign between labor and capital. Labor and capital join hands and function in the interest of society as a whole.
Herein of course lies the .beginning of the chief difficulties which labor faces. From such a position and such naive analysis flows the repudiation of class distinctions, class struggle, and the enthronement of the doctrine and practice of class peace and class collaboration. Class differences are eliminated, the interests of labor and capital are correlated and the concept of nation, of national interest, of the people and the welfare of the people, arises. That this analysis does not fit the facts, or that it does not work, worries the trade union leadership not at all. In the first place, the majority of them do not understand the problem and the very small minority who do are motivated by personal interests, bureaucratic prestige, pessimism or renegacy from the progressive attitudes of former years.
A trade union leadership with such an outlook on capitalist society and the function of the labor movement in that society, cannot provide the impetus for the class independence of the unions nor can that leadership divorce itself completely from capitalist politics and bourgeois political organizations. It is impossible under their conservative leadership to make clear the great class divide between the proletariat and bourgeoisie. “No politics” to them comes to mean no independent working class politics, no political activity by the proletariat as a class in capitalist society. If there is no class political activity of the proletariat in capitalist society, then there can be no such thing as sustained economic activity of the working class as a class. This, for the reason that economic and political activity in bourgeois society are indissoluble. The so-called economic organizations of the capitalist are at the same time political organizations. They are not political parties but they are the “outside” organizations which supply political programs to their political parties. This is not the only sustenance which the Chambers of Commerce and the other economic organizations of the bourgeoisie supply to the capitalist parties. They supply leadership. The bourgeois has established a configuration of relations which comprehend the whole of his life, crowned by the capitalist state with its bourgeois-democratic government. The bourgeois goes his way and pursues his activities with a high degree of class consciousness and class solidarity. The point I wish to emphasize is that the ruling class integrates its economic needs with its political demands and it is the economic needs which give content to its political demands and engender the political activity of the bourgeoisie as a class. This class takes over the state and state power for the protection of and the enhancement of its basic economic interests.
 
Class Struggle Through Unions
When the trade union bureaucracy seeks to orient the labor movement away from proletarian class politics, it does not lead the movement to neutral ground but into the arena of bourgeois politics. It cannot be otherwise with a leadership committed to the principles of class peace and class collaboration. There is no neutral ground for classes in capitalist society. The ruling class understands this. It pursues the class struggle with unrelenting vigor and persistence. The titular heads of the class, with their academic ideologists and petty-bourgeois sycophants, always attempt to make it appear that the bourgeois leader and his class speak for the nation as a whole; for the whole people. He claims to represent the present and historical interests of all the people. His announced program is always a “people's program,” his political organizations are organizations of the people; the government is “of, for and by the people” and the bourgeois vows that it “shall not perish from the earth.”
The proletariat, however, in the course of its experience in the actual class struggle, becomes aware that this is not a true picture of the society in which it lives. There are blots on the escutcheon: economic crises, insecurity, extremes of wealth and poverty and ever-recurring international wars. The most advanced section of the proletariat, influenced by the revolutionists, develops to class consciousness and challenges the representations made by the bourgeoisie. Not only is the right of the bourgeois to lead challenged, but also his right to private property and domination of the state. This does not disturb the ruling class unduly because it has at hand an ally: an ally from the working class itself, the trade union leadership. Yesterday it was Gompers, Mitchell, Morrison today it is Murray, Green, Lewis, Thomas. These leaders must play this r61e and perform this service.
The small and circumscribed orbit of their thinking, their acceptance of bourgeois political and economic concepts, their class collaboration makes of them purveyors of the ideology of an alien class to the proletariat which they represent. They endorse capitalism and give it their full support. They endorse and support the political organizations of the bourgeoisie. They have no class economic and political program for the proletariat. They seek a way to resolve all the contradictions of capitalist society: whether in war or peace. More than this, they tell the working class that it has a duty to solve the problems of the bourgeoisie. They advise the proletariat that it is possible for labor to solve the complex problems of capitalist society, within the framework of that society. This can be the only meaning of the statement of R.J. Thomas that if the employers will not act in a disinterested and patriotic manner during wartime and in the national interest, then labor must.
 
A Petty Bourgeois Ideology
This anti- or non-class struggle attitude of the labor bureaucracy demonstrates their essentially petty bourgeois class role. In relationship to capitalism and the bourgeoisie they belong to the working class but their economic and political thinking is that of the middle class. Along with the middle class the trade union bureaucracy is nationalistic, social-patriotic and opportunist. The economic roots of their opportunism and social-patriotism grow in the soil prepared by the bourgeoisie. Like the non-labor petty bourgeois, they receive favors from the capitalist class and support from the bourgeois government so long as they keep within the confines set for them by the rulers of society.
This class collaboration and social-patriotism on the part of the trade union leadership creates a real dilemma for the working class and an obstacle in the way of progress. This leadership, which is of the working class, which represents the proletariat, but which does not represent its class interests, is nevertheless well entrenched at the head of the labor movement. This leads trade union militants and revolutionists into conflict with the bureaucracy and into conflict with the bourgeoisie and government, which comes to the aid of its trade union allies. What is far worse, this class-peace policy of the union leaders retards effective trade union or political education of labor, spreads confusion and muddle, and creates a sort of non-political sectarianism among immature trade union militants. It is difficult for this type of worker to resolve the contradiction in his mind between the fact that the trade union bureaucracy is a part of the labor movement, retain their base in the trade unions, but who in practice attempt to serve both the capitalist bourgeoisie and the labor movement. Worst of all is the development of bureaucratic concepts and practices which make it all but impossible for militant and progressive unionists to exercise their formal democratic rights and establish democratic procedures in the union.
The naive militant is likely to think of the bureaucracy in office or a similar group seeking office as a mere “power caucus.” He doesn't and cannot go behind the appearances to the real seat of the trouble, which, of course, is the class-collaboration ideology and policies of the leadership. The everyday class struggle experiences of the rank and file bring the labor movement into conflict with the policies of the bureaucracy, which ideology the leadership has absorbed from the bourgeoisie. It is only through the suppression of democracy and the establishment of bureaucratic control that the union leadership could have any success at all in hblding the unions to a policy of class peace. Furthermore, the bourgeoisie is well aware that its program for labor would be unacceptable if presented directly and bearing the label of the National Association of Manufacturers. The NAM sends its program to the schools, the press, the pulpit and the government. It is from these institutions that it is transferred to the trade union bureaucracy. It should be stated that I am not considering those relatively rare occasions when the ideas and program of the bourgeoisie enter the labor movement directly through racketeering, collusive agreements or by the speaking done by government officials at trade union conventions. These are special situations and are themselves based on the more basic classless and non-class struggle concepts of the bureaucracy.
 
Behind the Bureaucracy
Just as the bourgeoisie cannot in general tolerate genuine democratic procedures for the masses of the people, so the trade union bureaucracy cannot tolerate genuine democracy in the unions. The trade union bureaucracy, as is the case with any other bureaucratic group in capitalist society, takes its methods from the bourgeoisie. The dictatorship which the trade union bureaucracy establishes over the labor movement has its roots in capitalist thinking and in the capitalist way of life. Its practical forms are similar to those which the bourgeoisie has established over society as a whole: that is, it is a dictatorship.
There is an important difference, to be sure. Subjectively the aims of the trade union bureaucracy are not identical with those of the bourgeoisie. They cannot be so long as bourgeois democracy lasts. Under democratic capitalism, the proletariat has a certain amount of freedom of organization and protest. This, coupled with the fact that the bureaucracy has its base in the labor movement and draws its livelihood, prestige and power from the movement. It will always seek therefore to preserve the labor movement and struggle in its own way to improve the condition of the working class. The bureaucracy are at the same time representatives of the bourgeoisie and of the proletariat. Because of the class dominance of the bourgeoisie, however, the result is the infusion of bourgeois ideas into the labor movement and at times the complete subjection of the trade unions to the will of the dominant ruling class.
This contradiction is the very essence of the difficulties of the labor movement today, and if not resolved will become the source of more pronounced and dangerous problems of the days to come. I say that subjectively the aims of the trade union bureaucracy are not those of the ruling class. But objectively, class collaboration and class harmony produce results not desired or dreamed of by trade union leaders. It is the sincere desire of Philip Murray that workers enjoy the good life of freedom and abundance, but freedom for a subject class cannot be attained by any effort at harmonizing the interests of the oppressed class with those of a dominant class exercising a social dictatorship over the whole of society.
 
Democracy and Fascism
Also, there are no prophets of sufficient insight or prescience to say that bourgeois democracy will have a long life in the United States. Bourgeois democracy is the pre-socialist form of capitalist political organization which gives the proletariat room for class struggle, for keeping its own leaders and the leaders of government and industry under mass pressure. For the proletariat, this is the chief distinction to be made between fascism and capitalist democracy: in capitalist democracy, with its bourgeois-democratic forms, the proletariat is enabled to prosecute the class struggle with far greater vigor than under fascism. This is not generally understood by the proletariat, suffering as it does from petty-bourgeois illusions about bourgeois-democracy. The answer usually given is that “democracy” is more tolerant than fascism, there is more freedom – freedom of thought, assembly and petition. Workers have the right to organize and bargain collectively.
The trade union bureaucracy thinks that the problem of whether or not the proletariat shall support the present war is settled when it has been stated that there are no trade unions in Germany and that if Hitler should win the workers in the United States will be reduced to the status of the German proletariat. While this statement is the brutal truth, it is not the relevant truth for the proletariat. The statement is not meaningful, is totally inadequate, useless for the working class and harmful. Identical statements were made by the French trade union bureaucracy and French liberals, and yet Hitler is in France today and the trade unions are dispersed. In order to avoid such a defeat in any other capitalist country the proletariat must lay hold of bourgeois democracy as a weapon for unrelenting class struggle. For the working class, bourgeois democracy is only a sort of instrument in the fight for complete proletarian democracy and socialism. For the proletariat to view capitalist democracy in the manner of the middle class and the labor bureaucracy, as an end in itself, is to provide the broad highway for the victory of fascism.
This analysis indicates the imperative necessity for a new orientation of the labor movement and a new trade union leadership. There are a great number of people who believe this and have said so. There is the liberal “friend of labor,” the radical militant who is disgusted with the undemocratic tactics and conservatism of the bureaucracy, the union-conscious worker who in despair concludes that what is needed is another organization independent of both the AFL and the CIO, and of course the Marxian revolutionaries. Quite often, the demand is put very simply even by revolutionaries: “the unions should throw out their present leaders,” “the unions need a house-cleaning,” the unions must do this, that and the other. Such platitudinous advice is thrown at the rank and file of the unions in utter abandon, as though these problems of the working class could be solved by radical golden texts and admonitions.
 
Militant Unionism and New Leadership
The problem of trade union leadership must be approached with a consideration of the questions raised in this article. Such an approach must also include a deep consideration of the history of the trade union movement and the rise of the bureaucracy in that movement. In order to understand any bureaucracy and to organize the struggle against it, it is necessary to discover its roots, the source of its power, the functions it performs and its connections, economic, social and political. Bureaucracies cannot be prevented, nor retarded, nor replaced if the only weapons available are radical phrases and adjurations.
The demand for a new leadership for the trade unions, to have real meaning, must be a demand for a new program. Not merely a new program of immediate demands such as “revocation of the no-strike pledge,” “restore collective bargaining” or an internal demand for “more democracy in the unions,” but more far-reaching and basic demands. The demands of the labor movement today, such as the above, are correct but they are inadequate. They are simple, democratic demands already recognized by bourgeois democracy. That they are violated today indicates that the labor movement must struggle to get these rights back. But their abrogation does not indicate that a program containing these and other demands like them is a sufficient one nor that the struggle to regain these rights is of sufficient proportions. On the contrary, it is clear now to many workers that the loss of these rights is proof that the programmatic base of the labor movement is too narrow, too petty bourgeois, too bourgeois-democratic and too deeply embedded in the conceptual structure of capitalism.
If the main consideration in any concern with the need for a new trade union leadership is not placed on the demand for a new program, a new orientation and for new methods of carrying on the struggle, then we are only insisting on the replacement of one bureaucracy by another, of one “power caucus” by another. All of the revolts, “unauthorized strikes,” grumblings and dissatisfaction on the part of militant trade unionists today are inchoate, primitive, but ominous demands for a new program for the movement. Explicit and implicit in the above presentation is the thought that the new program must exceed the orbit of immediate demands, must renounce class collaboration in favor of class struggle and, above all, must raise the thinking of the proletariat to a far higher class-conscious political level.
Since I have exhausted the space allotted it will be necessary to continue the discussion of these questions to another number of The New International.
 




A Declaration by Negro Voters has been issued by the leaders of twenty-five organizations. In their declaration these Negro leaders claim to express the opinions of the Negroes in the United States on the question of the war, political parties and candidates, imperialism and Jim Crow. The leaders who issue this declaration come from a variegated group of organizations such as Negro college sororities and fraternities, the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church, the African Methodist Episcopal Church, Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, National Maritime Union, Negro Elks, NAACP and the Council on African Affairs.
The second sentence in the declaration states that
“Political parties and candidates that seek the votes of Negroes must be committed to the wholehearted prosecution of the war to total victory, must agree to the elimination of the poll-tax by act of Congress, the passage of anti-lynching legislation, the unsegregated integration of Negroes into the armed forces, the establishment of a permanent federal committee on fair employment practices, and a foreign policy of international cooperation that promotes economic and political security for all peoples.”
Another paragraph tells us that
“The Negro people, like all other Americans, recognize the war as the chief issue confronting the country. We demand of any political party desiring the support of Negroes a vigorous prosecution of the war. We are opposed to any negotiated peace as advocated by the Hitler-like forces within our country. Victory must crush Hitlerism at home as well as abroad.”
 
What Do Negroes Believe?
We are interested right now in the two statements that Negroes are primarily concerned with a “vigorous prosecution of the war” and that Negroes, in deciding which party to vote for, will lean to the party “committed to the wholehearted prosecution of the war to total victory.” This statement is a barefaced and deliberate lie. The signers of this declaration know that it is a lie. Every semi-intelligent man and woman in the United States who has had any contact with Negroes knows that it is a lie.
The mass of Negroes in this country are not supporters of the war. Millions of Negroes believe that the war is not a war for democracy. There are thousands of Negroes who believe it is an imperialist war.
The government knows that Negroes do not support the war. The white press knows it, the Negro press knows it. The signers of this declaration know it. In its demands the declaration gives the reasons why Negroes do not make any such demands in connection with the war, alleged in the statement.
The declaration demands anti-lynching legislation. There is none, despite twenty-five years of effort. Anti-lynching bills have been defeated by the Democratic and Republican Parties alike. Roosevelt said not one word in support of the recent anti-lynch bill.
They want a federal FEPC. But Negroes remember the impotence of the FEPC. It was given little power and what limited authority it had was whittled away.
The declaration, demands anti-poll-tax legislation, but Republicans and Democrats have just defeated that effort.
These leaders say that they want an end to imperialism and colonial exploitation. How many Negroes believe that this war will end these twin evils? Hasn’t Churchill already Answered that demand in his statement that he did not become His Majesty’s First Minister in order to sit in at the liquidation of the British Empire?
The declaration demands the elimination of segregation in the armed forces. But Negroes know that segregation in the armed forces has been sustained with vigor by the federal government. Not only this, but the government has not even protected Negroes in the military service from insult, assault and lynching.
 
For Full Equality
These are the experiences which Negroes have gone through which teach them something about the present war. They know that the problem is one of national Jim Crow and is not a matter of the Republican or Democratic Parties. Their first demand on political parties is not for vigorous prosecution of the war but for the elimination of Jim Crow, discrimination, segregation, disfranchisement and lynching. Negroes do not recognize the war as “the chief issue confronting our country,” insofar as Negroes are part of “our country.” They see the chief issue before the country for Negroes, the complete elimination of Jim Crow NOW, for full equality.
When we say “Negroes” we are talking about the masses of the Negro people. We are not talking about the signatories to this declaration. They are mostly middle class Negroes who do not and cannot speak for, nor represent the interests of the Negro workers and toilers.
The signers of this document tell us that they want to end exploitation in Africa, the West Indies, India and all other colonial areas. Don’t they want to end exploitation in the United States? They don’t even mention this little trifle. What is their opinion on the question of the capitalist exploitation of the sharecroppers and industrial workers? And why do these Negro leaders refrain from making the demand for the complete freedom of Africa and India? Why don’t they demand openly that all subject and colonial peoples be granted their full independence NOW?
We know the answers to all of these questions and we know why certain phrases appear in this declaration. In the first place, the Negroes who signed this declaration were rounded up and corralled by Browder’s Communist Political Association. Some of them did not know what was happening to them, for Max Yergan poses as head of the Council on African Affairs. Ferdinand Smith poses as only secretary-treasurer of the National Maritime Union. Clayton Powell appears only as head of the “People’s Movement.”
 
Corralled by Stalinists
The Stalin-Browder line is as clear as day in the declaration. “Wholehearted prosecution of the war to total victory”; “the chief issue confronting our country” is the war. No “negotiated peace as advocated by the Hitler-like forces in our country.” One can just see millions of Negro miners, steel workers, sharecroppers and laundry workers storming the political conventions with the battle cry: “no negotiated peace”; “prosecute the war to total victory.”
This declaration is a statement by a group of pro-war middle class Negroes who find themselves with the same attitude on the war as that held by Stalin’s Communist Political Association in the United States. It is not a statement of what Negroes think but of what these Negro leaders and the Stalinists want them to think. The declaration serves not the interests of Negroes but the middle class interests of these leaders and of the Stalin-Browder Communist Political Association.
The declaration is a brazen notification to Roosevelt or Willkie or Dewey that these Negroes are in full support of the imperialist war. All the other “demands” are thrown in as window dressing to obscure their pro-war betrayal and in an effort to make such betrayal palatable to as many Negroes as possible.
 




During the past week two international presidents of CIO unions, the United Automobile Workers and the Industrial Union of Marine & Shipbuilding Workers, have appealed to their memberships to close ranks behind the leadership and to abide by the no-strike and other decisions made by the international conventions. These appeals were made by R.J. Thomas of the UAW and John Green of the IUMSWA.
Thomas’ statement pertained to the strike at the Chrysler Highland Park plant. The last strike came after sixteen workers had been fired by the company and fourteen officers of the local had been ousted by the international executive board. Picket lines were established and all the gates to the plant blocked. George Addes, following the Communist Party line, was not satisfied with the official action taken by the board. He advised the workers to “break through the picket lines if necessary to get your jobs back.”
 
Nature of Union Crisis
The Thomas statement said that the UAW “today faces one of the greatest crises in its history. On the outcome of this crisis will depend the possibilities of our survival in the post-war period.” And what is this crisis? Thomas says what in his opinion is the nature of the crisis, but he misses the point completely. He says that the crisis arises from the failure of a minority of the union to “abide by the democratic decisions and mandates of our constitution and our conventions.” In practice, however, the crisis arises because of an increase in the number of “unauthorized strikes” in spite of the no-strike pledge given to President Roosevelt.
Labor Action is for democratic decisions and we believe that workers should make every effort to abide by all decisions democratically arrived at. But the agreement on the no-strike pledge was not arrived at in a really democratic manner. The pledge was given by Murray, Green and ethers before the millions of AFL and CIO members were consulted. This pledge of the top leaders was passed on to the international presidents, who went into their unions and by begging, pleading, threatening and sobbing, dragged the rank and fileinto passive acceptance.
The trade union membership right from the beginning was skeptical about the pledge. Today they are openly and positively against it. They have good reason to be against it. They have learned from their experience that they were taken in by their leaders and sold down the river. They know now that when Murray and the others gave this pledge they were not representing labor’s interests but the interests of the employers and the employers’ government. Labor knows now that tire employers and the government have been and are taking advantage of the no-strike pledge to the detriment of the labor movement and its interests.
Labor was promised that collective bargaining would continue, that there would be no anti-union legislation and that no attack on the unions by the employers would be condoned or tolerated. Not a single promise made by the government or the employers has been kept, not one. Virtually every working class right has been violated, openly and with design. A concerted government-employer drive against the unions has emerged and is in full swing today.
The trade union leadership does nothing to halt this attack. They continue their toadying to Roosevelt and to the WLB, and run like scared rabbits every time some anti-labor demagogue from the backwoods of the South bellows in Congress. In such a situation what can the loyal and militant union members do? Submit quietly and permit the whole labor movement to be disembowelled and thrown to the capitalist vultures and their deputies in Washington?
 
Thomas’ Statement
Thomas hasn’t changed his argument one bit: “Public opinion has become inflamed against our union,” he bleats. What is this “public opinion”? The millions of workers in the AFL and CIO? Not so. The “public opinion” that is inflamed against the UAW today is the same “public opinion” that has always been inflamed against this militant union. It is the same “public opinion” that will be inflamed against the UAW when and if, after the war, Thomas carries out his promise to “authorize” strikes again.
In his statement, Thomas, following Murray, descends to the lowest level possible for a labor leader when he whimpers that “already more than 35,000 of our American brothers have been killed in action.” What responsibility does labor bear for the present imperialist blood bath that has caused the death of thousands of human beings? None whatsoever. But Thomas will not be moved: “... these figures will be increased many-fold in the months to come. Does any reasonable and responsible person believe that, in the face of these terrible facts, our union can tolerate wildcat strikes in war plants and still survive?”
The only inference that “any reasonable and responsible person” can draw from the inane remarks of President Thomas is that labor has some responsibility for the number of dead and maimed in the present war. Also we ask Thomas to remember the Anaconda Copper Co. and its defective Wire, the U.S. Steel Corporation and its defective steel plates, the defective parachutes, the cartel agreements between Standard Oil of New Jersey and Hitler’s Nazi chemical trust, which the Justice Department said verged on treason.
In his statement Thomas has an answer to this: a coward’s answer, a poltroonish answer: “This war must be won. If management will not sincerely work toward that end, then labor must do so. We may have to take it on the chin here and there for a time, but if we can present the nation and the returning soldiers with a clean record, we will gain after the war for the sacrifices we are making today.”
This is the most reprehensible nonsense. It is desertion of the workers and their interests. Labor has a perfectly clean record, if one gets clean from making sacrifices while capitalist corporations pile up their millions in blood profits. This is the story told by the 35,000 dead American youth. Furthermore, the labor leaders are not taking it on the chin. They have no personal wage problems to settle. They have no income tax problems. The 43 per cent rise in the cost of living works no burden on them. Thomas’ $9,000 and Addes’ $8,500 take care of that. They don’t operate under the Little Steel formula.
 
A Clean Record
The best way to present the returning soldiers with a “clean record” is to fight the Little Steel formula, the WLB and the designs of the employers against the unions, so that the worker-soldiers will have jobs at high wages when they return, and strong, militant unions to defend these jobs and wages for them. If this is not done, the reward of the returning soldiers will be doughnuts and coffee, confetti and promises that there will be no more war.
These are the facts. Thomas is perhaps too dull to understand. He is not dealing with simple violations of convention decisions or of the union constitution. He is dealing with loyal but angry and militant union members who are alarmed at the situation they. face. All the stupid statements that Thomas can make, all the threats of the UAW international board, all the tear-jerking over the no-strike pledge, will get Thomas, Murray and Green exactly nowhere with a working class that is becoming increasing dissatisfied with the retreat ordered by its leaders.
*
(The statement of President Green will be dealt with next week.)
 







BULLETIN: – At the time of going to press, announcement wos mode that War Mobilization Director Byrnes had ordered conferences of all procurement agencies to meet and discuss the matter of new contracts for the Brewster plant. Washington reports disclosed that the President personally intervened, promising that new contracts would be found to keep the men on the job. As a result of this intervention and promise, the union called off the sit-in strike.
Already, the union leaders are hailing this as a victory, or at least a partial victory. We have no doubt that the action taken by the workers, an action which we unqualifiedly support, called nation-wide attention to their situation and finally forced the Administration to at least promise to do something for them. But so far they have been given only promises, and very vague ones at that. There is absolutely nothing concrete to which any one can point. That is why PM, the New York newspaper, wrote:
“As for the possibility of new contracts, the optimistic words from Frankensteen and Byrnes hardly squared with testimony given yesterday before the Military Affairs Subcommittee.
“Although it was a big victory for the union, whose dramatic protest led the White House to act, it doesn’t alter the fact that some 7,000 of the company’s 12,500 employees will be out of work today and until the company gets new contracts—if it does.”
The big fight of the Brewster workers still lies ahead of them. Their fight for existence it not only for themselves, it is for the whole American labor movement.





The well-planned political attack of the capitalist ruling class and its government against organized labor and the working class has been focused this week on Local 365 of the UAW-CIO and (ha Corkers of the Brewster Aeronautical Carp. This foray against Local 365, which began some months back as on anti-tabor sniping expedition by Congress, the WLB and the Navy Department, reached its climax with the cancellation of all contract) held by the company.
We say that this is a political attack because that is the only accurate way to characterize the closing down of the Brewster plants by the Navy Department. Local 365 is a militant union. In comparison to a host of other trade union locals it was outstanding in its aggressiveness and its persistent defense of the working class rights of the Brewster workers. This local had voted against the no-strike pledge and defended this position at the lost convention of the UAW. The local had gone on record in favor of independent working class political action and a Labor Party.
The president of the local, Thomas De Lorenzo, had appeared before a congressional committee and had stoutly and militantly defended the local, its program, policies and activities. In retaliation for his stand and in order to strike at the local, the ruling class grabbed De Lorenzo through the medium of its legal machinery and dragged him into the capitalist courts. Progressive workers at Brewster who were coming more and more to understand what the real issues were before the working class in the United States, were constantly on the firing line to hold the local to its militant course. Increasing numbers of them were coming to see just what the issue was: A PROBLEM OF PROTECTING THE CLASS INTERESTS OF LABOR AGAINST THE SUFFOCATING OFFENSIVE OF THE CAPITALIST EMPLOYERS, ORGANIZED FOR THE PURPOSE OF STRANGLING LABOR AND RENDERING IT IMPOTENT.
That the Brewster managers and owners may not have been a party to these schemes is of no particular importance. They had problems of their own at the time, with which workers can have no especial concern. In a
because their interests are identical. In no sense can the difficulties of Brewster management with the Navy Department cause labor to regard its relation to both any differently than the working class approaches its relations to the Navy Department and the capitalist employers as a whole.
 
The Politics Involved
Many workers themselves will say that there is “politics” in this Brewster closing. Many of them will agree with the statement of Philip Murray in his telegram to Secretary of the Navy Forrestal:
“Those in your department initiating the action could not have been blind to the fact that termination of contracts is of the greatest political significance in this election year, particularly when it is demonstrated that the department has not planned for or exhibited any consideration of the people thus thrust out of work ... It would be most reassuring to be informed that the Navy’s action was not precipitated by Navy Department people unfriendly to the President and Senator Wagner of New York.”
Suppose that Murray’s suspicions are true. What essential difference would this make? Suppose the plant was closed down as the result of some inside Republican intrigue. This is far-fetched, but even if true, such a tempest in the teapot between Republican and Democratic Party bureaucrats could not possibly be the kind of “politics” that would aid Brewster and other workers to solve their problems.
Murray’s inquiry is primarily silly and nonsensical because it is a very weak attempt to cover up the fact that Roosevelt is the head of the government and the leader and boss of the Democratic Party. Furthermore, Forrestal is a member of Roosevelt’s cabinet, is his appointee and comes directly under his supervision. What Forrestal and the Navy Department do is what Roosevelt wants done and what he approves, and in fact he has now said so THIS IS THE MORASS THAT MURRAY FINDS HIMSELF IN SO SOON AFTER THE CIO COMES OUT WITH ITS GLOWING ENDORSEMENT OF ROOSEVELT FOR A FOURTH TERM.
There is “politics” involved in the closing of the Brewster works, and, as we have said, the closing is a political attack on Local 365 and the working class. It is the class politics of the capitalist ruling class against the working class. It is political activity of the ruling class through its government to protect its own class interests. It is not in the interests of the ruling class to permit organizations of workers to proceed unmolested to organize for militant working class economic and political action. The ruling class and its government always will be especially incensed when such bold programs and actions are launched by labor in the midst of the imperialist wars of the ruling class. This is the issue at Brewster, and this is the issue that will more and more confront labor as the days come and go.
All of these events should be of the “greatest political significance in this election year” to the working class. They are certainly of great importance to the capitalist ruling class. There significance to the ruling class, however, should be to teach us that it is futile to expect help from Roosevelt and the Democratic Party or the Republican candidate and the Republican Party. All of these events are warnings to the Brewster workers and to all labor to organize a political program and a political party for labor: OF AND BY THE WORKING CLASS.
 
“Consideration” for the Workers
In his telegram to Forrestal. Murray said that “... the department has not planned for or exhibited any consideration of the people thus thrust out of work.” The Navy Department did plan. It planned to get at Local 365 by closing the Brewster plant and throwing thousands of men and women out of work. It has similar plans for other militant trade union locals.
In his special announcement to the Brewster workers, Frankensteen said: “The reward for your faithful service in producing the vital Corsair fighter plane is the complete disregard of the Navy to the problems facing you as vital war workers in a non-critical manpower area.” This too is just so much twaddle. The implication in this statement is that the Navy Department is obstructing the “war effort.” and that the workers at Brewster were engaged in a “labor of love.” Such talk simply doesn’t make sense.
The workers at Brewster were working for wages because they must work in order to eat. They organized a strong union in order to have an instrument that would protect their standard of living and get them more in their pay envelopes. This “faithful service” was like that of the company, the difference being that airplane companies get fat contracts from the government which enable them to make millions in profits without a struggle, while the workers must fight all the way for their puny wages.
 
Who Did Not Plan?
It was the CIO and the UAW which did not plan. They did not plan to meet the situation which faces all the workers in the country: layoffs, firings, union-breaking and wage cuts. The capitalist employers are planning dnd their government is planning.
Another great “friend of labor” was brought into the Brewster situation: one Fiorello LaGuardia, Mayor of New York. Brewster workers who are veterans of the First and Second Imperialist World Wars went to see the Mayor on the Brewster closing. This member of the American Labor Party was “too busy” to see them. But he had sent a telegram to Washington to see what could be done.
While all these events were, transpiring R.J. Thomas, president of the UAW, was winning the applause of the capitalist press for his statement to the UAW membership against “wildcat” strikes. The New York World-Telegram devoted its leading editorial position to running the Thomas statement under the head: Mr. Thomas Says a Mouthful. And then: “R.J. Thomas is writing this editorial today.” Then followed the Thomas statement.
The extremely reactionary New York Sun also devoted its leading editorial to full approval of the Thomas no-strike position. PM, that stupidly contradictory paper of pro-war, pro-Roosevelt, but-we-are-also-for-the-rank-and-file-of-American-labor ideas, is likewise in agreement -with Thomas. They pretend to worry, however, at being in the same company with “some conservative papers” which throw “editorial flowers ... at Mr. Thomas.” These flowers “are touching but not very relevant,” says PM in a great sweat. The Brewster case is a test for the working class—a test ol its understanding and of its ability to lay hold of the political realities of the situation we are confronted with today. There will be many more of these situations as the war goes through its various changes and cycles. The working class cannot meet the onslaughts of its enemies by simply charging the enemy with not permitting us to make planes, or tanks, or guns.
The ruling class and their government will not let the soldiers and sailors go into battle without planes and arms. This is their war and they will certainly see to it that we are armed to fight it. Our job is to see to it that we are armed with strong unions and an independent working class political party to carry on the struggle of our whole class for freedom, peace, security and plenty.
 




Stalin’s lackeys in the United States, led by Browder, Foster and the GPU, are terribly upset over the dissatisfaction workers are demonstrating over the no-strike pledge. Almost every day they have an article in the Daily Worker, howling, wailing, moaning, threatening and calling on the FBI to do something. They want the WPB to deny newsprint to “Trotskyite” papers. They pack CIO Industrial Union Councils and pass resolutions “condemning” Labor Action. They buy space in capitalist dailies to “condemn” “Trotskyites” in the unions. They demand that the government “suppress” Labor Action and throw the “Trotskyite” “seditionists” into jail.
The Stalin-Browder Communist Political Association, following the fascist Elizabeth Dilling, has organized its own “Red Network.” Taking a leaf from the book of the Dies Committee, this outfit goes its slimy way, throwing filth in every place it is permitted to enter and on anybody who never made a pact with Hitler fascism.
 
The Liars at Work
They rant and rave about the KKK while at the same time they adopt the reactionary methods of the KKK. They talk against Gerald L.K. from one side of the mouth but from the other side they spew demagogy and reaction in the manner of Smith. This can be seen as clear as day by anyone who dips into the Daily Worker from time to time.
Here are some gems from a column by George Morris in the Daily Worker of Thursday, July 6. “After all, a Trotskyite is a peculiar kind of animal. He steps from the group that publicly confessed in 1936–37 trials at Moscow to an agreement with Hitler ...” But the facts are that no Trotskyist ever confessed. The Moscow Trials were properly characterized as the worst frame-up in history. Stalin used them to help purge his socialist opponents and to consolidate his bureaucratic regime. The trials were a vicious and ghastly frame-up concocted by Stalin and the GPU. “Confessions” were obtained by violence, threats and intimidation and were condemned by anyone and everyone not a Stalinist. Many are silent now only because Stalin is a partner of Churchill and Roosevelt.
But Morris has a queer memory. We advise him to stay out of Russia. He might get shot. As we remember history, it was Morris’ boss, Joe Stalin, who made “an agreement with Hitler.” Neither Stalin nor Morris will ever be able to rewrite this history. No amount of frame-up or GPU murder will destroy that record.
 
Some Facts
This agreement between Stalin and Hitler gave the fascist Butcher the go-ahead sign for the invasion of Poland which was the prelude to World War II. Right after the Stalin-fascist agreement, Molotov, another one of Morris’ bosses, dumbfounded every decent human being with the announcement that “fascism is a matter of taste.” That is, according to Molotov and Stalin, fascism is something like deciding on one brand of cigarettes or another. You decide which your taste prefers.
The Communist Political Association says that Labor Action and the Workers Party are opposed to an American victory. The inference that workers are expected to draw from this is that Labor Action is for a German victory. Here again they are trying to distort and rewrite history. Labor Action and the Workers are consistent opponents of capitalist and imperialist wars. We have said that this is an imperialist war, that it is not a fight against the theory and practice of fascism. Only yesterday Churchill proved what we say by declaring that the war is not “ideological.” We give political support to no imperialist class or government at any time. We give political support to the working class and to working class political organizations only. We urge the working class in the United States to break with the Republican and Democratic Parties, the capitalist parties, form our own party and establish our own government.
We believe that the workers in England, France, Italy and Japan should do likewise. We believe that the working class in Germany should drive the fascists out and establish their own government. If it were within our power we would help the German workers drive out the fascists just as we would help the oppressed Russian workers drive out the traitor and oppressor, Stalin. This is our program because only the working class can forever destroy fascism!
Morris and Browder would like the working class to forget a few important historic events aside from the “agreement” between Stalin and the fascist butcher, Hitler. We are against capitalist wars and for peace, but we never made a pact with Hitler, helped get an imperialist war going and then organized an American Peace Mobilization. We never organized a GPU and had it cooperate with the fascist Gestapo. We never aided Hitler and the fascists with the slogan: “The Yanks are not coming.” We have never called Roosevelt a fascist. We have never uttered such a monstrosity as did Browder when he said: “The former distinction between the fascist and democratic nations has lost the meaning it once had, and is rapidly losing any serious political meaning at all.” This came from the mouth of Earl Browder in Philadelphia on September 29, 1939.
William Z. Foster is also worried no end about strikes and the no-strike pledge. This is the same Foster who organized and led the great steel strike of 1919. It is the same Foster who a few short years back was whooping it up for peace: any kind of peace, “negotiated” or otherwise, just so the “peace policies of the Soviet Union” were accepted.
Foster is frightened out of his skin at what he now calls “narrow sectarianism.” He admits, that the workers have grievances: “their living standards are being infringed upon by the rising cost of living ...,” there are “various unsatisfactory decisions by the War Labor Board” and “many of the employers” are “provocative.” But, according to Foster, we must turn the other cheek because “the war is reaching its climax.” Also revocation of the no-strike pledge could have highly detrimental effect in the presidential election by strengthening the hands of the anti-Roosevelt opposition.”
This is queer talk from people who a few years ago were telling us that Roosevelt was a fascist. And we are reminded that the Daily Worker is elated over the fact that Dan Tobin of the Teamsters Union is after the “Trotskyites.” They are ready to lie down with Tobin in any old gutter. Now, Tobin is one of the AFL wheelhorses. Yet, didn’t the Communist Party say a few years ago that “the AFL is outright fascist”?
Foster says in his Daily Worker article of July 9 that “the basic remedy for the auto workers’ legitimate grievances, which the strike agitators are exploiting, is not to engage in a suicidal wartime strike policy but to improve the political work of the organization in Detroit, in Michigan, in Washington.” How shall the auto and other workers improve their political work? Foster and Browder say by voting for Roosevelt. But Roosevelt is President now and has been for nearly twelve years. The grievances about which labor complains most now came under Roosevelt. How will they correct these grievances by taking Foster’s advice and voting for Roosevelt again?
We like Foster’s expression, “strike agitators.” Where did we hear that and similar expressions before? “Foreign agitators.” “If you don’t like this country, go back where you come from.” “These agitators who come into our community and disturb the peaceful relations between the workers and their employers.” “They ain’t nothin’ but a bunch of commune-ists.” Yes, we heard this before from the Chambers of Commerce, the KKK, Father Coughlin and reactionary little business men.
With the Communist Party all-out for “free enterprise” and big business, it doesn’t sound strange coming from their months. Their line has changed again!
 





BLS ‘Price Index’ No Substitute For Real ‘Cost of Living’ Guide
According to the “steel analysts,” there has been an increase in the number of “outlaw strikes” in the steel industry. It is claimed that the steel scheduling program was being interfered with by the stoppages. This is very interesting. I don’t know much about steel scheduling, but I can easily understand that the breakfast and supper schedules of the steel workers are being held up by the Little Steel formula and the refusal of the WLB to render a decision on the steel workers’ demands for a seventeen cents an hour wage increase.
Perhaps some of these stoppages were due to the necessity for steel workers to scurry around to get money for the rent. Perhaps the steel workers are finding it difficult to put in the hard day at the mills on the food they can buy with their low wages. Perhaps many of the steel workers are finding it increasingly difficult to make it to the mills Without proper clothing, including shoes. And perhaps thousands of steel workers are getting the notion that it just doesn’t make sense to work unless you get paid for it. This is particularly true in the case of corporations like the steel companies, which have millions for dividends to loafers and parasites, but expect the men who produce the steel to labor and toil for just enough to keep from starving.
 

Statistics and Statistics
A group of “economic experts” has analyzed the cost of living dispute between the Bureau of Labor Statistics and the AFL-CIO. The only conclusion these “experts” come to that is of any significance is the statement that the BLS finding was not a cost of living index but a price index. This has already been commented on in Labor Action but bears repeated emphasis. “Economic experts” are people who, if they do nothing else, usually succeed in confusing those of us who are not experts in the mysteries of statistics and economic analysis.
It seems clear from the report of the “experts” that the AFL-CIO contentions about the cost of living were and remain correct. What the labor experts said was substantially the following: In order to maintain himself and his family at the former standard, the worker must have more wages than allowed by the Little Steel formula. This is due to the fact that not only are prices higher but that prices have risen faster than wages. It is also true that quality has been lowered. (A pair of socks that one pays sixty-five cents for today are of no better quality than socks that sold for thirty-five cents three years ago.) To this must be added the fact that lower priced goods that workers purchased are not obtainable today.
Neither of these two considerations was noticed by the BLS report. Another item not included in the BLS report is income taxes and bond purchases. Even if one argues that bonds are “savings,” this money, nevertheless, is not available to the worker unless and until he cashes the bonds. On war taxes, only the most hard-boiled and hypocritical reactionary, the most stupid ass or the most ignorant lout would argue that any good whatsoever accrues to the working class.
The Little Steel formula is bad enough, but the report of the BLS is more vicious because it is an attempt to give expert support to the present wage stabilization scheme. The Little Steel formula pegged the worker’s standard of living. This was pointed out in Labor Action at the time the award was made. Even if there had been no increase in prices, the Little Steel formula would have been no less reactionary. Such a wage policy means that a worker who is living in a shack must always live in that same shack. A worker who lives on salt pork and beans will always be confined to the level of salt pork and beans. With the tremendous increase in the real cost of living, the Little Steel formula became only more atrocious.
But along comes the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the federal government, claiming to be talking about the cost of living when these “experts” were really talking about prices. And not all prices even, but only some retail prices. The BLS report wasn’t even an adequate examination of price rises. The cost of living is the total amount of money a family must have to live on, irrespective of prices, or at least the total amount a family spends for living. To meet this demand the miners said they must have $2.00 more a day. The steel workers say they must have seventeen cents an hour increase. The workers’ wives are real experts on this question; far more reliable for us than the BLS “experts.”
The BLS report has been demonstrated to be a fraud. As such it is fit only for the government archives or the ash can.
 

A Word on Coos
I would like to ask the crew of the ship that sent some money to pay wages to the strikers at the Wright plant in Cincinnati a few questions. That is, assuming that these men sent this money of their own free will and were not tricked into this choice piece of stupidity by a reactionary, labor-hating commanding officer. The strikers at this Wright plant went on strike because a few Negroes were given better jobs and placed in the department with the white strikers. Now I would like to ask the seamen of this ship: if you had been working at the Wright plant when these Negroes were promoted, what would have been your position? Would you have decided with the Negroes or the strikers?
If these seamen are people who would have sided with the Negroes and defended their right to promotion, then they would not, it seems to me, have placed the emphasis they did merely on the fact that there was a strike of a few workers among several thousands. Furthermore, if these seamen are people who would oppose such an attitude toward Negro workers, they would not lay themselves open to the charge of being anti-labor by acting as they did. They would make an attack on the strikers for being anti-labor and anti-union, because that’s what a white worker is who strikes against equal treatment of Negro workers.
 




To crowd the past ten years of the history of the labor movement in the United States into four pages of The New International is an impossible task. Space limitations will make it necessary therefore to attempt a selection of the most outstanding events and to integrate them into some sort of pattern of the whole. Into this pattern would go such significant events as the coming of the New Deal and its rules and regulations for organized labor, the formation of the CIO, the impact of the war on the labor movement, the tremendous expansion of trade union membership, particularly the increase in Negro membership.
 
The Coming of the New Deal
The attempt of the ruling class in the United States to halt the decline of capitalism, to restore the economy to “normal” functioning, to pacify the masses of the people, were concretized in the election of Franklin D. Roosevelt to the presidency and bourgeois support of what came to be known as the “New Deal.” The United States and the whole capitalist world were in the throes of the most deep-going economic depression. Four years of the Hoover Administration had demonstrated even to the bourgeoisie that the politics and the economic thinking of the Great Engineer would have to give way, at least temporarily, to more “enlightened” plans, policies and schemes. This was admitted and agreed to by the ruling class except the most reactionary, inept and mediaeval-minded of their number. These were the people who supported Hoover for re-election. Their group comprised the leaders of heavy industry, the capital goods manufacturers, the big bondholders and the big bankers. They were against any concessions whatsoever to “the mob,” “the rabble” and to the masses of the people.
On the other hand, the chief support for the New Deal came from the lower middle class, including the small farmers, labor, small business, a large section of manufacturers of consumer goods and the liberals. It is important to emphasize that in so far as the New Deal was taken seriously and accepted as a permanent way out of the crisis, it Was a middle class phenomenon, a mass movement of the middle class based on the desire of the petty bourgeois to salvage his presumed place in society and save his small rural and urban property holdings. In so far as the proletarian thought at all of the meaning of the New Deal, his thinking was very simple and quite naive. The proletariat, as represented by organized labor, was mainly concerned with the maintenance of its unions, the right to organize, and employment. The unorganized part of the working class was first of all concerned with employment. Later, with the coming of Section 7-A of the NIRA and under the influence of the dubious and historically fallacious slogan: “Now the government has given us the right to organize,” the unorganized workers fell in behind the New Deal as “labor’s new Magna Carta.”
The result of all of this was rapprochement between the white collar middle class, the proletariat, the small farmer and the small business man. While it was true that each group had its own group reasons for rallying enthusiastically to the support of the New Deal, they were all unified for the time being behind the idea that the times demanded the intervention of the government, as it was put, for the protection of the masses of the people, for the rejuvenation of the economy, for the fulfillment of the American Promise and the American Dream. Those who talk glibly today about the “Century of the Common Man” in connection with the “war aims” of the United Nations forget that barely ten years ago they proclaimed the New Deal as the “Century of the Common Man.” Those liberals and their followers who exuberantly, piously or hopefully – dependent on temperament or stupidity – announce today that a “revolution” is taking place, forget that not over a decade ago they heralded the New Deal as “socialistic,” the broad avenue to plenty in our time, the forerunner of the rights of man.
 
Failure of the AFL
The organized labor movement and the unorganized workers, particularly in the mass production and heavy goods industries, were enthralled by the New Deal mainly for the reason that this panacea appeared on the scene when labor was besieged and embattled by all the hosts of a frightened but stubborn ruling class. The labor movement had declined during the depression years and before. The decline in trade union membership was taking place even before the crash of 1929; it began seriously about 1922. The AFL membership at the time of the Great Crash was only about fifty per cent of its 1920 total. There was some attempt at organization by the AFL, notably among the textile workers of the South and in the automobile industry in Detroit. Both of these attempts were dismal failures. The Executive Council of the AFL, holding fast to a degenerate form of the philosophy of Gompers, ignored completely the trend of the times both in respect to technological development and the company union plans of the employers. AFL President Green made a trip south during the depression, ostensibly to promote organization among textile workers. His efforts were confined to pious addresses to groups of business men, but he made no speeches to textile workers. He departed with the blessings of the business groups but the mill owners went their way totally unaffected by anything which had been offered by President Green in the way of AFL co-operation.
The same policy of attempting to organize the workers through co-operation with employers was employed in the automobile industry. The AFL sought an agreement with General Motors through which this corporation’s workers would become members of the AFL without their knowledge or any effort on their pan. The scheme was not acceptable to General Motors and was later rejected by the Ford Motor Co. The essence of the AFL plan was to form the workers into federal unions, directly affiliated to the AFL. Later, however, these workers would be separated into the various crafts and put in the appropriate craft international union. Thus did the AFL hold to its fatal craft union philosophy in the face of the rapid decline of its membership and in the face of the difficult plight of workers in the mass production industries who had no union organization.
The attitude of the AFL was summed up by Wharton of the International Association of Machinists, who said at a later date that the AFL had not been remiss in attempting to organize workers in the steel industry. The fact was, according to Wharton, the steel workers did not want to be organized. The fact is that right through the period of the depression the AFL was so thoroughly craft-union-conscious that the workers in the mass production industries were considered a lower order than the skilled workers in the craft unions. This attitude persisted until the wide expansion in employment after the beginning of the war. There was no change in the basic craft-union philosophy, but the treasury-minded presidents of the AFL internationals suddenly realized that there were millions of dollars in joining fees and per capita taxes waiting to be collected in camps and factories under construction and among the workers in the aircraft plants and shipyards. Even the Negro workers were wooed to some degree when it was seen that they would be employed by the hundreds of thousands and that they too would have money for joining fees and per capita taxes. To be sure, the practice of placing these Negroes in Jim Crow locals or of some other form of segregation was followed, but there was a slight change from the former practice of either excluding the Negroes or ignoring them.
 
Capital’s Union-Busting Aims
The conservative practices of the AFL, pursued with extreme ineptitude and doddering callousness, persisted not only in the face of the ravages of the depression but also when confronted by the company-union designs of the bourgeoisie. This was the period when the employers and their associations were experimenting with various types of company unions under the mild-sounding name of “employee representation plans.” Rubber, steel, textiles, coal, railroads and the electrical companies were all busy with these schemes. Their aim was to get their company unions entrenched while the legitimate organizations of labor were in a weakened and disorganized state from the years of unemployment. The bourgeoisie was determined to finish the unions off before the business cycle began its upward climb and before re-employment began. Not only was the AFL blind to the manifestations which have been enumerated, but the craft union leadership had not even an elementary idea either of the magnitude or the nature of the sickness of capitalism. This leadership was completely incompetent to deal with the real situation. Industry was sick, capitalist society was sick nigh unto death, and the labor movement was in a condition that can properly be described as a state of decay. Along with the rest of bourgeois society, the trade union movement had been drugged on the superficial and artificially stimulated “prosperity” of the golden years of Harding and Coolidge. True, the car was now somewhat dilapidated and there was no garage to put it in. True, there were millions of pots containing no chicken, the grass was growing in the streets and the full dinner pail was only a plaintive memory. But despite the fact that this situation existed all over the capitalist world, many leaders of labor and industry were convinced that the Hoover era was a mere mishap, a miscalculation which would and could be corrected with the aid of Providence, the American Spirit, and the revival of our pioneer fortitude and courage.
 
“Section 7-A”
The answer to the prayers of the faithful, the hopes of the believing and the class resourcefulness of the “enlightened” among the bourgeoisie was the election of Roosevelt and the proclamation of the New Deal. We are primarily concerned with the unions under the National Industrial Recovery Act and the transformation wrought in the relationship between organized labor and the government. We have remarked before that after the passage of the act labor leaders toured the country announcing that now “we have the right to organize.”
In the light of what has happened to collective bargaining since the beginning of World War II it is important to quote the relevant section of the act. Section 7-A reads: “That employees have the right to organize and bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing, and shall be free from the interference, restraint, or coercion of employers of labor ... that no employee and no one seeking employment shall be required as a condition of employment to join any company union ...” What the act did in fact was to legalize collective bargaining and to illegalize the company union. This was what was significant about Section 7-A. Formally, and so far as the law was concerned, employers were forced to bargain with their employees. And since labor had learned long before that its best bargaining agency was the union, it joined the unions by the hundreds of thousands and an upward swing in trade union membership began. It was a long and, to labor, a successful trek from the conspiracy trials of the early nineteenth century to government enforcement of collective bargaining in the second quarter of the twentieth century.
Despite the fact that the most reactionary of the employers resisted the operation of Section 7-A, not only by their efforts to maintain their company unions but by the persistence of their spy systems, their constant efforts to frustrate collective bargaining and often by open resort to anti-union violence, the movement grew rapidly. The AFL leadership at least knew enough to seek whatever organizational advantage there was in the new governmental paternalism. Also there were many employers who concluded that the easier road was recognition of the unions and the consent to bargain collectively. They knew that the whole New Deal was a necessary concession granted to the masses in a period of great stress and strain from which the bourgeoisie had been unable to deliver itself. Furthermore, big business was still in control of industry through provisions contained in the codes of “fair competition.” Furthermore, under the NRA set-up, labor leaders were drawn closer to the government and thereby made more amenable to conservative suggestions coming from the new “friends of labor” in the government.
From later developments, the contention of Norman Ware that “there are signs that the Administration originally regarded the collective bargaining clause as more a hindrance than a help to recovery” may have great weight. Ware continues: “It seems to have been the opinion of both President Roosevelt and General Johnson that minimum wages, maximum hours, employer paternalism and the suggestions of the Labor Advisory Board were all the wage earners needed for their protection.” Ware then quotes from Roosevelt’s message when he sent the NRA to Congress: “Workers know that the first move expected of the nation is a great co-operation of all the employers ... to improve the case of the workers. Industries can do this only if they have the support of the whole public and especially of their own workers. This is not a law to foment discord and will not be administered as such ...” Ware remarks that there is not a word here about collective bargaining or any other principle on which trade unionism is funded. The whole concept advanced is one of employer and governmental paternalism. Of course this and many other aspects of the New Deal, the codes and Section 7-A, were explained by the Marxists at the time and the Blue Eagle was often described as the “Blue Buzzard.”
 
The Unions Grow Stronger
The quantitative advance of the labor movement in the early days of the New Deal was, however, unquestionable. The AFL unions revived and increased their membership. Not only this, but scientific progress and technological achievement had created a situation in the mass production industries which made this decisive sector of the economy the most fruitful field of trade union expansion. The finance-capitalists understood this. It was here that they were determined to hold the line with their company unions, espionage systems and blackjacks. It was the conjuncture of the severest economic crisis in the history of capitalism, the attempt to resolve the crisis by strictly controlled concessions and bourgeois planning and the already demonstrated high level of the productive forces which brought to fruition the long but sporadic efforts to establish an industrial union movement in the United States. Here had been erected plant capacity far in excess of what was necessary for supplying the needs of the domestic population. It was estimated, for instance, that the large automobile companies could produce enough cars to supply the whole world, and not just a restricted capitalist world market. This was true to one degree or another of the actual and potential production of other goods and services.
Despite this, the productive forces – labor, plant and natural resources – were idle. The New Deal had begun its regime of price-fixing, wage-fixing, artificial competition-stimulation, artificial expansion of the market and provisions for taking care of the halt, the lame and the aged.
 
Rise of the CIO
It was out of this objective situation that the industrial union movement and the CIO emerged. It was by working in this milieu, seizing the advantages offered by the New Deal and comprehending, in an elementary way, the potential role of the mass production workers, that John L. Lewis and his associates became makers of labor history. The AFL leadership, on the other hand, seeing nothing and learning nothing; encrusted with a decadent craft union philosophy; contemptuous of the needs of the mass production workers; ignorant of the fact that 1935 was not 1885; plunged ahead and confined its efforts to the expansion of its craft union membership. The craft union theorists could not understand that the protagonists of industrial unionism were not latter-day Knights of Labor nor ideological heirs of the founders of the Socialist and Labor Alliance. The tremendous struggle which ensued therefore was a conflict between craft unionism, which had once played a progressive role in the labor movement, and new conceptions suitable to an age of monopoly capitalism, a higher level of technology and mass production. With the emergence of the CIO it can be said that the labor movement attained a higher level, and in relation to the AFL the CIO became the progressive section of the labor movement.
It has been remarked often that the New Deal was instituted as a recovery measure; which, being interpreted, means that the New Deal was a mechanism for the rehabilitation of capitalist production. Business was permitted to write its own codes of “fair competition.” Temporarily the government replaced the private monopolist as the price-fixer. It is interesting that the New Deal government took over from monopoly capitalism one of its favorite modes of price-maintenance and price-appreciation by artificially holding down production. Furthermore, industry was stabilized and the profit function protected by government subsidies and enormous loans. Despite this, all that the labor bureaucracy could discern was Section 7-A, “which gives us the right to organize.”
This was particularly true of the CIO. Its theoreticians, those in the organization, and its friends inside and outside the New Deal government, hailed the new role of the government as the protector of labor. This despite the fact that the New Deal was again and again announced as a recovery measure; that is, as a measure to restore the status quo before the depression. This new theory of the role of the government was not at all understood by the CIO leadership. While it was true that the government was playing a new role, it was not what the labor movement believed it to be. Some of them were to understand this later, with the coming of World War II.
One of the reasons for the CIO succumbing so completely to the blandishments of the New Deal was somewhat fortuitous. The NLRB, under Madden, Witt and Edwin Smith, was partial to the CIO as against the AFL, and the CIO profited greatly from decisions of the board which were not always objectively arrived at. This was partially due to the influence of the Communist Party in the board, the CP at this time being violently pro-CIO. This was enough for empirically-minded labor leaders who were more concerned with the building of their organization than with the making of political analyses, which they were not competent to make even if they had been so inclined.
 
The War and the Unions
Concomitant with the progress of the labor movement in membership and prestige the bourgeoisie continued its struggle against the New Deal and the unions. This was accentuated as the “depression” was magically transformed into the “recession” and some measure of “prosperity” was restored. The organized workers fought back persistently and continued the extension of their organizing drives. But the course of world events disturbed “the American Dream” and the utopian hopes of the labor leadership. War clouds appeared on the horizon and “recovery” through the forty-hour week, collective bargaining, “premium pay,” minimum wages, burning the wheat and killing the pigs, was turned into “recovery” through the forty-eight and sixty-hour week, the abolition of collective bargaining, job stabilization, maximum wages, taking away the right to strike and the elimination of “fair competition.” The subsidies were still there, only bigger. The profits were there, but huge beyond compare, even after the taxes went higher than ever before. The big bourgeoisie which had allegedly been driven from the temple in 1933–35, appeared again in full view, and in total control of the government.
The drive began to unify the nation behind the “war effort.” The labor leaders responded to this call, which they described as the call of “our government.” The CIO devised the slogan of “Victory Through Equality of Sacrifice.” They and their friends among the dwindling New Dealers fought for the retention of all the fundamental New Deal measures and legislation. What they did not know was that the real spirit and essence of the New Deal was being retained. The essence of the New Deal was “planning” for the salvation of capitalism in a period of decline extremely alarming to the bourgeoisie. We have already quoted Roosevelt on the NRA: “This is not a law to foment discord and will not be administered as such.” At a time when the bourgeoisie is facing a life-and-death struggle with a foreign imperialism, to administer the New Deal as was the custom during peacetime would “foment discord,” in the eyes of the bourgeoisie and its government.
Furthermore, it must be emphasized again that the ruling class, in a period of capitalist decline especially, will not worry overmuch about how “recovery” is effected. They do not put all of their eggs into one basket, neither are they committed to the use of the same basket from period to period. They have many avenues of approach to the maintenance of their monopoly, prestige and profits. At one period it is a New Deal, at another it is imperialist war. The fact that they do not have control over the course of history, or that they cannot have control over the course of history, or that they cannot predict without error does not deter them from seizing on events and using them for their own class interests, whether in war or peace. The profits accruing from the manufacture of munitions are no less profits than those flowing in from peacetime monopoly or New Deal plowing under of cotton.
 
Militancy of the Workers
An outstanding feature of the past ten years of the labor movement with all its ups and downs has been the persistent militancy of the proletariat. True, its militancy has been dampened since the outbreak of the war and under the betrayals of the trade union bureaucracy, but no one can say that the working class in the United States has capitulated. No matter what one’s ideas and opinions may be about “this being a period of reaction,” this fuzzy saying cannot be interpreted to mean that the proletariat is or should be quiescent. The numerous strikes, especially those after the declaration of war, give the lie to any such declaration.
Perhaps the most heartening aspect of the resurgence of the organized labor movement during the past decade has been the entrance of Negroes, until today there are nearly a million Negroes occupying a place in the trade union movement. The outstanding feature of the entrance of the Negroes into the ranks of organized labor is their making a place for themselves, primarily as workers and not as Negroes. This is attested by the virtual passing of scabbing on the part of Negroes, their development of union loyalty and their support of the militant actions of the unions of which they are members. This development of course is part and parcel of the industrial union movement. There is no evidence that the AFL has changed its ideas or its practices in connection with the Negro worker. If anything, the position of this organization has become more reprehensible under attack. One can hear from AFL bureaucrats such statements that “the AFL treats Negroes better than the CIO.”
The past decade witnessed not only the formation of a new trade union center but sporadic efforts at unification and a split in the CIO with the withdrawal of the UMWA. The agitation for unification was confined largely to the top of the AFL and CIO. The whole proceedings were conducted bureaucratically with no apparent effort to arouse the rank and file of the two organizations in favor of a merger. In fact, the rank and file demonstrated little interest in unification. This was in part due to the conflicts engendered in the course of competitive efforts at organizing, especially in the war industries. Furthermore, on the part of the CIO membership there were the recent and unpleasant memories of their experiences with the AFL before the coming of the CIO. On the part of the AFL, craft-union exclusiveness acted as a deterrent to the development of unification. In practice it was difficult to discover a point at which the interests of the two groups of workers coalesced. This was true despite all the theoretical and practical reasons that might be adduced for the merger of the two organizations.
The Roosevelt government for a while intervened in this matter in favor of unification, but two situations lessened the interest of the government in such a consummation. First was the unity proposal of John L. Lewis and the second was the solid support received from the AFL and the CIO in the prosecution of the war. Roosevelt was opposed to any step which would enhance the power of Lewis in the labor movement and unanimity of the AFL and CIO on full support of the war and other measures of the Administration made it unnecessary to intervene further in the direction of unification. Since the Administration had complete support for the war program there was no need to risk the dangers of a unified trade union movement.
 
The Road Ahead
In closing this brief survey it is necessary to say something on the road ahead for the labor movement in this country. What are the prospects for the post-war period? This problem worries the leadership, especially the leadership of the CIO. The AFL craft-union bureaucrats are more sanguine. They have several advantages, at least of a temporary sort. This, of course, is enough for them. They could not be expected to concern themselves with the really important omens in connection with capitalist production and world trade. They base themselves on what they believe to be the abiding features of industry at the point of the need for skilled craftsmen. This applies to the building and construction industry, the metal trades and transportation. This is the backbone of the AFL. They believe that after the war, even though there is a “recession,” there will be enough work for enough of their membership to maintain the organization and the treasuries of the Federation and the international unions. Furthermore, many of these internationals have millions of dollars in their treasuries. They can go through several lean years, they believe, and maintain themselves.
The CIO is in a somewhat different condition. Its unions are younger, not as stable in an organizational and financial sense, and, more important, the CIO can live effectively only if it continues to expand.
The drive that is already under way to smash the union movement will gain momentum after the war and will be centered on the CIO. It is easier to come to an understanding with the AFL craft-union aristocracy than with the lower-paid semi-skilled and unskilled masses of the CIO. Furthermore, there will be layoffs in the mass production industries that will tend to decimate the CIO membership. In order to meet this, the CIO will probably resort to a series of mergers between internationals. This is presaged by the United Steel Workers taking in the Aluminum Workers.
Neither the AFL nor the CIO will be able to withstand the attacks of the bourgeoisie now and after the war if they persist in their present policies. This is especially true of the CIO. It is this organization that we are especially concerned with because of its greater promise and significance, which flow not only from its vertical structure but its composition. At no point in its existence, however, has the leadership of the CIO understood what is really fundamental, important and potent in the industrial form of organization. That is, the industrial form of organization lends itself more readily to class struggle and a class struggle program.
It can be maintained that beneath the demand of the proletariat for industrial union type of organization is an unuttered demand for a class struggle program. This demand is inchoate and vague but it is there. This is the point at which the industrial union movement can and should distinguish itself from craft unionism. The CIO bureaucracy, however, rejects class struggle notions and programs in favor of class collaboration and intermittent capitulation at every decisive phase of the struggle.
The CIO will not be able to maintain its leadership after the war with a continuation of such crass class collaboration as it has practiced in the past and practices today. The organization will never be in a position to repulse the assaults of the bourgeoisie without the most determined and conscious class-struggle action.
The leadership of the CIO has some vague understanding of this point. This is the meaning of their resistance to independent political organization of the proletariat. It is true that sustained economic struggle augmented by the intrusion of the ideas of the revolutionaries will promote class consciousness among the proletariat and impel them to independent political organization and class political action. The CIO leadership resists this class demand of the proletariat because, as meek class collaborationists, such a demand is not of their world. But this is the direction the labor movement must take if it is to make any further genuine progress at all.
 




Robert Minor, first assistant to President Browder of Stalin’s Communist Political Association, has a piece in the Daily Worker of June 27 entitled: To Tell the Truth: There’s Nothing New Under the Sun. The article is concerned with the unions and capitalist enterprise in the post-war period. Minor, it must be remembered, is the man who says that the present war is “a sacred war.”
The article begins with the pronouncement that “in this war, every country that has a large free powerful trade union movement is winning. Every country that has not is being defeated,” This statement is not true. Russia is winning and Russia does not have a “free powerful trade union movement.” There are no genuine trade unions in Russia. There are no labor organizations in Russia such as exist in the United States and England, or such as existed in Russia when there was a Bolshevik Party under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky.
The Russian trade unions and all “free” organizations of the working class were suppressed and disbanded long ago by the bureaucracy headed by Stalin. The only group which is free in Russia is the group of government bureaucrats and the heads of the big industries. These form a class which exploits the workers and enriches itself from the toil of the masses.
A worker or a group of workers which demanded even the limited freedom which the workers in the United States or England have today would be thrown into jail or shot. Such workers in Russia would meet the same end as did workers in Hitler Germany who insisted on freedom of speech, assembly and organization.
 
Distorting the Truth
The other part of the above quotation is a somewhat subtle distortion and dangerous half-truth. It is true that the United States and Great Britain are winning. It is also true that there is a “large” and “free” labor movement in these countries. Now Minor wants us to believe that the United Nations are winning because there is a “free” labor movement in these countries.
There was a free labor movement in France. The working class in France had tremendously more freedom than the workers in Russia, yet France was defeated by Germany, where there was no “free” labor movement. In fact, we find the armies of all the belligerent countries composed of workers fighting against each other. Simple observation will tell anyone that the question cannot be determined by Stalinist word juggling about “free” and unfree labor movements.
It is true that many workers in the United Nations; in the capitalist democracies, believe that the war is being fought for democracy, that it is a war against fascism. In their minds they are fighting for democracy and not for the perpetuation of or the extension of United States or British imperialism. In their minds they are fighting for the continued existence of their “free” trade unions. In their thinking they accept the true but oversimplified statement of their leaders that if Hitler wins that will mark the end of their unions. The capitalist ruling class seizes on and inflames this attitude of the workers in the United Nations and exploits this for its own ends, namely, the waging of imperialist war.
 
Birds of a Feather
But Stalin and Hitler, who are dictators in countries that have no “free” labor movements, adopt a similar tactic. Stalin unearths the hoary nationalistic traditions of Czarist Russia and incites the enslaved Russian masses to defend the fatherland against the German aggressor.
This aggressor, Hitler, to be sure, just before the German army crossed into Russia, was hailed by Stalin, Browder and Minor as a friend of the Russian people and a pillar of world peace. Hitler, not to be outdone by all the rest, also claimed to be fighting a “sacred war.” Thousands of German workers hurled , themselves against the foe in defense of their fatherland, as they were taught.
The fact that there is an important difference between the political or economic set-up in the United States and England, Germany and Russia, or the fact that there are “free” labor movements in the United Nations and none in Germany or Russia is not what determines either the nature of the war or the probable victor in the contest. Russia will probably be on the winning side without a free labor movement, Germany will lose without a free labor movement.
 
Is Labor “Free” Today?
What is a free labor movement today? How is this question to be answered in the concrete circumstances of the present war? (The Stalin-Browder party called it an “imperialist war,” a war being fought by two gangs, before Hitler’s army crossed into Russia.) Is the labor movement as “free” today as it was before the U.S. entered the war? Are unions free to call strikes? Are workers free to move from one job to another? Can a union bargain collectively with management and come to a wage agreement? Unions and workers are free to do none of these things. These things are controlled by the capitalists through their government. Despite important differences now, these things are also controlled by the government in Russia and Germany, where there are no “free” trade unions.
The trade unions in England and the United States are in this condition because there is another freedom which they have not availed themselves of and taken hold of. That is political freedom and political independence. Workers have this opportunity in the U.S. but they do not have the opportunity in Germany and Russia. In Soviet Russia they made a beginning under the leadership of the Bolshevik Party with Lenin and Trotsky, but Lenin died and Stalin seized the country and suppressed the workers’ organizations.
 
Political Action Necessary
A genuinely free labor movement today in the United States would be a movement devoted to independent working class political action. It would be a trade union movement in the process of breaking with the capitalist parties and setting up a workers party, a labor party that would oppose both the Republican and Democratic Parties.
This, of course, is precisely what Browder, Minor and Stalin do not want. They say so. They are very clear and precise on this. Not only are they against independent political action by labor, but they are just as violently opposed to militant action by the unions.
The Stalin-Browder Communist Political Association demands that the working class support capitalism, the Chamber of Commerce, the NAM and the capitalist employers. Minor wants trade unions to exist after the war because trade unions are necessary to the continuation of capitalism, according to him. Of course this isn’t true because, for example, there is capitalism in Germany but there are no trade unions there.
In his piece Minor supports the demands of a capitalist publishing house (McGraw-Hill) for cooperation between labor and management. Minor says: Such cooperation could only come “by the integration of the efforts of labor and capital for the victory and for a post-war policy of no strikes, through the only agency that can exist – the United States government.”
 
“The Decisive Men”
Also, “it could only come after a growing habit of thinking realistically by decisive men of the capitalist class.” Now it so happens that the “decisive men of the capitalist class” in the United States are such friends of labor as Rockefeller, the Mellons, du Ponts, Ford, Stettinius, Weir, Girdler, Avery and others. These are the men, according to Minor, who want “strong, powerful, free” trade, unions. These are the men whom labor is to cooperate with after the war. It is through cooperation with these men and their like in Europe after the war that labor will achieve “great, free, and powerful trade unions and collective bargaining. It is through cooperation with the big capitalists that every nation in Europe, no less than the U.S., Great Britain and Russia, will have highly organized trade unionism after the war.”
We take it that the candidate of the Communist Political Association for organizer of the world labor movement after the war will be Harry Bridges.
 




According to the daily press, one hundred miners belonging to Ray Edmundson’s anti-Lewis faction met in Cincinnati last week. This is the group formed in southern Illinois by Edmundson, allegedly to fight for the restoration of district autonomy in the miners’ international.
The delegates to the conference passed resolutions condemning Lewis’ “autocratic rule,” his rule by his “royal family,” and, according to Edmundson, “when the convention meets in September, Lewis and his royal family can take a licking on the issue gracefully or disgracefully.” Edmundson declared that “liberty, independence and autonomy will be restored to the members of the miners’ union, whether Lewis likes it or not.”
One resolution of the conference said that the fight against Lewis will not interfere with the production of coal or become a strike movement. Another resolution calls for all supporters of autonomy to meet in conference in Cincinnati on September 11, one day before the opening of the international convention.
 
Democracy Long Overdue
Labor Action believes that full democratic procedure is long overdue in the miners’ union. We believe that autonomy should be restored to the thirty-one districts unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the UMWA membership that there are districts in which such glaring and anti-union irregularities exist as would jeopardize the welfare of the district and the international if autonomy was restored. It is hard to believe that this is the actual situation in twenty-one out of thirty-one districts. If it is the case that it is necessary to withhold autonomy from two-thirds of the UMWA district, then it seems to us that there is a sickness in the UMWA that should be cured.
The best, manner of providing correctives for any illness that exist in any section of the labor movement is to adopt the practice of the widest possible internal democracy, The opportunity to elect their own officers is an elementary democratic right of union members that should not be abridged. This should apply to districts as well as to locals and the international.
We believe that there is room for vast improvement in the matter of democratic procedure: in the UMWA. We also know that the same adverse criticism can be made of the labor movement in general and one does not need to direct one’s darts at the UMWA and Lewis exclusively. This is all that we can say on this aspect of the question at this time. We can, however, say something in addition on the Edmundson autonomy campaign.
 
“Liberals” Hate Lewis
In the first place, we know that Lewis, is not very popular in some quarters. He is extremely unpopular with the Roosevelt Administration and with Browder’s Communist Party Political Association. He is not popular with the leadership of the CIO. There is not much love for him at the top, of the AFL. He is also anathema to the so-called liberal journals and papers such as The Nation, the New Republic and PM.
All of this was made very clear during the mine strikes of 1943. All of these people were against the strikes and attempted to make it appear that the miners’ grievances could have been settled without resort to the strike.
They talked and wrote daily about the “war effort,” about “letting the boys down on the fighting fronts,” “isolationism” and “treason.” Despite all this, the miners continued their marches in and out of the mines with superb discipline and union loyalty, They pointed the way for the rest of the labor movement, which was straining at the leash while the Murrays, Greens and the Stalinists were turning heaven and earth to hold the line for their pro-war no-strike pledge.
We are skeptical about this Edmundson autonomy move. At present it seems faintly malodorous. We may be wrong, but we would like to know if there is anything behind this, such as the Roosevelt Democratic Party machine in Illinois. It happens that there is a miners’ convention in September. There is a national election in November, and both capitalist parties would like the miners’ votes. A fight against Lewis on the issue of “dictatorship” and autonomy would be as good as any for the vote hunters, provided they can get a miner to step out front and lead the fight.
We don’t claim that this is the case, but such things do happen. We are sure that if there is any possible way for the Stalinists to crawl into the Edmundson group and render aid and assistance, they will be there bag and baggage. Lewis was the same dictator in 1940 he is today but they raved for forty-five minutes trying to force him to remain as head of the CIO. Edmundson was an $8,000 a year; appointee of Lewis. It is reported that, after he resigned this post, he returned to the mines at a miner’s pay.
 
A Rank and File Fight
We say again that we are for the restoration of autonomy to the twenty-one districts that are today denied their democratic rights. We believe that this is in the interest of good trade unionism. We believe that the twenty-one districts should wage a struggle in the coming convention for this democratic right. We believe, however, that this struggle should arise in the UMWA and be conducted by the miners themselves. We don’t believe that capitalist politicians, whether Democrat or Republican, have any genuine interest in fighting for democracy in the UMWA or any other union.
Above all, we hope that not a single miner will let the Stalin-Browder Communist Political Association get close enough to be touched with a forty-foot pole?
 




In an article in Collier’s for July 15, which he calls Not Guilty, John L. Lewis has written what to him is the miners’ side of the case in connection with the 1943 Strikes.
The article sets forth the facts as they were already known to everybody but the most stupid among: the population. He relates the low wages of miners, the exorbitant prices charged in the company stores, the high and unprecedented production of coal, the hazards and difficulties of mining, the time lost without compensation in getting to the point of operations and back to the mouth of the mine at the end of the shift, and other inequalities suffered by the miners which reduced their “take home pay.”
Lewis goes into detail on the execrable role of the government in the handling of the miners’, demands for a wage increase. He pillories the WLB for its bungling, meddling, its pettiness and arrogance, and its slimy efforts at wrecking the miners’ union. Lewis gives the details as they occurred from week to week, month to month and strike to strike. In all this he does an excellent job which is all to the good. But, as was said above, these facts were already known. They were so clear that the real situation was apparent to the rank and file of labor. The action of the miners was of such portent that the leadership of the CIO and other organizations were continually taking to the platform and the press to warn their membership that Lewis was a scoundrel and that labor should not be influenced by what was taking place in the coal fields.
However, aside from a restatement of the facts in the case, Not Guilty is sorely inadequate. It is difficult to discover from a reading of the article just what it is that Lewis is attempting to prove himself “not guilty” of.
And is he talking about Lewis as leader of the UMWA or is he talking about the UMWA? He says the record gives the lie to the charge that the miners are not patriotic. He says that despite the 1943 strikes, the union mined nine million more tons of soft coal than in 1942 and that for the first four months of 1944 ten million more tons of anthracite were mined than in a like period in 1943. Also the UMWA is the only labor organization which enters into agreements for a two-year period.
 
Short On Understanding
Lewis writes that “no other labor executive or union has been subjected to any such bitter, cruel and sustained attack.” This is true, but Lewis does not get beneath the surface in his article. He doesn’t enter into the history of the case. Nothing is said about his break with Roosevelt and his support of Willkie in 1940. He emphasizes that if the miners do not get a contract they lay down their tools. “This is our historic and automatic procedure ... No contract, no work ... Nevertheless we were not careless of the national interest, for we knew that there were seventy -nine million tons of bituminous coal in storage.” We think that this last observation about the coal in storage is beside the point, really. Suppose there had been only five million tons in storage. Would the miners have worked without a contract? We don’t think so.
In his article Lewis ignores the real reasons for the “cruel and sustained attack” on the UMWA. He doesn’t explain that at first the capitalist press, the government and all other anti-labor farces centered their fire on him alone. They did not attack the union as such. It was only after the miners had exhibited such indomitable courage, loyalty to their union and union discipline that the capitalists and the government changed their tune and began to attack the union. It was because we knew that the attack right from the start was an assault on the UMWA that Labor Action took the position it did in connection with the mine strikes. In fact, Labor Action was the only paper in the country which from the Very beginning devoted its columns to full and unqualified support of the UMWA in this important struggle. Labor Action and the Workers Party took this position because we understood immediately that the attack was levelled at the miners’ union. And we knew why. It was because the miners’ actions were prompted by their economic needs. The strikes were a revolt against the notorious no-strike pledge that had been given by all the labor leaders, including Lewis. The miners were in revolt against the infamous maneuvering and conniving of the WLB and the Little Steel formula.
Not only were the miners writhing under these injustices, but all of organized labor. It so happens that .the miners are the toughest, the best organized and the most disciplined union in the country. They only expressed in action what millions of workers wanted to do but were held in check by their leadership. The capitalist employers and their government knew that the strike action of the UMWA would act as a spark which would set off an explosion throughout, the ranks of labor. Lewis had to be branded as a “traitor”; the UMWA must be attacked and driven back or the flames would spread from the coal fields to the aircraft plants, the shipyards, and to all the “arsenals of democracy.”
 
Lewis’ Reactionary Stand
Lewis doesn’t discuss these things but resorts to some very reactionary positions. For instance: “Countless strikes, many for reasons shocking in their essential triviality, have disrupted and are disrupting the nation’s war effort, but neither leaders nor Strikers have been named and pilloried.” The first thing wrong with this statement is that it isn’t true. In virtually every strike the workers have been pilloried: by the capitalist press, the government and again and again by the trade union leadership.
Secondly, what strikes, since the miners’ strikes of last year, would Lewis brand as “shocking in their essential triviality.” We would like for Lewis to name the strikes that have taken place for trivial reasons during the past two years. Not even the cowardly leaders of the CIO nor the traitorous scoundrels of Stalin’s Communist Party Political Association claimed that the situation behind the miners’ strikes was trivial. They only said that the UMWA should not strike, even though they had just grievances. We don’t care for the very reactionary John L. Lewis who assumes such a pious air of shock and patriotic fervor over strikes that have taken place.
Lewis has a word of praise for Secretary Ickes. “Let me say that “there was no time that Mr. Ickes did not exhibit good faith, but at every turn his hands were tied by the petty vanity of the War Labor Board.” This is either a piece of Lewis obtuseness or just seizing on any opportunity to take another crack at the WLB. We do not say that Ickes would not have come to agreement with the UMWA and that it would not have been a good agreement. But Ickes’ hands were not tied by the “petty vanity of the War Labor Board.” If they were tied, they were tied by the same people who untied the hands of the WLB: Roosevelt, the coal operators and the whole capitalist pack.
Lewis closes Not Guilty by saying that the miners carry on, faithfully observing a contract which is not fair while “other industries are disrupted and bedevilled by walkouts and work stoppages in insolent disregard of contractual obligations. But they are not stoned and execrated as were the United Mine Workers.” Aside from its essentially reactionary character, this statement is just so much tripe. What industries are disrupted? What stoppages have taken place in “insolent disregard of contractual obligations”? Lewis here sounds like the New York Times, Henry Ford or a Republican congressman.
We are glad that the UMWA is a militant union; that it has a long tradition of fighting for the rights of labor, that it has a tradition of “no contract – no work.” These are the things that make a union great. The leadership may come and go but these militant traditions go on forever.
 





Report on the CIO Convention
After reading the daily minutes of the recent CIO annual convention there is great temptation simply to set down what were the failures and shortcomings of this meeting and let it go at that. This would be the easy way because there were so many things wrong from the standpoint of labor and the present-day needs of the labor movement. But such an approach would serve no useful purpose. In fact, in the midst of a great deal of downright skullduggery, nonsense and time wasting, the CIO convention nevertheless did make some progress.
In the first place, the convention voted to continue the PAC, that is, the delegates voted not to liquidate the most articulate political formation which labor has ever developed in the United States on a mass scale and by the decisive section of the working, class: the workers in the mass production industries. By the continuation of the PAC, labor, at least labor as represented by the CIO, has said that the days of “no politics in the unions” have been left behind.
 
Most Progressive Step of Convention
This is a gain for – labor and to this extent the decision of the convention to continue the PAC and to extend its operations lays the foundations for real and genuine independent working class political action. For, of course, this is not what the PAC represents today. This was not what the PAC represented in the recent elections. Here it acted only as a committee to organize the workers as shock troops for the re-election of Roosevelt. The next step and the imperative step is for the awakened workers to insist on and organize for working class political action completely divorced from Republican or Democratic Party politics. To be serious about conserving the gains which labor has made and to make really permanent political gains under present concrete conditions means to proceed to the practical task of forming the Labor Party.
There can be no doubt now that thousands of workers have this in mind. They supported Roosevelt because they wanted to defeat Dewey, whom they considered the “greater evil.” The Workers Party, of course, does not support this point of view, having argued repeatedly in Labor Action that both Roosevelt and Dewey are capitalist candidates and that their parties serve only the interests of the capitalist employers. As Roosevelt swings into action in the coming months, labor will learn many things. Hundreds of thousands of workers will regret that they ever voted for him or for the candidate of any capitalist party. Then they will realize far more clearly than they do today what the Workers Party has been talking about in Labor Action when we advocated breaking with the Republican and Democratic Parties and setting up a Labor Party.
 
Talk of a New Party Is in the Air
Murray, Hillman and the others realize this. They know that the new political experience the workers have gained will impel them in the direction of Labor Party organization and independent working class political action. It is mainly for this reason, to retard this development, that so much emphasis was put on admonishing the convention about “third party” demands. In his address, Hillman said: “We likewise rejected all proposals for a third party. The experience of the past year has fully demonstrated the wisdom of that decision. It is my hope that this convention will reaffirm it. You don’t have to organize a third party just to accommodate those who won’t take time off to register and vote.” This is just so much tricky and obstructioning maneuvering, shot through with bureaucratic cunning.
What the past year has demonstrated is that labor can have its own independent Labor Party, that we do have political power if we will only organize and exert it in our own behalf. The PAC has demonstrated that. The last sentence in the quotation from Hillman is a slanderous piece of demagogy. He suggests that workers who demand a Labor Party do so because they are too lazy or indifferent to “register and vote.” These workers don’t want to take “time off” to throw their votes away on the capitalist candidates. They are not willing to follow Hillman, Murray and Bill Green in their most abject surrender to Roosevelt and the Democratic Party, or the Republican Party.
The Resolution on Political Action says:
“The experience of this election campaign has fully confirmed the correctness of our decision to abstain from and discourage any move in the direction of a third party. We reaffirm that decision and reject any and all proposals for a third party. A third party would serve only to split and divide the forces of progress at the very moment when unity is our greatest need. The political activity of the CIO must and will be continued on an independent and non-partisan basis, giving support to the progressive forces in both major parties and basing its judgment of candidates solely on their records.”
 
The Horse and Buggy School of Politics
This is strong language. Ancient language. Sam Gompers was using this language twenty-five years ago. “Reward your friends and punish your enemies.” But this isn’t 1920. The working class is miles ahead of the Harding era and the Coolidge era. Its militant vanguard in the unions is moving slowly but surely out of the Roosevelt era and out of the orbit of capitalist politics.
And we have to say right here that we are not talking about any hodgepodge hash of a “third party”: a mere fake containing Wallace and La Guardia and other “liberal” vote-snatchers who would be trotted out by the big capitalist politicians to derail any movement of labor toward independent political organization and action. We are talking about a mass Labor Party based on the unions, with a working class program and controlled by the unions.
 
The “Rejectors” Will Be The Rejected
The resolution rejects “any and all proposals” for this kind of party. The “political activity of the CIO ... will be continued” as at present. Who is deciding that the political activity of the CIO will remain tied to the Republican and Democratic Parties? Murray, Hillman, the top officialdom of the CIO, the leaders of the internationals, the paid organizing staffs and the followers of Stalin.
But these men are far from being the CIO. The AFL bureaucrats decided that there should be no industrial unions, that the great mass production industries should not be organized. But they are organized and today the eight-year-old CIO is as big and powerful as the fifty-eight-year-old AFL. Just as the AFL bureaucrats were not able to defeat the surge of the mass production workers toward industrial union organization, just so the CIO bureaucrats will not for long be able to hold back the development of the CIO masses to independent political organization and action.
Murray and the others gave a no-strike pledge to Roosevelt. But they didn’t stop strikes with their rejecting and deciding. Hundreds of thousands of workers have learned that the Murray-Green no-strike formula doesn’t work. They will surely learn that the Murray-Hillman-Communist Party, “No Labor Party” formula will also do them no good.
The CIO leadership organized the PAC for the sole purpose of getting Roosevelt re-elected. Legions of workers know now, however, that it can be used for something else. Let Murray, Hillman and their associates “reject” and “decide” as they will, but the final answer will come only from the masses in the mines, mills, fields and factories as they learn more, as their experiences deepen and they see that the capitalist parties are not for them.
(Another article on the CIO convention will appear next week)
 





“Fine ’Em or Fire ’Em” Dal, Again
Sherman Dalrymple, president of the United Rubber Workers, has decided that the way to run a union is to adopt the tactics of a dictator. Dalrymple is a second-rate and ignorant bureaucrat, but h. is something more. He is a strong-arm man. After 1,000 members of Local 101 in Detroit went on strike against a cut in piecework rates the great Dalrymple fined each of them $12.50. The men refused to pay the fine. Of course they were outraged at such a brutal and bureaucratic imposition from the president of their international.
There has been some talk from many of the fined workers of leaving the URW and going to the Mechanics Educational Society (MESA). They are militant workers who are sick to their stomachs over the kind of treatment they and others have received from Dalrymple. They are correct to oppose Dalrymple. It is a pity that the workers from Local 101 did not join in the fight against Dalrymple at the last URW convention. If this fight had been carried through, this little dictator might be out looking for a job today.
There is one mistake, however, that these workers should not be provoked into making. They should not leave the URW. The URW does not belong to Dalrymple, even though he acts that way. The URW belongs to its members. And even if it does not, the membership should take their union back. This goes for the 1,000 who were fined and all the other URW rank and file members.
The place to fight against Dalrymple is inside the URW. Fight in Local 101 against him and his stooge, Marmon. Prepare for the next URW convention and kick Dalrymple downstairs. He isn’t fit to be the leader of workers. Reactionary, stupid, arrogant and bureaucratic – that’s Dalrymple. By all means the 1,000 and all the URW militants should fight this little bully. But inside the URW and Local 101, the URW and the CIO. The fight against Dalrymple cannot be carried on from inside the MESA. Should these militants leave Local 101 and the URW, the local and the international will be weakened. Then Dalryniple will have a field day. Nothing would please this bureaucrat more than to have these militants pull out. It is their union and they should not let Dalrymple take it away from them or force them out. The next URW convention is not years away. These fines can be made into a mighty weapon to fight Dalrymple with at the next convention.
Here is another instance of the havoc wrought in the labor movement by the no-strike pledge. Dalrymple will claim that what he did was “legal.” There isn’t but one way out for the URW, the UAW and all the unions: kick out the no-strike pledge. Bury it and forget it.
*

Mont’y Ward and No-Strike Pledge
That strike-breaking scab sheet of the Communist Party, known as the Daily Worker, has an article in the December 15 issue on the Montgomery Ward strike in Detroit. “The principal issue highlighting the Detroit Montgomery Ward strike,” says the Daily Worker, “is whether labor can leave even a crack open for exceptions to its no-strike pledge.” Stalin’s crew can always be depended on to shove new anti-labor ideas and new reactionary advice into the trade union movement.
It has been an accepted opinion for a long time that the principal issues in a strike have to do with improving the conditions of the workers who are on strike: better wages or working conditions, shorter hours, the right to organize or to bargain collectively. These are the issues at bottom in the Montgomery Ward strike. The principal issue is whether or not the workers at Montgomery Ward are to permit their union to be kicked to pieces, their standard of living reduced and their fundamental rights to be tramped on daily.
 
The No-Strike Pledge Is Involved
“The issue is not Sewell Avery,” says the Daily Worker. That is correct. The issue is the attitude of the Montgomery Ward corporation in its attempt to take advantage of the no-strike pledge to the disadvantage of its employees and for the destruction of their union. The Daily Worker goes on to say that “the conduct of an employer obviously cannot be a condition for maintaining the no-strike pledge.” What is so obvious about this? Wasn’t the statement made by Murray, Thomas and others that the no-strike pledge was given in return for the promise from Roosevelt that the employers would not be permitted to harass the unions, that collective bargaining would be protected, that the cost of living would be pegged as of a certain date?
If the labor leaders lied about this, then even worse, those workers who are inclined to accept the no-strike pledge would have an extremely difficult time convincing even the most stupid that the pledge should be kept.
If the labor leaders did not lie, and Roosevelt actually made these promises, it is a fact that they have not been kept. They have been violated both by the government and the employers. This alone, if there were no other reasons, releases labor from any obligation to maintain the no-strike pledge. This alone is sufficient reason for every worker to vote in the UAW referendum for rescinding the no-strike pledge.
 
Why the Pledge Should Be Rescinded
There is a further and more important reason for voting against the no-Strike pledge or for acting against it. That is the fact that it has become a huge millstone about the neck and body of labor. Even the leaders of the AFL and CIO admit this in effect when they say that the WLB has destroyed collective bargaining, or when Thomas at the CIO convention, found it necessary to apologize for the membership on the WLB, or when Murray and the other labor leaders whine and whimper about the rise in the cost of living and the failure of the government to give up the Little Steel formula.
The conduct of an employer has everything to do with what decisions the unions make. If employers or the government grant the demands of Workers, obviously they will remain on the job. Workers don’t strike just for practice in walking the picket line. The worker has his primary relation to the employer for whom he toils. If the government steps into the picture and acts precisely as does the employer, then the government is obviously acting against the workers and in the interests of the employers. That is the case today, yesterday, and will be the case tomorrow: the government will protect the interests of the capitalist employers. Under these conditions, where Will labor get by coming together annually to reaffirm a no-strike pledge?
The Daily Worker says that employers like Avery “are doing everything they can to provoke strikes.” Let us assume that this is true. Why do Avery and other employers act in this manner? Because labor is tied to a no-strike pledge. Because Avery and other employers know that the leaders of the labor movement and the Communist Party will agree with him that there should he no strikes. Because he knows that Murray, Thomas, Green and the Daily Worker will howl for the workers to stay on the job and be kicked around by the Sewell Averys, General Motors, U.S. Steel, Congress, the WLB and Roosevelt.
No employer today would dare “provoke strikes” if labor rescinded the no-strike pledge. The mere act of getting up from its knees would scare the pants off the employers, the WLB and Roosevelt.
 





AFL Convention Retains Jim Crow
The AFL convention once again has rejected a resolution by A. Philip Randolph calling for the elimination of discrimination against Negroes by AFL internationals. This time the performance of many of the top bureaucrats was just as disgraceful and brazen as in past year. The convention told Randolph and all Negroes in and outside the AFL that Jim Crow is to remain a standing policy of the organization.
Randolph’s resolution called on the convention to condemn and abolish Jim Crow and all Jim Crow auxiliaries organized by internationals. Randolph named the Boilermakers, the Machinists and the Electricians. He accused these internationals of establishing “dual memberships in the AFL under which first-class membership is given to white workers and second-class membership to Negroes.”
One would think that the AFL leaders would at least refrain from denying the truth of Randolph’s charges. The facts are established beyond dispute or refutation. Negroes are Jim Crowed in the AFL. But facts mean nothing to a blundering ignoramus like MacGowan, president of the Boilermakers. He had never listened before to a “more offensive address.” Randolph’s remarks were “arrogant and insolent.” That is, the remarks of a Negro president of an AFL international were “offensive,” arrogant and “insolent” if they condemn a white president of an AFL international for maintaining separate locals for its Negro members.
 
Ku Klux Klan Mentality
MacGowan is “getting a bit tired of being kicked around by professional agitators.” That’s Randolph, who only insisted that the AFL repudiate Jim Crow inside its ranks. MacGowan perhaps feels that Randolph and the Negro boilermakers should be thankful that they are permitted in the union under any conditions, Jim Crow or otherwise. MacGowan is “tired.” What does he plan to do? Break up the Jim Crow auxiliaries and take the Negroes into the regular locals? Not MacGowan. He’s too ignorant, stupid and cocky to take that course.
What will he do in the next convention? Will he organize a goon squad to throw Randolph out? Or will he organize a lynching bee outside the convention hall? We have an idea that Randolph, with his superior intelligence, especially, in comparison with the intellectual incapacity of the MacGowans, will continue to prove more than a match for the AFL Jim Crowers.
Loring of the Tennessee Federation of Labor also is for suppressing “this professional agitation.” He is also a very bright man; just like MacGowan. Loring got off the following gem: “The white people aren’t raising these problems; it’s the Negroes.” The white workers aren’t kicking against Jim Crow, says this intellectual giant. That’s all we need to say about Loring. Strike-breaker Frey got in his mouthful also. He also has a complaint against the Negroes. They are not thankful “for what the AFL has done for Negroes.” That is, Negroes are not thankful for Jim Crow locals. They ought to be glad that the AFL does not exclude them completely.
Randolph wasn’t thankful. In reply he told MacGowan, Frey and Loring: “Get as mad as you like, but the Negroes are going to fight for their rights no matter how mad you get.”
Earlier MacGowan had questioned if Randolph was in the right organisation. It is our opinion that MacGowan is in the wrong organization. He doesn’t belong in a labor organization. We recommend the Ku Klux Klan.
*

Goodrich Progressives Fight Back
The progressive forces in Goodrich Local No. 5 at Akron, who recently suffered a setback in the local elections, are not taking it lying down. They are fighting back. This is as it should be. Bass was defeated for president by a reactionary bloc acting under the inspiration of the labor-baiting Akron Beacon Journal. Progressives must fight back. They must stand prepared always to put their program and their case before the whole rank and file. They must keep their roots in the rank and file and depend on the rank and file for whatever strength they hope to achieve. This is the way to wipe out the influence of reactionary and anti-union elements.
It would be an excellent thing if Bass would get back in the shop and participate once again in the day-to-day activities of the workers in the ranks. This should be the perspective of every progressive who meets defeat at the hands of reactionaries.
The progressives in the local are taking the correct course. They are exposing the lies and slanders of the Beacon Journal. They are giving the facts to the local in answer to the slanders, distortions and lies of the reactionaries in the local. This is one way to educate the membership. Let them know the truth. Give them all the facts. This is the way to maintain a democratic local. Union reactionaries and their outside masters can’t thrive for long if the membership knows the facts and understands them.
 




In this, the fourth article in this series dealing with the need of a new programmatic orientation for the labor movement in the United States, the discussion will revolve mainly around the organizational and tactical questions of working class political action.
The first article, in the May number of The New International, dealt with the war and the no-strike pledge. The second, in the June number, discussed class collaboration and the relationship of the trade union bureaucracy to the bourgeoisie. The third, in the September issue, took up proletarian politics in relation to the bourgeoisie and the capitalist state. This article ended with the statement that “... the Republican and Democratic Parties are the political instruments of a class. They serve the interests of the capitalist class. They cannot serve the interests of the proletariat, which is an alien class to the bourgeoisie ... For the proletariat, the little propertyless people, to stand before the capitalist state, before the men of property and power, and demand a place in the sun, is to demand a transformation of that state by the class which can profit only from the status quo. This sets a real challenge before the proletariat: the challenge to organize politically, independently, with class-conscious clarity and militancy.”
 
The Imperative Task of the Trade Unions
This is the practical and imperative task before the trade union movement. The reelection of Franklin D. Roosevelt to some degree aids in transferring the question to a different area of attack. Before the elections, the problem was clouded by the fact that millions of workers believed that the contest between Roosevelt and Dewey was a genuine contest between two parties with fundamentally different social viewpoints. Previous articles in this series have attempted to explain why this is not so. But because they believed this, thousands of workers felt that Roosevelt was, in an important sense, a lesser evil and to be preferred to Dewey. Since there was no mass party of labor, these workers believed that not to vote for Roosevelt meant either to “throw away their votes” or to turn the country over to reaction.
It must be said that despite the soundness of the theoretical arguments that can be made against this conclusion drawn by labor, their instincts, which drew them to Roosevelt and away from Dewey, had definite progressive features. The matter was confused for the working class furthermore by the existence of the PAC. Here was a political committee, formed out of the CIO, which purported to be leading labor to independent political action. The fact that the independence of the PAC resided only in its organizational and physical “separation” from the Democratic National Committee and of course from the Republican National Committee, was not of political significance to the CIO masses for reasons which have already been gone into in detail. Also the demonstration of strength by the PAC, even before the election, was a further source of disorientation to workers whose political thinking is still very immature and naive.
The proletariat is now in politics as never before. This has been demonstrated. But what was done was a manifestation once again in history of trade union politics, that is politics at the trade union level, the bread and butter “take home” level. This may be described as the politics of a militant proletariat groping toward class consciousness. It is political action without the illumination of political theory.
Despite this, the proletariat has made real political progress in the United States during the past year. This is irrefutable. Through the activities of the PAC there has unquestionably arisen a new sense of political power and a slim understanding of the inadequacy of simple trade union activity. The question arises of what to do next. What, for instance, should be done with the PAC? Turn it into a Labor Party? Organize a Labor Party? Continue the PAC as it is?
Before we go further into this it is necessary to take up a phenomenon that rears its head perennially in American politics. That is the third party movement and third party propaganda. This agitation has already begun and appeared in the liberal press immediately following the election. This is a great danger for the proletariat.
The Liberal Party of New York State received over 300,000 votes in New York City alone. That is, this number of people voted for Roosevelt through the Liberal Party. The leaders of this party are very enthusiastic about their showing and are already talking about a national Liberal Party. Such a party could only get its membership from the petty-bourgeoisie and labor. Labor, however, would play only a subordinate role and would find itself under the ideological influence of a petty bourgeois leadership. Not only would this be true of the ranks of labor but also of that part of the labor bureaucracy which allied itself with such a party. This course could only lead to the shrouding of the proletariat in another myth: the myth that the middle class, including the liberals, is a coherent social class and that the petty-bourgeoisie and the farmers can play an independent class role in capitalist society. The penetration of the labor movement with such erroneous concepts and theories would not only disorient the working class politically but would also interfere seriously with the sustaining of trade union militancy on the economic level. This was demonstrated very clearly by the attitude of the petty bourgeois liberals toward such anti labor measures as the no-strike pledge and wage stabilization.
 
The Question of a “Third Party”
The present talk from the liberals about forming a third party, so soon after the election, is a sort of shamefaced admission that even these stupid people realize that the campaign talk and promises were only a blanket to cover over the real aims of the Roosevelt Administration, namely, the extension of United States imperialism to world dominion. For labor or the working farmers to place themselves at the disposal of such puerile sycophants would be to commit political and class suicide.
There is reason to believe that this third party movement suffered a real blow by the death of Wendell Willkie. It is clear to me that Willkie was playing with the idea of a new Liberal Party, perhaps to take the field in 1948. This would have been a most insidious evil for the proletariat to be faced with. It seems that Willkie became convinced that the Republican Party was so thoroughly discredited that it would not likely be able to recover. He was probably of the belief that the Democratic Party, lacing insuperable difficulties in the next four years, would also lose the confidence of labor and the masses of the people.
Willkie was a man moving in a definitely liberal direction, developing great influence and enthusiasm. At the same time he was a big business man and the representative of big business. During his active business career he was allied with the most reactionary section of big business. Outwardly at least he disassociated himself from business and became a “people’s champion.” Willkie had little or nothing to say about business during his days of political activity. He concerned himself with foreign policy, forays into the realm of civil liberties and the rights of minority groups.
We may never know what Willkie had in mind, but from what he was, it can be said that any move of his toward third party organization would have interested large masses of people and the big bourgeoisie also. Under certain conditions, he might have been supported by them temporarily just as they did Roosevelt during his first administration. From their side Willkie could become their representative in one final effort to resolve the deep contradictions of bourgeois society. After Roosevelt, the Democrats will have no one sufficiently astute and proficient in the arts of bourgeois politics. The Republican Party will recline in the grasp of the Old Guard and its crouching medieval-minded but powerful patrons. Willkie and a new Liberal Party might have given the bourgeoisie temporary surcease from the ominous rumblings in the ranks of a long-suffering proletariat.
 
Basic Problems That Call for Solution
This brings us back to the point where we left off discussing the re-election of Roosevelt. The fanfare and pyrotechnics of party warfare are behind us. Great social problems are before us and cry out for solution. Mankind stands confronted with questions of such portent as we have never had to deal with before in all the decades of the twentieth century. First there is the general matter of the salvation of humankind itself and the rescue of civilization from a headlong plunge into despair or barbarism. This is the lesson of the Second Imperialist World War, the lesson taught us by the piles of dead and maimed, the wreckage of the cities, the European shambles, starvation and misery, imperialist thievery and capitalist oppression.
The United States is not separate from Europe, Asia and Africa, and cannot be separate. The rapacity of the imperialist plunderers causes the bourgeoisie of the United States and England to reach out into every nook and corner of the earth. Markets, raw materials, natural resources, labor power, capital – these are the building blocks of world imperialism, of international war, of the exploitation and oppression of the people. This is the god of the Anglo-American bourgeoise and Roosevelt and Churchill are his major prophets.
The Anglo-American bourgeoisie seeks to dominate the world. But before them stands the threat of disunity in their own ranks, the danger to them of mass uprisings on the continent of Europe and the inchoate but ever present demand of the proletariat that it be fed, housed and clothed. The bourgeoisie in the United States will attempt to pacify the proletariat here with blood money drawn from the exploitation and sufferings of the European workers and the colonial masses. England will play the same game as of old. But it will not work this time. The working class will not be so tolerant and the colonial masses will not remain quiet.
The embattled bourgeoisie cannot possibly recover except temporarily. This means that the working class and the masses of the people face a great danger: the progressive degeneration of bourgeois democracy. This is but a cautious way of saying that while the military defeat of Germany and Japan seems assured, the fascistization of the United States can proceed apace in the years following such a military triumph. American workers cannot defeat fascism by killing German workers, just as German workers cannot rid themselves of their Hitlers by killing American workers.
The bourgeoisie will fight like fury to retain its social power, the right to exploit and plunder. To retain and protect their class opportunities they will resort to every subterfuge, every canard; every form of bribery, political and economic. Should these fail, they will be prepared to strike relentlessly at the proletariat and its organizations. The question today is: who shall be master in the house? This is the way all important social questions pose themselves. Which class shall rule? The bourgeoisie, the class of the minority; or the proletariat, the class of the majority? How shall the proletariat pierce the thin veil of sham bourgeois democracy and come to actual grips with the social dictatorship of the bourgeois minority? How can this be accomplished and at the same time the proletariat gird itself for protection against the bourgeoisie when this class, recognizing that it can no longer rule through bourgeois-democratic slogans, decides on repressive measures?
 
Labor Must Think and Act on Class Lines
This is the framework into which the proletariat must fit all of its political and economic thinking and planning today. This is the class pattern along which the working class must think. Their constant frame of reference should be relentless prosecution of the class struggle. Outside of this framework and this reference, the proletariat cannot approach the problems of the war, of reconversion and unemployment, of continued taxation to pay for the war, of democratic rights and civil liberties with any degree of benefit to itself.
War and fascism are the twin evils of our time. All the immediate and concrete disabilities of the proletariat are subsumed under these twin evils. Such evils as the anti-labor acts of Congress, wage freezing, profiteering prices, job stabilization etc., are but the reflection of the underlying political course which the bourgeoisie is traveling. The heart of the problem is the degeneration of bourgeois society, the decrepitude of capitalist productive relations and the attempts of the ruling class to escape from its importunity through imperialist war and totalitarianism. So far as the future is concerned, there is very little left in the capitalist horn of plenty save economic crisis, war and fascism. The bourgeoisie cannot save the world from mass unemployment, it cannot escape the Third Imperialist World War and it is not the class upon which reliance can be placed to deliver the world from fascism.
These are the foremost tasks confronting the organized labor movement, the organized proletariat. The trade unions cannot accept the tremendous responsibility which is laid at their door if they remain as they are. I do not mean that they should cease to be trade unions in the historical and functional sense, but they must acquire a new outlook on history, they must take on a new function in addition to the economic functions they perform today. The new outlook on history is to acquire a knowledge of the course of capitalist society, the class nature of bourgeois society, consciousness of the place and r61e of the proletariat, conscious acceptance of class struggle and progressive realization that the struggle between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat can only result in dismemberment of workers’ organizations unless the working class is organized for the exercise of social, political and economic power and control.
This means above all the political organization of the proletariat as a class, the formation of a mass political party of the toilers. This is the task before the trade unions: to realize the reasons why this is Imperative, to envisage the goal of political organization, to understand its practical aims and to take the necessary concrete steps for providing out of the ranks of the union movement the human and financial equipment needed for the formation of the party of the proletariat. This is the new function, the new program the organized labor movement must assume. This course is indicated not only in connection with the evils of imperialist war and fascism, which many workers may believe to be remote, but also in connection with the practical survival of the trade union movement with any appreciable degree of militancy. The survival and independence of the trade unions can be guaranteed through class political activity of the working class. In the future it will not be possible to protect the unions even as economic organizations save by the political party of the proletariat. To talk of protecting the unions, the rights of the workers to organize, to bargain collectively and to enforce its demands even partially by the grace of a bourgeois government in the future, is to confuse protection with surveillance.
 
The Position of the Workers Party
The Workers Party, a political organization of Marxian revolutionists, has for several years advanced the idea that the trade unions should accept the responsibility for initiating and carrying through the formation of a mass labor party in the United States. The Workers Party put forward this slogan for an independent labor party as the concretization of the concept of independent political action by the toilers. It was and remains a call from the Marxian revolutionists for the working class to break with the bourgeoisie politically, to reject bourgeois politics and the present or future capitalist parties. In practice this means, at present, to renounce the Republican and Democratic Parties and in their place erect the mass party of labor. All of the articles in this series have been concerned with elucidating the reasons why this step should be consummated by the trade unions and the working class.
Aside from the important propaganda carried on by the PAC, urging workers to “get into politics,” and the stimulation to political thinking which this propaganda accomplished, virtually nothing has been done in a practical way toward independent proletarian political organization. This is due mainly to the political immaturity of the working class in the United States and the trade-union bureaucracy’s class-collaborationist servility.
The labor party we are talking about and which the Workers Party advocates should be based on the unions. In the first place here is where the most advanced workers are. Here are the masses of the organized proletariat. Here are the financial resources necessary for perfecting a political organization. Also it is in the unions that workers are made conscious of the need for political organization if for no other reason than the fact that it is here that their daily experience aids in the germination of political thinking. The maturing of this experience, however, and its conceptualization can only take place in the political organization where this experience is generalized, clarified and interpreted. It is in the workers’ political party that proletarian political theory is developed and the political program organized. It is here also that the strategy and tactics of working-class political organization are learned. The party of labor should not be based on the unions primarily for the reason that the composition of a political party is determined by its composition, for the nature of a political party must be judged by its program as well as by its composition. But a party based on the trade unions is more likely to have a proletarian program. This point is of significance in connection with any future excursions by the labor bureaucracy into the field of labor party organization. From their platform of class collaboration and their petty-bourgeois outlook they are likely to ignore the important question of program and base themselves on “people.” Not the people in the labor movement but the liberals outside the trade unions. They might invite some Senator Norris to form a party that labor would support. But the labor bureaucracy does not think in terms of themselves as the leaders of an independent party of the working class. What we wish to emphasize is not so much that non-trade-union liberals should be rejected because they themselves are petty bourgeois but rather because their ideas and program are petty bourgeois. This means that their politics is really bourgeois politics. This is what the proletariat must reject and renounce.
This all, for the working class, is a part of an evolutionary process, a dynamic process of trial and error, of struggle against the bourgeoisie, of failure today and success tomorrow, of learning in the course of the class struggle and assimilating the teachings of the great masters’ proletarian politics.
 
Labor Party and Revolutionary Party
Many workers who know of the Workers Party and who are readers of Labor Action will ask why the Workers Party, a revolutionary party, advocates formation of a labor party. The answer to this question is a simple one. The Workers Party is primarily concerned with the building of the Marxian revolutionary party in the United States, for the reason that only a revolutionary party can lead the masses of the working class to the accomplishment of its historic tasks and the achievement of its class aims. This is no less than the complete reorganization of society for social ownership, production and distribution. The Marxian revolutionists aim for the reorganization of human society for real freedom and genuine democracy; not the sham that is capitalist democracy. In a word the goal of the revolutionists is socialism and the socialist society.
All workers who understand the full needs of the working class and are prepared to accept the program of the revolutionary party will come directly into the Workers Party. Unfortunately, however, experience teaches that the great mass of the toilers have not advanced to this stage. This does not eliminate in the least, however, the basic need for the proletariat to effect a break with capitalist parties and capitalist politics. The Marxists will not hold aloof in snobbish isolation, however. We emphasize, that the proletariat must take that step which it is capable of taking in the United States today and under the present circumstances. The trade unions can found a mass independent labor party. Trade-union militants can lead and inspire those workers under their influence to break from and renounce the Republican and Democratic Parties. The leading militants in the labor movement can begin now to organize the labor party. The mass of the workers are ready for this modest step. It is a modest step but if consummated it would be the most tremendous leap forward that the proletariat has taken in its entire career in this country. It would be the most progressive movement ever to materialize inside the working class. It would mean that the proletariat had awakened from its long political slumber, that it had seen through the shabby covering of bourgeois society, that it was in full flight away from the miseries of capitalist exploitation and oppression.
Why do we make such claims for such a modest beginning in proletarian political independence? Because even such meagre beginnings would be a demonstration that the working class has been aroused, that its class consciousness has been heightened, that it is learning – learning political organization, political tactics and the elementary forms of political theory. The proletarian masses would not be left to themselves to grope their way forward. The more advanced trade-union militants and the Marxian revolutionists would be at their side and in their midst: working with them, fighting with them; teaching, leading, inspiring them.
 
The Program of a Labor Party
The Workers Party has published in Labor Action a Transitional Program, a program for an independent labor party. This is the program that the Workers Party proposes for the labor party. It may turn out that when the labor party is formed that it will not accept all of this program. We cannot predict about this. This is the program that we will advocate. The Workers Party believes that this program is a necessary bridge for the proletariat into the full Marxist revolutionary position. Should it not carry, the Workers Party will remain at its post in the ranks of the proletariat and in the labor party, as the rallying center for the most advanced workers and the inspirer and teacher of the masses.
The workers’ struggle is therefore carried on, on two fronts: the narrower front for the direct building of the revolutionary party, the Workers Party, and the wider front where the struggle is to lead the mass of the proletarians to break with the Republican and Democratic Parties. There is no contradiction between the two; they complement each other. It is in the course of this struggle that the mass revolutionary workers’ party will be built. The call for independent political action for breaking with the two capitalist parties poses the main questions of the living class struggle before the working class as a whole. It cuts across the line dividing the AFL from the CIO. The forces of the labor party will come from the AFL and the CIO. Labor party activity is a unifying activity that may prove fruitful in bringing the two trade-union federations together. It is realized though that the industrial unions are the most fruitful field for political action. The power of the industrial unions even at the trade-union level will be enhanced as their membership absorbs the new proletarian political learning in the labor party. It is then and not until then will the functional aspect of industrial unionism be exalted above the worship of structure which prevails today.
 
The Fear of Capitalist Reprisals
The question of reprisals by the bourgeoisie against the working class and its organizations, if there is a break from the bourgeois parties, is feared by many workers. This is the argument continually dinned into the ears of labor by the labor bureaucrats. This is a question that must be faced. Of course, slave-owners will never consent to the emancipation of their slaves. They, assisted by their labor lieutenants, will fight like a wolf pack against the labor party. They know what it means. No matter how long the road may be, the bourgeoisie know that once begun the march of the proletariat into a labor party is a gathering of the proletarian masses for victory, freedom and social power.
The struggle for independent class political action will engender a reaction from the bourgeoisie. This must be true unless we accept the no-class-struggle of the liberals, the most backward workers, and the trade union bureaucracy. The answer to any aggression from the bourgeoisie is mass organization, mass militancy; not softening of the class struggle, not class peace but determined intensification of the class struggle whenever the bourgeois counter-offensive sets in.
This completes our argument for the formation of the labor party. The great necessity is to begin. This is a challenge to the militants in the trades unions. They cannot escape this responsibility. It is far better to take on this responsibility now than to repent later in an American version of the concentration camp.,
Next month these articles will be continued with a discussion of the Negro Worker and the Trade Unions.
 




A highlight of the CIO convention was the speech of R.J. Thomas on the WLB. Thomas began his speech as follows:
“I want to make an apology to the convention due to the fact that I am a member of the National War Labor Board. I think I was appointed to that board under false pretenses. We were told when we were appointed to that board that we would have some voice at least in determining the wage policy of the workers in America. I assure you that labor has not gotten that sort of recognition. ... I don’t think that the CIO has made many mistakes in its history, but it has made one that I know of. A week or two ago, when the resignations of three public members of the NWLB were given to the President ... I think the mistake we made was that every member of the CIO should have sent those three members of the WLB a wire of congratulation on their resignation.”
Thomas then goes on to explain why these telegrams should have been sent. The public members “have certainly been very weak in the present situation,” and “it is impossible to get them to take a position any more.” This is certainly sad.
One might be excused for thinking that before Thomas sat down he would propose that the labor members get off the WLB. He is ashamed to be a member of the WLB and apologizes for his past sins or stupidity – as the case might be. For Thomas supported the resolution on the WLB which contained the following: “For the duration of the war there must be an agency such as the WLB. to adjust all disputes between labor and management which cannot be resolved in collective bargaining. The CIO reaffirms the need for a NWLB that will provide the forum for a peaceful and equitable disposition of all disputes that may arise between labor and management which cannot be resolved through collective bargaining.”
Yet in his speech Thomas said that the WLB is “breaking down collective bargaining.” He has sympathy for “the regular labor members who sit there day after day” pounding “their heads against stone walls, and are able to accomplish nothing.” In discussing the WLB, Murray said “In too many instances ... the operation of the collective bargaining contract and the grievance machinery for all practical purposes has been suspended.”
Any worker who can make sense out of all this is truly a wise man. Thomas beats his breast and apologizes. The labor members of the WLB beat not their breasts, but their heads, against stone walls. They “accomplish nothing” on the WLB. The WLB is “breaking down collective bargaining.” “Grievance machinery ... has been suspended.” And what will Murray, Thomas and Green do? They will pass a resolution supporting a WLB. They will not get off the board. Obviously they want a stone wall to beat their heads against. They may be all right for Murray, Thomas and the rest of the labor bureaucrats, but how about the men and women in the factories? How about the unions? Shall they be beaten to pieces?
These labor leaders don’t have the guts to get off the WLB. Roosevelt has them in his hip pocket. They can’t breathe. They writhe, gasp and gulp. They are chained to their no-strike pledge, to the WLB, to war-mongering, solicitude for the welfare of business, and to “Our Commander-in-Chief.”
They want to organize, but labor can’t get very far in an organizing drive, especially in the South, with a no-strike pledge hung around its neck. They want collective bargaining, but collective, bargaining, they say, has been blighted by the government through its WLB. They call for the repeal of the Smith-Connally Act, but this act was passed by the Democratic Party, which they supported in the election. They want homes, built for workers, but the money for the homes must come from the government and the government is controlled by people who protect the interests of private real estate dealers and banks. A resolution is passed on education demanding federal aid to the states. But the Southern states, wherein there is the most ignorance, don’t want federal aid unless the money is controlled by the states. These states fear that they may be forced to give equal educational advantages to Negroes. Furthermore, more money for education, means higher taxes on business and the rich. The rich fight today for a lowering of taxes.
They are against the poll-tax but the party they just got through returning to office is heavily influenced by men who are elected because there is a poll-tax. These leaders, want jobs for all and an “Economic Bill of Rights.” But where will this come from? Surely not from the capitalist employers and their capitalist government. Certainly not from the Democratic or Republican Parties. The CIO wages a good fight against racial discrimination. There should be no question about this. But racial discrimination in the United States is part of the lifeblood of capitalism Capitalism thrives on the division between Negro and white workers, native and foreign born, Jew and Gentile, Catholic and Protestant. The CIO leaders call for international solidarity of labor. Good, but do they know that capitalist employers and capitalist governments cannot be depended on to give any aid to the development of international labor solidarity? On the contrary, capitalist governments will do all in their power to keep the working class in every country tied to its own capitalists, all the easier to exploit them.
Every good and correct resolution which we have mentioned above as passed by the CIO convention can be made to work; can be put into operation by labor if, when and only when labor is organized politically; only when labor resolves to “take over control in Washington.”
The low point of the CIO convention was reached in one sentence in the resolution on. “international security and complete destruction of Nazism and Japanese, militarism.” The resolution calls for the “right of self-determination for “India, Ireland, Africa and Asia.” These countries “should be provided the maximum opportunity to manage their own affairs with a view toward achieving self-government.” This is excellent and as it should be, but before this we read the following sentence in the resolution: “The German people must be taught that they shall atone for the crimes and horrors which they have visited upon this earth.”
What crimes have the “German, people” committed? Are the German workers a part of the criminal “German people?” Are the thousands of workers and anti-fascist little people in Germany a part of the criminal “German people”? How about the German workers and other anti-fascists in Hitler’s concentration camps? Are they criminals, too? How shall they atone? After the fascist oppressors have been forced off the backs of the German workers and the concentration camps have given up their thousands of emaciated victims, what new tortures would the leaders of the CIO propose? Starvation? Forced labor? If not, what?
Every decent human being who reads this sentence should spit and cast it from him lest he be contaminated. Will the leaders of the, CIO say that the British PEOPLE should atone for the crimes of the British RULING CLASS in India, Africa and China? Who will atone for the massacre of Indians, for the bombing of Hottentot villages, for the forcing of the opium traffic on the Chinese people? The British people – or the British ruling class? Is there no difference in the minds of the self-righteous and pious Murrayites?
Who will atone for the crimes against the Negro in the United States? The white workers in the CIO, who fight day in and day, out against these crimes? They are a part of the white people in the United States. Or shall we place these crimes where they primarily belong – on the backs of the ruling class; the planters, the mine operators, the manufacturers and bankers?
We do not care what happens to the German ruling class; they can not atone for their crimes. We want to see the German working class destroy them. We should extend the helping hand to the German workers. They have nothing to atone for; and only a fool could make any such demand.
The labor members of the WLB beat their heads against a figurative stone wall. The German anti-fascist workers beat their heads against this real barbed wire of the concentration camp. Murray & Co. don’t have the courage to get off a WLB, but they demand that the helpless and betrayed German workers, with no help from the outside world, escape from their concentration camps and prisons and destroy Hitler.
We say again that every decent human being who reads this sentence should spit.
 





Daily Worker and George Bass
Last week we wrote in this column on the defeat of George Bass in the Goodrich Local elections in Akron. We pointed out the fact that Bass was defeated by the most conservative members of the local, who were led by a handful of the reactionary scissorbills, acting in league with the labor-baiting Akron Beacon Journal. As was to be expected, Browder’s Communist Political Association (Communist Party) has come out in its Daily Worker in support of these reactionaries and the Beacon Journal.
The Daily Worker for November 27 calls the defeat of Bass “good news from Akron.” Bass is a “pro-Trotskyite” who was defeated through “the patriotic understanding of the Goodrich workers.” Trade “unionists loyal to the CIO no-strike policy and the national interests which it defends, turned thumbs down on him (Bass) and his Trotskyite henchmen.” The “patriotic repudiation of Bass should be a signal to all CIO supporters in the CIO to give the same medicine to his fellow travelers in their ranks.” By this the Daily Worker means that what it calls the “patriotic” workers should vote against the rescinding of the no-strike pledge in the coming UAW referendum.
 
Why Bass Was Defeated
Bass was not defeated through “the patriotic understanding of the Goodrich workers.” He was defeated because a small group of reactionaries skillfully and very brazenly played on the backwardness and lack of “understanding” of a large group of workers who for one reason or another were not active in the local. They were taken in by these scissorbill-Beacon Journal stooges who were really not fighting the battles of the Goodrich workers but the battle of the Goodrich Rubber Co. They won, not because these rank and file workers want a reactionary leadership but because the scissorbills organized them and the Bass forces did not. We commented on this in Labor Action last week.
 
Workers Party Members Are Not “Henchmen”
We are not certain what the Daily Worker means by Bass’ “Trotskyite henchmen.” If they mean members of the Workers Party, we want to say that Workers Party members don’t act as “henchmen” for anybody in the trade unions. Furthermore, members of the Workers Party don’t act as henchmen for Roosevelt and the Democratic Party. Neither do we act as henchmen for the Republican Party. We didn’t act as henchmen of Hague in New Jersey, for the rotten Tammany leaders in New York City, for Kelly in Chicago, for Bilbo in Mississippi or for Willkie in 1940.
The members of the Workers Party did not act as “henchmen” for Hitler and never will. We have never made a pact with this fascist butcher and never will. We have never made a pact with the FBI nor called on the government to refuse newsprint to a labor paper.
Members of the Workers Party were never henchmen of John L. Lewis. We didn’t organize a forty-five-minute ovation for Lewis at the CIO convention in 1941. We didn’t oppose Murray for president of the CIO and then spend the next three years crawling up his pants leg trying to make him forget that we were once “henchmen” of Lewis who were now willing to lick Murray’s boots if he would only let us.
No, it wasn’t the “Trotskyites” who did these things. It was Browder’s Communist Political Association (Communist Party) – henchmen for Stalin, Eric Johnston, Hitler, Democratic Party, Republican Party, National Association of Manufacturers, the cops and the employers.
 
Deep Differences Between Communists and Workers Party
No, the “Trotskyites” don’t act as “henchmen.” Neither do we crawl through the labor movement with an axe in one hand and slime and filth in the other. Browder, the Stalinists and the Daily Worker have undisputed priority in that field. Members of the Workers Party in the trade unions are against fascism and always have been. We fight against fascism; we make no compromises and no pacts with fascism.
We were and remain against the no-strike pledge. We are for militancy in the unions, for real collective bargaining and democratic decisions by the union membership. We are not supporters of the war, because it is an imperialist war for imperialist gain and aggrandizement. These things should be clear even to the scoundrels who edit the Daily Worker. Our ideas and our program have been published in Labor Action week in and week out.
Members of the Workers Party are loyal supporters of the labor movement: of the CIO and the AFL. We give these workers our ideas and our program: the program of democratic and militant unionism, the program of revolutionary socialism. We stand for independent political action by and for the working class. We have advocated and still advocate that the trade unions organize a mass independent Labor Party.
 
The Program Necessary for Progressives Today
We are not “henchmen.” We go to the ranks of labor as an integral and loyal part of the trade union movement. We propagate our ideas and our program. This is our right, our duty and our responsibility. The Workers Party does not agree with the present program of the organized labor movement on the war, the no-strike pledge, the WLB and the relinquishing of collective bargaining. We believe, and there are thousands of militant workers who agree with us, that such a program can only lead to defeat for labor.
This is what we were saying in this column last week to George Bass and to other militant rank and file leaders in the unions. They have a duty and a responsibility to consider these things seriously. We are not living in the horse and buggy age of the class struggle. The demands on a trade union leadership are different. They must become not only militant trade union leaders but political leaders guiding the labor movement on the road to independent working class political action. If they fail in this the unions cannot and will not escape the clutches of Stalin’s henchmen or the victory of the most reactionary and backward scissorbills.
 




The National Council for a Permanent Federal Employment Practices Committee is sponsoring House of Representatives Bill 3986 for a permanent FEPC. The bill was introduced by Representatives Thomas Scanlon (D., Pa.), Charles LaFollette (R., Ind.), William D. Dawson (D., Ill.), lone Negro members of Congress, and George H. Bender (R., Ohio),
The bill is described as “establishing the right of freedom from discrimination in employment and setting up a Fair Employment Practices Commission which will continue after the war.” A digest of the bill reads:

The policy of the United States is to eliminate discrimination in all employment relations subject to the control of the government. Freedom from discrimination is a privilege of citizens which shall not be abridged by the United States or any state.
 
It shall be an unfair employment practice for any employer or labor union to engage in job discrimination because of race, creed, color, national origin or ancestry.

If and when established, the commission will consist of a chairman and six others to be appointed by the President with the consent of the Senate. The commission will have the power to order the hiring or reinstatement with back pay if discrimination is found. The commission may use the federal courts to enforce its orders and have the power to subpoena witnesses and evidence. Interference with the commission will be punishable, on conviction, by a $5,000 fine, a year’s imprisonment or both.
 
Discrimination Far and Wide
We are for an act of Congress which makes any form of discrimination, segregation or Jim Crow illegal and punishable by fine, imprisonment or both. We prefer that such acts be made a federal criminal offense punishable by imprisonment alone. But this bill confines itself to “job discrimination.” It isn’t clear to us just how the federal government, with all its discriminatory and Jim Crow practices, will go about advocating or enforcing such a measure.
There is Jim Crow and discrimination in the federal government at Washington and elsewhere. There is political discrimination and Jim Crow in the South in direct violation of the Constitution, and the federal government has done nothing more than support this discrimination. The federal government sits by while there is Jim Crow in Army and Navy units and it tolerates the most vicious forms of discrimination throughout the military service.
The federal government builds housing projects and segregates Negro war workers in separate Jim Crow areas. Negro employees are discriminated against right in the government departments at Washington. In the District of Columbia, which is governed directly by appointees of the President and Congress, there is the grossest discrimination.
Despite all of this, we are for a bill which aims at the single object of job discrimination. We are willing to begin at the point where discrimination hurts most directly and painfully. If the Negro masses get more and better jobs, they will be able to improve their conditions and be in a far better position to fight against other forms of discrimination and Jim Crow.
 
The Bill Errs
There is one section of this bill against discrimination, however, that we are strongly against. We are against the inclusion of labor unions in the bill. That is, we are opposed to that part of the bill which gives CONGRESS the power and authority to control the practices of labor unions. We are unalterably opposed to the disgraceful, anti-working class and vicious practices of some unions in discriminating against Negroes.
These practices are the official policy of some AFL unions and the Railway Brotherhoods. They are not the policy of the CIO but, on the contrary, are distinctly forbidden in the CIO constitutions and by numerous resolutions and decisions of the CIO and its affiliated internationals. And so, no matter how or where the CIO may fall down here or there in the enforcement of its constitution and practice, the bill so far as unions are concerned, is aimed at the AFL and the railway brotherhoods.
We believe that the anti-Negro and anti-working class practices of the unions should be fought consistently and with irreconcilable anger and persistence. A thorough housecleaning is needed. But this housecleaning should and must be done by the labor movement itself. And we can say to the AFL, the railway unions and any other unions to whom it needs be said that if they do not purge themselves of these stinking practices, the unions will find a reactionary Congress willing and ready to seize on this situation in order to get their anti-labor hands on the unions.
It is very difficult to understand how this labor union section of the bill could get the support of trade union leaders. We notice the names of Wolchok of the United Retail, Wholesale & Department Store Employees (CIO) and Minkoff, Joint Board, ILGWU (AFL). Do these men and the other labor leaders supporting this bill believe that giving Congress the power to snoop around in the internal affairs of the unions will benefit Negro workers? Don’t these labor leaders know that the government already has the power and authority to force the employment of Negroes, no matter what the objecting unions may think?
Any employer in the United States can hire Negroes in any capacity and no union can stop it, no matter what the opinion of the union is about the hiring or promoting of Negro workers. This has been proved again and again, even before the federal government began financing and operating the plants.
We are for a bill which strikes at the real enemy of the Negro worker: the enemy that really has the power and that is the employer. We are not for permitting the powerful and reactionary capitalist employer to hide behind the skirts of some stupid, blind and ignorant union leaders. But we will not support any act or bill which in attempting to correct one evil institutes one far greater.
We will not support a bill which places a club in the hands of Congress with which to beat the whole labor movement. This will be of no certain benefit to the 500,000 Negroes now in trade unions.
If such a bill is passed, including the punitive provisions against labor unions, it would become a bill, not for the protection of Negroes in their rights to a job, but a bill for anti-union acts on the part of a capitalist government. Congress has no interest in forcing unions to admit Negroes or to cease from discriminatory practices against Negroes. Their anti-Negro practices are one of the very few things that Congress and the employers like about unions. If the white workers should put aside their prejudices and join hands with the Negro workers, Congress and the employers would be highly discomfited.
We say again, the breaking up of discrimination and Jim Crow in the labor movement are hot the business of Congress nor of any other section of the government. This is a matter predominantly for the white workers with the assistance, of course, of the Negro workers. We are a part of the labor movement and we have some responsibility for its welfare. Congress has no such responsibility and will not assume it. The trade unions should demand that the part relating to unions should be deleted from this bill.
 




One of the strangest escapades yet indulged in by the Roosevelt government has been terminated by the return of the railroads to the capitalist bondholders and stockholders, that is, to the owners of the roads. The twenty-two-day colonels have returned their eagle bedecked uniforms to the War Department, along with their commissions. These railroad presidents remain “gentlemen” but they are no longer “officers.” The saluting is over, the presidents are plain Mr. or Bill, and Mr. Roosevelt is no longer their Commander-in-Chief:
 
Farcical Bumping
These twenty-two days of government “ownership” were not only an escapade, but somewhat of a farce. Not a farce from the side of the railway unions, but a farce from the side of the government bureaucrats who attempted to bungle through as in so many labor disputes. The railroad unions did a good job and came out of the affair with real gains which resulted from the mass pressure they had voted to exert.
In the course of the fight, “Assistant President” Byrnes and Vinson, the assistant to the “Assistant President,” were kicked around like a Missouri hound dog. General Marshall also came in for attention by Labor, the official paper of the railway unions. This paper stated that the White House had used Marshall in the “strangest of propaganda stunts,” “in a scheme to inflame public opinion” against the unions.
It was only the railroad unions that came out of the contest with any degree of honor. Not only this, but they achieved something more substantial than the honor of the unions. They got wage increases beyond what they were prepared to accept from the National Mediation Board. The board had made an award of eight cents an hour. Boss Vinson vetoed this and said that four cents was enough. In the final settlement, the operating brotherhoods got an increase of nine cents an hour, plus a week’s vacation with pay, which they didn’t get before.
The non-operating organizations got increases of from nine to eleven cents an hour. The four to ten cents part of the settlement is retroactive to February 1, 1943. This will total about $170,000,000.
One of the most important aspects of the victory of the unions was the defeat of Roosevelt’s intention to freeze the wages for the duration of the war.
“Above all,” says Labor, “they blocked the scheme of President Roosevelt and ‘Assistant President’ James F. Byrnes to freeze rail wages for the duration ... On top of that, they vindicated the all-important principle of collective bargaining ... and set a precedent which will aid all unions in all industries.”
 
Another Hole in Little Steel
The railroad settlement means that the Little Steel formula has been punctured again. Last June Vinson vetoed the eight cents an hour increase because he said it exceeded the Little Steel formula. But now it is claimed that although nine, ten and eleven cents are more than eight cents, the formula has not been breached and “inflation” need not be feared.
How did the government arrive at such a conclusion? The slick statisticians and economists who work for the various government boards and stabilizers said that overtime pay should be absorbed in the hourly increase in pay.
If you call overtime pay which you never got before, a part of your regular hourly rate of pay even though this means more money per hour and by the week, that is not inflationary. If you get nine, ten and eleven cents increase in pay by counting in your overtime, that will not produce inflation even though you get more money each week. But if you are given a straight eight cents an hour increase, that will be inflationary, even though you will have less money in your pay envelope each week!
 
Holding Down Basic Pay
This sounds crazy, but there is method in the madness of the Roosevelt government on this point. The Roosevelt capitalist government and the capitalist employers are not so much concerned with what they call “inflation” but with holding down the base rate of pay.
They are insisting here, as in the case of the miners, that if workers get more money in their weekly pay envelopes, it must come, not from an increase in the basic hourly rate, but from overtime work, from putting in more hours. That is, they want to increase the length of the working day. They have no serious objection now if the workers take home fifty dollars for sixty hours of work, but they are against his having the opportunity to take home fifty dollars, say, for forty hours of work.
The owners of industry and their government at Washington have their eyes on the post-war period. Should labor establish comparatively high basic hourly rates of pay now, the workers will fight after the war is over to retain this basic hourly rate. The employers, aided by their government, are laying plans for holding down wages and increasing hours for the period after the war. The nonsense about inflation is simply a scheme to hide their intentions from the working men and women.
It is necessary to make some comment on the business of the government taking over the railroads.
 
It Was a Phony
The government didn’t really take over the roads any more than it took over the mines. A government does not and cannot take over capitalist private property simply by nailing up a sign saying: “No Trespassing, Property of the United States Government.” Neither can any government take over capitalist private property by putting a few corporation presidents in army uniforms with eagles on their shoulders.
The only way a government can really nationalize capitalist private property is by expropriating the capitalists, by taking their property from them, in the name of and for the benefit of all the people, eliminating the payment of interest and dividends to the private owners, and of all private profit.
All the government did in the case of the railroads was exactly what it did in the case of the mines. It carried on operations to guarantee that its imperialist war plans would not be interfered with and to head off a strike against the capitalists who own the railroads and the mines. All the workers know, however, that neither the railroad workers nor the miners got anywhere with the government and their capitalist bosses until they decided that mass action was the next step.
Now that the railway unions have won a victory for themselves against their employers and the government, we think it in place to call their attention to a very disgraceful situation which they have conspired with their capitalist employers to create.
 
Negro Railroad Workers
We refer to their monstrous, reactionary, anti-labor and anti-democratic attitude toward Negro railroad workers. We are speaking specifically about the firemen, engineers, conductors clerks, brakemen, switchmen and all those railroad unions which exclude Negroes from membership, and conspire with the employers to keep them from holding certain jobs and getting promotions.
With the utmost stupidity, these unions make a bloc with the railroad companies against Negro workers. They mouth about “democracy,” they fight for the democratic rights of white workers and at the same time lead these same white workers to practice the most vicious form of discrimination and hatred against Negro workers.
Instead of placing themselves in the forefront of the struggle for democratic rights for Negroes, these unions join with the reactionary employers, the Negro-hating and labor-hating Southern congressmen, the Ku Klux Klan and all the most rabid and backward forces in the population against the Negro workers.
Labor, the official organ of the railroad unions, is a very progressive union paper on many important issues. But on the matter of discrimination against Negro workers it is noticeably and strangely silent.
At the top of its editorial page Labor carries the expressions: “INDUSTRIAL DEMOCRACY” and “TRUTH, JUSTICE AND FREEDOM.” For whom does Labor seek industrial democracy? For whom does it seek freedom and justice? For white people and white workers only? It’s about time Brother Keating had something to say in Labor on this question.
 





Jim Crow in Capital City
The CIO has opened a servicemen’s canteen in the Jim Crow city of Washington. This is Washington, D.C., the seat of the federal government, with Roosevelt at one end of Pennsylvania Avenue and Congress in the Capitol at the other end. This is the city from which the alleged war for democracy and against fascism is being conducted. This is the city where a congressman from the South makes a speech and says that the white boys in the Army are fighting for “white supremacy.”
There is Jim Crow all over the place in Washington. If a Negro gets hungry downtown it’s just too bad. If he wants to get a job on the street cars in this federal capital, administered by Congress, he will be looked upon as a freak.
At any rate, the CIO opened the servicemen’s canteen and it wasn’t a Jim Crow canteen. Negro soldiers were admitted just like any other soldier. They went there, danced, ate and drank the refreshments provided just like any other soldier. None of the Negro patron’s appeared naked nor, so far as we have been able to learn, has a single white woman been raped. This despite the fact that there are white hostesses as well as Negro hostesses. We must point out also that no Negro hostess has been raped by a white soldier.
This is highly displeasing, however, to Representative McKenzie of Louisiana. He is worried. Since the white soldiers in the Philippines and other places in the Pacific, according to Senator Eastland, are fighting for “white supremacy,” Louisiana McKenzie doesn’t want the efforts of the white boys in the Pacific destroyed by Negro and white soldiers and women mixing in a canteen in the same city where the White House and the Capitol are located.
McKenzie wants to know “how can anyone be a party to encourage girls into the arms of Negro soldiers at a canteen dance while singing Let Me Call You Sweetheart?” And that isn’t all, according to McKenzie. This CIO canteen is the only one in Washington “which invites both white and Negro servicemen and has both white and Negro hostesses.” He wants to know if the sponsors of the canteen have no “regard for the traditions of the South or the culture of the white race?” If they do, “why this dishonor to American womanhood?”
At time if seems strange to read such statements as these of McKenzie and Eastland coming out of Washington. They sound so much like talk that has been coming out of Berlin for the past ten years. But it isn’t so strange when one remembers that such talk was heard in the United States long before Hitler was born.
*

Service Act and Negroes
Labor Action has stated its position on Mr. Roosevelt’s national service act, but there is one side that we have not commented on. That is how such a “slave act,” how such “quack medicine,” would affect Negro workers. It has been charged and correctly that this act will tie workers to their jobs, or transfer them from job to job and from town to town for the benefit of the capitalist employers. That is, the biggest benefits from the passage of this bill will come to private industry and give industry a chance to increase its profits.
If the national service act will be a new slavery for white worker’s, it will be doubly a new slavery for Negro workers. It will give employers a new club to use in their discriminatory acts against Negroes. If workers are to be chained to the job, that means that Negro workers will be chained to the worst jobs.
Under this act it will be very easy for some Negro-hating foreman or employer to make out a case of keeping Negroes in the most dangerous, the heaviest, dirtiest and lowest paid jobs. All the employer has to do is “prove” that they are needed in this or the other job. This is only an additional reason why both white and Negro workers should oppose the Roosevelt national service act.
It is important to record, for the benefit of Negro workers who may not happen to know it, that the Communist Party or whatever it is they call themselves now (we mean the Stalinists) has come out in full support of the national service act.
Curran and Bridges, both members of the CIO Executive Council and leaders of international unions dominated by the Communist Party, rushed into print to support this “slave bill.” The Daily Worker and. other Stalinist papers supported the proposal. They didn’t quiet down until they got to the recent meeting of the CIO Executive Council and found out that Murray was against the national service act. Bridges tried to put up some kind of defense for his position but got a terrific blasting from Murray. These “friends of the Negro people” sink lower and lower as the years go by.
*

Negro Labor and Unions
In a long political editorial, the Black Dispatch, a Negro weekly published in Oklahoma City, Okla., has the following paragraph in its February 12 issue:
“Negro leadership should recognize that despite, some existing evils in its organization, labor represents the most liberal force toward which the black man should gravitate in America. No political party that supports poll-tax laws should be condoned. If labor can liberate the six million white workers now disfranchised down in Dixie, through the operation of poll-tax law, that same group of white Workers will in turn free four million black workers as a defensive technique. Care should be given now to the attitude of political parties toward labor unions.”
This, of course, is good sense, as the half million Negroes now in the organized labor movement are beginning to learn. They haven’t learned all they should, but neither have the white workers, who have been at it far longer.
*

Lily White Boilermakers
At the recent convention of the Brotherhood of Boilermakers, the delegates had before them the question of the Jim Crow locals for Negroes which this international union has established in many cities. We don’t know yet what the results of their deliberations were.
The Boilermakers are a tough outfit, and not easily changed. This union is very reactionary. It is filled to overflowing with meanness, ignorance and arrogance. Their constitution and methods of admitting members are an echo from the dim past. Furthermore, their constitution is so framed as to keep out Negroes, Chinese and other colored races.
Under the heading, Subordinate Lodge Constitution, Article VI, “Qualifications for Membership,” appears the following:
“Section 1. An applicant for membership must be a male citizen of some civilized country between the ages of sixteen (16) and seventy (70) years ... all applicants must be balloted for, and three black balls may reject any candidate. When three or more black balls are cast they must be explained, after which it will require a two-thirds majority vote of the members present at a regular meeting to declare said applicant eligible to membership.”
Evidently this international believes that Negroes in the United States are not citizens or that the United States is not a civilized country. At any rate, Negroes are not admitted to the Boilermakers Union. Whereas on the West Coast there are many Negro workers in shipyards coming under AFL and the Boilermakers’ jurisdiction, Negroes are barred and Jim Crowed into separate locals under a Negro stooge and traitor. The FEPC and the WMC have had this matter under advisement for about six months but, so far as we know, nothing has been done.
 




(Concluded)
The real essence of the AFL statement comes in the section on “free enterprise.” “We believe in free enterprise as an essential in personal freedom. The right to start a business and the right to choose a job are the basis of a free life.”
 
Reducing It to the Ridiculous
Miners should have the right to open a coal mine, steel workers should have the right to put up a steel mill, sharecroppers should have the right to establish a bank and compete with Chase National. They already have this right. There is no law which forbids a miner to buy a thousand acres of coal land and begin producing coal. There is no act of Congress which tells a steel worker that he shall not put up a mill, and any sharecropper has the right to open himself a national bank.
“By free enterprise we mean a progressive economy which provides incentives and opportunities to individuals and groups to take the initiative and to assume the risks involved in launching new forms of productive activity. Freedom of enterprise means freedom of labor. Thus organized labor means by free enterprise bold initiative for the increase and the range of, production.”
Capitalism, you see, has not been bold enough. The railway buccaneers did not gobble up enough of the public lands. Old Rockefeller was too timid in establishing his oil empire. Bell Telephone had no business to let a few small companies escape in its “trend” toward cheap telephone rates. When Morgan formed U.S. Steel he wasn’t bold enough and the reason for this was the absence of “free enterprise.”
Brothers Green and Woll want homes for workers after the war but none of this New Deal foolishness. “Private initiative should play a leading part in post-war housing reconstruction ...” Of course, there should be “safeguards against speculative abuses.” There should be a public works program ready to be “let to private contractors” to supplement “private employment,” should a decline occur. “Our accumulated national debt and interest charges thereon will mean sustained high tax rates ...” The big bondholders will continue to get their interest while the working class continues to be subjected to the present high income taxes. THIS IS THE WAY THE AFL WILL REVERSE MONOPOLY AND THE CONCENTRATION OF WEALTH.
 
Analyzing Other AFL Demands
Among many correct demands, such as care of veterans, unemployment benefits for two years, better social insurance, the AFL wants the shorter work week restored. They do not say what the hours shall be. That presumably will be left to the boldness and initiative of the employers. The shorter work week is to be restored “without material reduction in weekly earnings.” The workers should not have their wages cut too much because “during the war wage earners have contributed increased productivity ... without compensation by increases in wage rates.”
The AFL leaders are ready to submit to wage reductions after the war, along with the cut in hours. They agree with the WLB. If we want more money let us work more; if we work less, then we should be satisfied with less money. The workers may work for a lower rate after the war but the income taxes will remain as of today. The workers mustn’t do anything to impoverish the employers. It is assumed that the amount of the wage reduction will also be left to the boldness and initiative of the employers.
The unions must be ready with cooperation for the maintenance of full employment. “This implies ... review and revision of rules and practices which were developed to protect workers in a depressed economy and severely fluctuating economy.” This sentence could have been written in the office of the New York Times, the NAM or the Daily Worker. Perhaps Eric Johnston of the U. S. Chamber of Commerce put this sentence in. The workers are to keep paying the present income taxes, they are to take a cut in pay and they are to reject the measures enacted under labor pressure in the early days of the New Deal. Thus the AFL will usher in the “century of the common man,” build up the “public conscience” and promote “free labor.”
It is in the section dealing with “equality of opportunity” that these AFL bureaucrats become completely disgusting and reprehensible. Equality of opportunity is denied, say these “bureaucrats, “wherever individuals are deprived of their civil and political rights ... it is denied wherever workers, because, of race, religion or sex do not have an equal chance to get jobs ...” The AFL is opposed to any and all of these forms of discrimination. For the AFL to say that it is opposed to these practices is a downright lie. The AFL officialdom has been for decades the main bulwark of these practices in the labor movement. THE AFL IS BUILT ON DISCRIMINATION: DISCRIMINATION AGANST THE UNSKILLED WORKER, DISCRIMINATION AGAINST THE NEGRO WORKER.
They know they lie. That is the reason they issue such a mealy-mouthed, statement on discrimination. If they are for political equality, why is it that the AFL never turned a finger against the poll-tax? Why, right now, do they announce their support of poll-tax Congressman Martin Dies? If they are so interested in eliminating discrimination on account of race, why doesn’t the AFL suspend the Boilermakers Union, the Machinists Union and other AFL unions which discriminate against Negroes?
 
In Conclusion
This whole statement of the AFL on the post-war world is a compound of ignorance, stupidity, reaction, mush, lies, craft union arrogance and puerile verbiage. Most of it could have been, written by any capitalist or by Earl Browder. Most of it can be supported wholeheartedly by the NAM and Stalin’s Communist Party in the United States. Green, Woll, Hutchinson and Tobin crawl into bed with Browder, Witherow and Eric Johnston.
Capitalism (“free enterprise”) today is a stinking and gangrenous dictatorship exercised by the capitalist ruling: class over the working class. The AFL bureaucrats in this statement only proclaim themselves the labor lieutenants and recruiting sergeants of this degenerate social order for the post-war world.
These aging buffoons, bootlickers and traitors seek to drive labor into the imperialist slaughterhouse today, and tomorrow herd what is left into the capitalist pens of exploitation.
The document is putrid with old-fashioned phrase-mongering and platitudes, totally unsuited for this age of international murder, destruction and imperialist savagery. It attempts to deliver the working class to big business right at the time that fascism threatens to engulf the whole world in one form or another. There is not one sentence on independent action by the working class; not one word on independent political action by labor. There is no practical criticism of what is going on today and ho guide to labor about what to do to achieve freedom.
 




“Hell, shoot me. It’s your country. I’m supposed to die anyway. Go ahead and shoot.”
Thus spoke a Negro soldier wearing the uniform of the United States: “land of the free and home of the brave.” The place was Charleston, S.C., and the other man was a white policeman, an officer of the “law.” The Negro soldier was accused of being drunk. When he remonstrated that he was not drunk the policeman, in the manner of policemen, especially Southern policemen, began to club the soldier, uniform and all. Not even Negro soldiers, being trained to die for democracy and the four freedoms have rights which policemen and white army military police are bound to respect.
The “man” Bilbo is speaking:
“We people of the South must draw the color line tighter and any white man or woman who dares cross that color line should be promptly and forever ostracized ... The superior ability of the white race, has been proved both cranialogically and by six thousand years of planet-wide experimentation ... If you do not accept this as true, then you brand as false both history and biology.”
Senator Eastland of Mississippi announces in the Senate: “White boys in the Pacific are fighting for white supremacy.” During the past twenty-one months, ten Negro soldiers, in uniform, have been severely beaten by white military and civilian police in Mississippi.
Maybank of South Carolina announced in the Senate after the Supreme Court decision on the Texas primaries: “Regardless of any Supreme Court decision, any laws that may be passed by Congress, the South will maintain its present political and social institutions.” And what are these political and social institutions to which the senator refers? First of all, lynching and mob murder. Next, the perpetuation of ignorance among the common people, both white and black. Also the maintenance of the poll-tax, which disfranchises millions of white and black human beings.
 
And in the North
This is the South. The North is only a little better. The North is not so direct and openly brutal as the South. Above the Mason and Dixon line they are slimier and more piously hypocritical. The pattern of segregation, insult and Jim Crow is the same. It begins in the federal government at Washington. The late Secretary of the Navy was against trying any “social experiments during the war.” He meant by this that no Negroes should be allowed to sleep on battleships with white sailors. No Negroes should be officers in the Navy. The Secretary of War is of the opinion that most Negroes should be in labor battalions.
The same holds for the war industries: the “arsenals of democracy.” After two years of protest Negroes are still discriminated against; they still have to fight to get a job and then fight against Jim Crow inside these “arsenals of democracy.”
Roosevelt is silent on these main questions. Maybank, Bilbo, Dies and the other Southern rebels belong to Roosevelt’s party. He needs them and he will do nothing. Dewey or the Republican candidate will speak only in vague terms about Jim Crow in the Army, Navy and industry because he too will not want to rock the boat while crossing the stream into the White House. All of them, Republicans and Democrats, are committed to Jim Crow. It’s their national policy. The four freedoms don’t apply to the Negro in the U. S., or to the black people of Africa, or the brown people of India. THESE PEOPLE, AND ALL THE OPPRESSED OF THE WORLD, WHITE AND COLORED, WILL HAVE TO FIGHT AND DIE TOGETHER FOR THEIR OWN FREEDOM.
One walks down the streets of any city and sees service flags in the windows where Negroes live: flags with one, two, three or more stars. What are these Negro youths fighting for? For “white supremacy”? That’s what Eastland said the white youths were fighting for. (Incidentally, we don’t believe this. We believe that Eastland is a scoundrel and a liar.) Are these Negro youths fighting for the maintenance of present-day Southern social, economic and political institutions? Are they fighting for the poll-tax, white primaries, a Jim Crow Army and Navy .and a Jim Crow federal government? Are they fighting to keep Africa and India enslaved to the ruling British capitalist class?
Are they fighting for the right to be lynched after the war is over? We don’t believe that’s what Negroes are fighting for and we don’t believe that is what the overwhelming majority of white youth is fighting for. But if white and Negro youth, white and Negro workers, don’t know it by now, they will learn that this is the end that is being planned. This will be the practical result of their efforts if the capitalists and their political henchmen have their way.
 
Will They Have Their Way?
We don’t believe, though, that they will have their way. We don’t believe that the South will be able to maintain its present social and political institutions. We don’t believe that the North will be able to maintain its present economic set-up, which, of course, is identical with that of the South. The trade union movement and workers’ political action will take care of that. With 500,000 black workers in the labor movement today and thousands more going in, the South and North will discover that it will be increasingly difficult to Jim Crow, segregate and lynch Negroes.
As Negroes discover that as toilers their strongest fortress is the organized labor movement, especially the industrial unions and the revolutionary political party, they will more and more turn their backs on their anti-union advisers and the Jim Crow Democratic and Republican Parties.
When thousands more white workers learn that the Negro workers are their allies and brothers, their comrades in arms, they will throw off their unnatural prejudices, their white “superiority” attitudes, and fight beside the Negroes for the democratic rights of the Negro people, against Jim Crow everywhere and for the social, political and economic equality of the Negroes.
When the white workers learn who their real enemy is: that it is the white ruling class, they will unite with the, black workers and unitedly have their revenge against their common exploiters and oppressors: North, South, East and West.
 




As you assemble in your constitutional convention, all of us are aware of the pressing and extremely important problems that you will face. You will not only face the peculiar problems which you must solve as workers in the giant and basic steel industry, but you will be confronted with great problems that are being faced by the whole working class in the United States. You are aware, of course, because you have been told so often, that these problems arise in part from the fact that the United States is engaged in war.
While the war is the main event and while our answer to the big questions of the day cannot be answered without giving first consideration to the war, it is also a fact that these problems have their roots in the workings of capitalist society. It is necessary that all of us of the working class realize this or we will not get far in seeking the correct solution for the many problems that face us.
 
The Union and the Steel Companies
Right now, you as steel workers are mainly concerned with your demands for a wage increase and with other demands that have to do with security on your job and a decent standard of living for your families. You are demanding a basic wage increase of seventeen cents an hour; also, a guaranteed minimum annual wage as well as severance pay on a graduated scale, depending on length of employment.
Your international union has done an excellent job in making a careful study of income and expenditures of steel workers’ families. Your case was so well organized and presented that the steel manufacturers had no answer and had to ask for time to prepare their case. In your Attempt to deal with the steel barons, the only answer you could get from them was “No.”
The steel employers, led by the United States Steel Corp., along with the rest of big business, had already decided on and instituted an anti-union drive even before you presented your demands.
Big Steel – and Little Steel, too – would really like to get back to the days of company unions. Undoubtedly the steel manufacturers are preparing for a showdown with your union. They know that you are in a strong bargaining position due to your size and to the fact that steel is the basic and essential industry.
The steel companies, along with other big corporations, are convinced that they can win an anti-union victory today, Fairless, Grace, Weir and Girdler are ready to revert to all the old union-crushing practices so popular in the days of Frick and Gary. They are heartened now because they have reason, to believe that they have already scored a preliminary victory.
They have their Smith-Connally bill, a friendly WLB, a threatening War Manpower Commission, and a President in the White House who has asked Congress to pass a national service act.
 
An Inventory of Labor’s Situation
If this were all, it would be bad enough. B-ut the employers and their government have more. They have a no-strike pledge from labor. The employers and President Roosevelt have also squeezed other concessions from organized labor. While it is true that you were not consulted about the no-strike pledge, it is nevertheless true that you, have rather passively accepted the situation. This is a oon-dition which faces you as you assemble for your constitutional convention.
All of the concessions which you have been pushed into making, including the no-strike pledge, have developed into a millstone about the necks of the steel workers and organized labor in general. You were told that your first duty was to win the war, that you should be prepared to make any and all sacrifices for the winning of the war. We were promised that our unions would be unmolested, that collective bargaining would be maintained, that prices would be held in line with wages, that no new crop of millionaires would be born as a result of war profits.
Not one of these promises, made by the government, has been fulfilled. Any confidence which workers placed in promises made to their leaders has been betrayed. It is only wages that have been held down while hours have been increased. The War Labor Board has taken a steadfast and consistent position that if labor gets more money in the pay envelope it must come not from an increase in the basic hourly rate of pay but from putting in longer hours. There is no real collective bargaining today. This time-honored union-management procedure has been transferred from the factory to the WLB and numerous other government agencies, including the President and his assistants. The cost of living has risen 43.5 per cent – 74.2 per cent on food alone – and this since January, 1941. Our wages, however, are tied to the Little Steel 15 per cent formula. Even the figure of the Bureau of Labor Statistics,, which is 50 per cent too low, says that living costs have risen 23.4 per cent since 1941.
President Roosevelt’s statement that no new crop of millionaires must be produced through war profits has also been shown to be merely so many meaningless words. The tremendous increase in profits has produced millions in dividends and interest. WHILE IN 1939 THE SHARE OF CORPORATIONS IN THE NATIONAL INCOME WAS 8 PER CENT, IN THE LAST QUARTER OF 1943 IT WAS 13 PER CENT. LABOR’S SHARE IN 1939 WAS 65 PER CENT, BUT ONLY 59 PER CENT IN THE LAST QUARTER OF 1943.
 
No-Strike Pledge Must Go
There is no need to go any further with facts and figures. We in our families have been through the experience of attempting to make ends meet within the limitations of the Little Steel formula. We know that it can’t be done. The main question before your convention, therefore, is what to do about it. A demand has already been made by your union and other unions for the abolition of the Little Steel formula. But the WLB and the government pay no attention to our demands. LABOR ACTION knows why and we believe that you do, too. THE EMPLOYERS AND THE GOVERNMENT HAVE THAT NO-STRIKE PLEDGE.
That means that organized labor can only beg. It can’t fight. In order to fight and get results, labor must be free. It must be free to use the only weapon we have, our numbers and our organized strength. We have the numbers but we are shackled by the no-strike pledge.
It is claimed that the no-strike pledge was given a a patriotic gesture; to demonstrate that the working class was in full support of the war, While Labor Action, and the Workers Party do not support the imperialist war, we can say to those workers who do support the war that even they must realize by now that it is only labor which has made any sacrifice whatsoever. Furthermore, does any worker believe that a war which produces billions in profits for one side and want and misery for the other side, is a war for democracy? This is the real situation today and big business and the government show no inclination to change things. “THIS MEANS THAT IF THERE IS TO BE ANY IMPROVEMENT SUCH IMPROVEMENT WILL HAVE TO COME FROM THE PRESSURE OF THE WORKING CLASS.
This is the brutal fact which the steel workers face in their convention. They are faced with the necessity, the urgent necessity, to rescind their no-strike pledge. This will require courage, understanding and determination. The overwhelming majority of the workers are against the no-strike pledge and have always been against it. The only people who have been for the no-strike pledge are the leaders of the labor movement, the Communist Party, the employers, and the government.
If you take back your no-strike pledge, you will demonstrate, not irresponsibility, as will be charged, but genuine working class responsibility and loyalty. Then your union will mean something and you will be in a position, if the need arises, to enforce your demand for an increase in pay and the other demands which you have in your program.
 
The Question of Political Action
There is another aspect of the CIO program which will probably come up in your convention. That is the CIO political action campaign. Your Political Action Committee is preparing to enter the coming November election with a political platform. Since this is to be political action by a large organized section of the working class, one has the right to assume that you are thinking of independent working class political action. THIS IS A STEP WHICH IS LONG OVERDUE!
At the last CIO convention there was no resolution calling for the re-election of Mr. Roosevelt. Since that convention, however, many CIO unions have come out with endorsements of President Roosevelt for re-election. This, of course, is not independent working class political action. This is tying the workers to the Democratic Party – the party of Howard Smith, Bilbo and Martin Dies. It would be no different, to be sure, if workers’ organizations endorsed the Republican Party.
Independent working class political action can only mean a break with the Democratic and Republican parties. The organized labor movement, with its millions of militant and loyal members, can have a party of its own and we can have it this year. We can organize our own national labor party, based on the trade unions. That would be OUR party. We can put up our own candidates ... members of our unions and of our party. We can vote for them – and for them alone.
 
The Two Most Important Issues
It seems clear, therefore, that the two most important questions to come before your convention are: the rescinding of the no-strike pledge and the beginning of action for the organization of a genuine Labor Party.
Labor Action and the Workers Party are deeply interested in your convention because we are a part of the working class and active participants in the struggles of organized labor. We make no apologies, therefore, for holding this discussion with you. We are steel workers, aircraft workers, shipyard workers and toilers in numerous other industries. When we discuss these problems with you, therefore, we are discussing our own problems.
We greet the constitutional convention of the United Steel Workers of America and hope that your deliberations will result in many concrete gains not only for the toilers in the steel industry but for the whole working class in America.
 




The second constitutional convention of the United Steel Workers of America, held at Cleveland May 9 to 13, might have become a pillar of fire to guide and inspire other sections of the labor movement. The opportunity for deliberate and significant action that would have brought the whole CIO to its feet, came on the second day of the convention when the no-strike pledge was up for consideration. This was the second resolution in the Resolution Committee report. The first, as was to be expected, was entitled “Philip Murray.”
As soon as the resolution was reported and its adoption moved by the committee secretary, Delegate Tavlin of Local Union 2941 got the floor to support reaffirming the no-strike pledge “to keep up production in support of our armed forces.” The next delegate to speak was Mark Brown of Local Union 2715, from near Reading, Pa. Brown was one of the younger delegates and was “speaking against the no-strike pledge and in support of a resolution from his local demanding the revocation of the pledge. Brown made an excellent presentation of the case against the no-strike pledge and was clearly winning the confidence and support of an increasing number of delegates as they listened to his formulation of the things that were in their own minds. At first there was some booing, but this quieted down as Brown continued, and President Murray insisted that the convention maintain order.
It was clear that Brown was really expressing the sentiments of the delegates. They were against the no-strike pledge and were therefore in a mood to listen to any delegate who had the courage and ability to formulate arguments against the pledge and to fight for this position in the convention. Brown was not only speaking for his local but for numerous other steel locals that had sent in resolutions against the no-strike pledge.
The situation was a tense one. This was evident not only in the attitude of the delegates but by the plainly demonstrated discomfiture of the leadership on the platform. It seemed that something dramatic was about to happen. Murray certainly understood this.
After Brown had finished there was applause from the delegates. Another delegate took the floor to relate how difficult it was to get grievances settled. He too was against the no-strike pledge. Next came a delegate in favor of continuing the no-strike position of the union. And then came the perennial Van Bittner, chairman of the Resolutions Committee, with the statement that he had received short notice as to the preparation of the resolutions. He didn’t want to take up the time of the convention and closed with the astounding statement that he believed the overwhelming majority of the steel workers were in favor of the no-strike pledge now, just as they were two years ago.
 
Murray Gets into Action
Murray then took the floor, it seemed with a sort of sinking feeling that Van Bittner might be just running off at the mouth. Murray was plainly perturbed and alarmed at the unquestionably antagonistic attitude the delegates were assuming. He began with the history of the no-strike pledge. He went over the old ground that the “leaders of organized labor in the United States of America, by their own motion, without a single request from the President of the United States, gave to him a commitment that for the duration of this war organized labor would not indulge itself in the conduct of strikes.”
Murray, told the delegates that when the no-strike pledge was given, the United Steel Workers of America had 600,000 members. “It is meeting two years after it gave its commitment to the President of the United States with a membership of approximately one million.” This was one of Murray’s main arguments for the no-strike pledge. It amounts to saying that the union grew because of the no-strike pledge; that is, that thousands of steel workers joined the USWA in the past two years because its leaders had promised Roosevelt not to strike. If this is true, then one would think that instead of growing the USWA would have lost members, because there have been strikes in steel involving thousands of members. The membership has not adhered to the no-strike pledge. Just last December, at the expiration of the contract, 175,000 steel workers were on strike for a brief period.
Murray had another argument that he has become noted for. He gave, it again in the same words that he has used so often before. His the argument that if the pledge is withdrawn “your organization and its leaders would be required, under some set of circumstances, to suddenly rush to Washington and combat the influence of a powerful anti-labor group who are bent upon the passage of no-strike legislation and national service legislation.”
Murray, Thomas and others advanced this argument two years ago in support of the no-strike pledge. After they had shed their tears and dragged the CIO through the mud of no-strike capitulation, abject submission to Roosevelt and fawning over Army-Navy brass hats, the “anti-labor group” went right ahead with their Smith-Connally Act, state anti-labor laws, wage and job stabilization, higher taxes on workers and with free rein to the big capitalists to make more profits, salaries and dividends. To cap it all, the Great Friend of Labor in the White House came forth with his demand for national service legislation.
 
Murray Becoming Stumbling Block
As Murray’s reactionary position comes more and more into conflict with the genuine interests of the workers he leads and represents, he becomes more and more dishonest and more of a stumbling block in the way of progress for the industrial union movement. He talks about a “powerful anti-labor group who are bent upon the passage of ... national service legislation.” Who is demanding national service legislation? Congress? No. It is Roosevelt, the War Department and the Navy Department. It is Roosevelt whose boots Murray, Thomas, Green, Bittner, Browder and Golden are prepared to lick every day in the week. Murray doesn’t mention one word of the fact that it is Roosevelt who is running things in Washington and that it was he who demanded national service legislation which Murray himself, in an honest moment, called “quack medicine.”
Murray had another tear-jerker up his sleeve: an indecent and irrelevant appeal to the patriotism of the delegates and workers.
“The withdrawal of your no-strike pledge here would be regarded as an insult to the armed forces and to the balance of our union-minded population here in the country ... If you withdraw your no-strike pledge, which I know you are not going to do, what sort of letter would you send to your boy overseas tomorrow explaining the matter?”
Then Murray went on with all the threadbare arguments that delegates have heard from him so often about the value of labor’s representation on government agencies, the coming invasion of the continent, “your country must come first,” there are no labor unions under Nazism, and on and on with a mixture of truth and fiction, sense and nonsense. The point is that even what he was saying that was true was completely irrelevant to the issue before the convention.
He closed his appeal with increasing fervor and emphasis.
“Your better judgment will undoubtedly prevail ... Don’t take unnecessary chances; don’t jeopardize the interests of your union ... I want it over as soon as we can get it out of the way, but I don’t want it over until I am positive that these forces of tyranny which you and I and all of our armed forces are now fighting, are completely destroyed in every inch of ground on this globe.”
 
Delegates Not Convinced
When Murray had finished, some delegates began calling for the question. The motion for the previous question was put to vote and lost. Murray had not convinced these 2,300 delegates that to withdraw the no-strike pledge was equivalent to guaranteeing the victory of Germany. Neither had, be convinced them that other things he said made sense. They knew they had a case before the WLB and that nothing was being done. They also suspected that Roosevelt would like to hold over a decision on their demands for wage increases until after the election. Withdrawing the no-strike pledge might speed up action from the WLB.
The discussion continued with a Negro delegate, Timothy Smith of Local Union 2603, speaking against the pledge, and Joe Cook, another Negro delegate, who follows the Communist Party line, speaking for.
When the vote was taken, the resolution was carried with FROM 300 TO 500 DELEGATES VOTING AGAINST reaffirming the no-strike pledge. An attempt to make the decision unanimous failed, with several hundred delegates holding out against this effort to force support of a position which millions of workers are really against.
A Detroit capitalist daily called Murray’s speech and his fevered plea for the no-strike pledge “his greatest hour.” Perhaps so, but Murray knows today that, in the days to come, he will not have easy sailing holding the men in line.
 
Wage Demands Before the WLB
The next most important matter before the convention was the case of the steel workers before the WLB. Despite the fact that the union had presented an excellent brief to the WLB and the fact that Murray and the other leaders spoke on the subject, the delegates were not particularly anxious to take the floor to discuss the wage demands. Murray, in opening the discussion, remarked that perhaps there was not enough interest being shown in the wage situation.
“Now, this is your forum and here is your wage policy. I am asking what it is that you are going to do to help push this program forward back home. All of the people employed in the industry need your support. The officers of your international organization need your support in the prosecution of this program.”
But what support could these 2,300 delegates give? What could the hundreds of members back home do? What could other CIO unions do? The resolution on the wage question came before the convention on Thursday. On the opening day of the convention, Tuesday, Murray had devoted nearly one-half of his opening address to the convention to an endorsement of Roosevelt for re-election. On Wednesday he closed his political harangue to the convention with the words:
“In these days of selective service there is a person who, regardless of his own desires and inclinations, must and, therefore, will be selected to be the candidate of the Democratic Party. We must make sure that Franklin Delano Roosevelt is re-elected.”
On Wednesday afternoon the no-strike pledge was reaffirmed, What could the delegates do in a convention hall on Thursday afternoon in connection with their wage demands which were in the hands of the WLB? The no-strike halter was still around their necks; their leaders had committed them to the support of Roosevelt—the man mainly responsible for the anti-labor WLB, for the demand for a national service act, for the Little Steel formula, and for all the other measures of the government for the protection of the big capitalists and high profits and for the degradation of the labor movement.
These workers and all other workers are in full support of the demands of the steel workers. But the delegates had sense enough to know that you can’t force the employers or the Roosevelt anti-labor WLB to grant a wage increase by sitting in a convention voting to support Roosevelt, the WLB and a no-strike pledge. And at least even the delegates who are for the no-strike pledge know that after you give such a pledge there is no need to wail and moan about lack of delegate interest in a resolution on wages where there is really nothing that the delegates or the membership can do about it. That is they can do nothing about it so long as the union adheres to a no-strike pledge.
 
Other Resolutions on the Floor
There were other resolutions which should be discussed but there is not space enough this week. There was an important resolution on discrimination against Negroes in industry and the armed forces. Murray made a strong speech in support of the resolution. Some of his remarks might be heeded by a few of the local officers of the USWA and by one national officer.
There was some dissatisfaction voiced by Negro delegates at the way hotel accommodations are made for them at conventions. They are asking why Negro delegates are not quartered at the same hotels as the delegations of which they are a part. This question arose in the 1942 convention of the steel workers and it is about time the national officers took a hand and settled the matter. It is inexcusable that a communication should go out from any national office of any CIO international reading that “The _______ Hotel is exclusively for Negro delegates.” Negro delegates should be housed with other delegates and the CIO unions should refuse to patronize hotels that will not admit Negro delegates.
 







This is the second installment of David Coolidge’s article analyzing the AFL recommendations for the post-war world.



Parts Three and Four of the AFL statement oh post-war planning deal with Guiding Domestic Principles and Immediate Domestic Program. The first guiding domestic principle reads that “our immediate responsibility is to win the war.” The AFL leaders bestow great praise cm the’m-selves for “suspending the exercise of the hard-won right to strike.” The result has been “an achievement of production without precedent in the history of mankind.” No mention is made of the important fact that this production resulted in the highest profits in the “history of mankind.”
Neither is it mentioned that giving up the right to strike resulted in the stabilization of wages, job stabilization, the Little Steel formula, the lengthening of the work week, the movement for piece work wages, the passage of the Smith-Connally Act and numerous state anti-labor bills; organized employer-WLB drives against the unions and the Administration’s demand for a national service act.
The statement then launches into a line of airy nonsense about the AFL being “an organ and an expression of American democracy.” This is true in only a limited and very narrow sense. It would be difficult to convince the Negroes or the white mass production workers that the AFL is an organ of democracy for them. “The essence of slavery ... is to be compelled to work at the dictation of another.” This is not the “essence” of slavery, but even if we accept the AFL statement, it is necessary to add that workers have no alternative but to work at the dictation of another so long as we tolerate the existence of capitalist society. The working class must toil at the dictation of the capitalist ruling class so long as capitalism exists. We can better our condition by militant and aggressive mass actions but we cannot escape capitalist class dictatorship while capitalism continues.
”The right to work and the right to quit work are among the most basic rights of free men ... the right of the worker to unite with his fellows to protect and advance his interests has been made a part of the law of the land. The AFL is determined to defend this “right against any and all forces that may challenge it.” How and when will the AFL defend these rights? By giving up the right to strike? By boasting about production and saying nothing about profits, salaries, dividends and interest? We shall see later What the positive contributions of the AFL are to the defense of workers’ rights.
 
Words That Have No Real Meaning
Remembering the present high production, the AFL says that it will riot “tolerate the “defeatism which holds that under a democratic regime of freedom it is not possible to make. this abundance actually available to our people.” Available to what people? Who are the AFL’s people? Abundance and superabundance are already available to some of the people. Even under rationing, the capitalists and their immediate beneficiaries suffer not at all. Also, what does the AFL plan to do to see that “this abundance” is available to the working class and the poor? Give another no-strike pledge? Continue to make sweetheart agreements with big business? Support Martin Dies for re-election to Congress?
The AFL is for checking the “concentration of economic and governmental power.” It wants the common people to “exercise effective control over the conditions which determine their livelihood.” But if they are to do this, “the trend toward private monopoly and the concentration of wealth” must be reversed. What does this mean? How can the common people exercise control over an economy which they do not own; an economy owned by capitalists, operated for private profit, and this ownership and operation protected by a capitalist government?
 
For “Free Enterprise”
Furthermore, the AFL is for the perpetuation of this system of private profit. The leaders of the AFL are in full agreement with Eric Johnston, president of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. They want “free enterprise” unencumbered by too much government regulation. They want the capitalist government to take its hands out of capitalist “free enterprise.” What do these doddering old men think the government is? Suppose the government, with its police, state guards, auxiliary military police, secret police and army, took its hands off the unions? What would become of the no-strike pledge, the Little Steel formula, job stabilization and the Smith-Connally Act?
The AFL leaders see only a “trend” toward monopoly and concentration of wealth. In 1944 these evils are just getting under way, presumably. Green, Woll & Co. have read nothing, they see nothing, they learn nothing and they understand nothing, save “free enterprise” and per capita tax. They have never heard of U.S. Steel, A.T.&T., the Big Five in the packing industry, Rockefeller, Morgan, Mellon and the Sixty Families.
The AFL leaders want the capitalist bosses. “We recognize that organizations of business, of finance, of farmers and of the various professions, as well as of labor have their indispensable part to play ... Each of these groups should press for the adequate recognition of its own peculiar interests ... Fortunately, each of the major functional groups is beginning to perceive that the impoverishment of other groups endangers its own security and prosperity.”
Every worker will shed a flood of tears at this tender solicitude of the AFL leaders over the plight of the manufacturers and bankers. With profits and dividends rolling in by the hundreds of millions, the capitalist ruling class is in danger of “impoverishment.” From whom? Evidently from the demands of the working class for more wages. If the steel workers get their seventeen cents increase that will impoverish Morgan and U.S. Steel.
It is interesting that the AFL statesmen recognize that the groups in society have “peculiar interests” and that each should press for the recognition of its interests. Do Green and Woll believe that the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the NAM are not pressing hard enough? It is true that the workers have “peculiar interests” as a class but how can we press for the recognition of these interests, as workers, while we have the no-strike millstone around our hecks, placed there by the Greens and Murrays?
(To be concluded)
 




The recent convention of the United Steel Workers of America revealed in the starkest manner all the contradictions which the labor movement has been placed in through the operation of the class collaborationist and pro-war attitude of the trade union leadership. And not only were the contradictions between class collaboration and the material needs of the working class easily apparent, but it was also clear that among the CIO leadership, at least, there is great fear that they will not be able to hold the line much longer in the face of growing resentment among the workers. Furthermore, the labor leaders are beginning to understand just a little that they too, as well as the rank and file, are being kicked around by the Administration in all its various branches. This fact, known not only to all the trade union leadership but to the rank and file as well, does not make it easier for the labor bureaucracy to continue with the line of the past two years. Neither the big stick, nor pleading, or sophistry or the usual maudlin and extraneous sentiments about not failing the boys on the fronts, suffices any longer, One simple weakness of the tactic of appealing to the patriotic sentiments of the workers is its total irrelevance in the mind of the intelligent worker. Not only is this appeal irrelevant but also misplaced and essentially impotent. It is irrelevant in the first place because it bears no logical or practical relation to the question of production, except from the standpoint of increasing capitalist profits. Virtually every government official who has any connection with war production has commented again and again on the tremendous and phenomenal rise in production. This has been particularly true in the production of ships, airplanes and munitions. Next is the fact that the demand of labor for wage increases is just that and nothing more: a demand for more money in the pay envelope to take home. A steel worker can be a flaming patriot, like Murray, or a revolutionary opponent of the war and yet discover a community of interest based on the need for a wage increase of seventeen cents an hour.
 
The Labor Leaders and Wages
The labor leaders continue to tie up the demand for wages with the question of production and the problem of winning the war. The government claims that wages are stabilized because this is a device for avoiding inflation, or runaway inflation, as it is often termed. Labor leaders as a rule do not attack this inflation theory of the government. This would lead them into a head-on conflict with the Administration, expose the fraudulent nature of the “inflationary spiral” propaganda and make it extremely difficult for the union bureaucracy to continue support of the concessions which labor has made during the war. Union leaders have posed as experts on the war and what is required from labor, but they have had little to say on the matter of monopoly prices and the maintenance of cartel agreements in relation to inflation. That is, such important and pertinent things as high profits, salaries, dividends and monopoly prices are not used by the trade union leadership in order to expose the essentially fraudulent claims about wage increases producing inflation.
The CIO has demonstrated that the cost of living has risen 43.5 per cent since January 1941. But even this is not pushed energetically as the basis for the demand for a rise in wages. The labor leadership refrains from conducting a campaign for wage increases based on the increase in profits, salaries, dividends and the rise in the cost of living. They always bring in the war. Not the war profits, salaries, dividends and interest, but the military problem of winning the war and the patriotic responsibility of labor to win the war, no matter what the bourgeoisie may happen to be doing.
There is a reason for this queer procedure by the trade union bureaucracy. Should they say point-blank that the workers are entitled to a wage increase and that the granting of such an increase has no necessary connection with the winning or losing of the war, then there would be no way to escape making a frontal attack on the whole governmental set-up as it relates to labor. To take such a position in practice would be inconsistent with the pledge not to strike for the duration of the war. Should the labor leaders take the war and patriotism hokus-pocus out of the wages question and stick to their time-honored claims about economic demands, collective bargaining and the “just demands of labor,” they would be forced to answer very embarrassing questions about the no-strike pledge.
In order to escape this embarrassment we see the miserable performance of Murray at the recent steel workers’ convention, telling the delegates that if they withdrew the no-strike pledge that would be regarded as an insult to the armed forces) and using the preparations for the coming military invasion of Europe as an argument against rescinding the no-strike pledge. If one looks only at the surface antics of the labor leadership, neither their position nor their apology for their position makes sense. Here is the fact that both the AFL and the CIO have produced statistics to prove that the cost of living has risen 45.5 per cent since January 1, nearly twice as much as the index of the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The steel workers have prepared a thoroughly documented and competent brief on the condition of steel workers and the ability of the steel corporations to pay increased wages. Industry was dumbfounded at the deadly accuracy of this brief and the irrefutable presentation of the steel union officials. Furthermore, the figure of the Bureau of Labor Statistics shows that the cost of living has advanced beyond the provisions of the Little Steel formula. And yet the CIO leadership contents itself before its own members with the argument that the objective economic situation is not what should decide the policy of the unions but the military question of winning the war; a matter, of course, which labor is not called on to decide and cannot now decide. The question which labor can decide and is squarely Confronted with and for which labor is responsible to itself is deliberately obscured by the leadership in the most Jesuitical manner, with a great deal of cant and saccharine verbosity about labor’s responsibility for not holding up production and for the necessity “to win this war. “
 
Labor and “Winning the War “
Even if it is assumed that labor has a responsibility to “win the war,” what can the working class do that it has not already done? Nobody except a few professional liars, DAR reactionaries and the most incorrigibly and blindly reactionary of the bourgeoisie even pretend that labor has not produced in more than abundance. Even the most stupid must know by now that net profits have mounted to such gigantic sums that the money is actually available to pay even greater wage increases than are asked by the workers. Then why do the labor leaders hesitate to let the matter of wage increases rest on the sound and unadulterated foundation of need, validity, justice and the availability of the necessary wealth with which to meet the demand? Why do they confuse the question of the war with the simple economic demands of the workers, especially when the material satisfaction of those demands can easily be taken care of with ill effects only upon the big monopolists?
Furthermore, why does the labor ‘bureaucracy become so disturbed when the no-strike pledge is attacked? Is it because they believe the no-strike pledge has resulted in gains for labor? How can they prove this and to whom? Surely not to the steel workers or the shipyard workers. It would be difficult to prove to the miners that they would have gained more if they had not had their four strikes last year. This, of course, is one of Murray’s beloved arguments. The steel workers had a certain number of members at the time the no-strike pledge was given; and now, just look: after two years of the pledge, the union has around two hundred thousand more members. Could any argument in support of the no-strike pledge be more fatuous and asinine? To be sure the union has more members. It has a bigger treasury. Having more members and a bigger treasury made it possible to raise the wages of the regional directors from $360 to $500 a month. But the steel workers get the same wages from the steel corporations they got two years ago. Their regional directors will get an additional $140 a month from the union treasury, but the ordinary rank and file have no idea when, if ever, they will get their modest little seventeen cents an hour increase. Murray gets his $20,000 and Bittner, Golden and McDonald their $10,000, but the seventeen cents an hour increase of the steel workers rests safely in the archives of the War Labor Board.
Are the labor bureaucrats worried for fear revocation of the no-strike pledge would produce strikes all over the country and thereby curtail production? Strikes would stop production; that is the purpose of a strike. But does it follow that mere rescinding of the pledge would cause strikes? We can say that it would be possible to rescind the no-strike pledge and there be no increase in strikes merely because the pledge had been rescinded, just as it would have been possible to refuse to give the pledge and yet keep strikes at a minimum. Workers don’t go on strike merely to demonstrate their independence, or to prove that they can live without working. In the present concrete situation, however, revocation of the no-strike pledge would undoubtedly precipitate a wave of strikes and filing of strike notices under the Smith-Connally Act. The labor bureaucracy knows this. They know that the pledge is a deterrent. Therefore they fight in every convention and in every edition of the union papers for a continuation of the pledge. But this can’t save them. When we say that revocation of the pledge would be followed by a wave of strikes we only say that the strikes would be justifiable and a reasonable and responsible action by the working class. That is, it would be a responsible class action by the workers in their own class interests.
 
Effects of the No-Strike Pledge
No matter what arguments were or could have been made for the no-strike pledge, those arguments have been proved invalid, defeatist and disruptive. The pledge has weakened the labor movement and pushed it back. The militancy of the movement was dampened while the employers and the government took the offensive against labor. Constant reaffirmation of the pledge left labor no weapon with which to meet this offensive. All of this should be clear even to the editor of that putrid and miserable petty bourgeois weekly, The Nation, which proclaimed last year that the miners should not strike, no matter what their grievances were.
It is because they recognize now that they face defeat that the workers would resort to their former militancy, including the strike. They have beheld the complete failure of the cringing and puerile pacifist methods of their leaders. The miners were forced to strike four times in one year to get even some slight gains. The shipbuilding workers asked for a small wage increase in the summer of 1943 and some of these workers were granted about one-half of the increase asked in the spring of 1944. The steel workers’ contract expired in December 1943 and despite Murray’s blustering about not working without a contract, in May 1944 these workers do not have a contract. After a walkout of approximately 175,000 of them in December 1943, in May 1943 not only have they not received any wage increase but there is no evidence that the WLB plans to render a decision prior to the November election. As this is being written, the only activity going on in connection with the case is a parade of steel barons, bourgeois economists and other sycophants before the WLB insisting that to raise wages in steel would wreck this infant and struggling industry. This is the industry whose net profits during the war have increased 244.6 per cent over the period 1936 to 1939. Steel dividends during the war have increased 59.1 per cent, assets over one billion dollars and reserves have increased by 161 million dollars. To this must be appended the revenue provision that steel companies which break even or make a profit during the war are guaranteed tax refunds for two years equal to their peacetime annual average net profits.
All of these facts and more have been placed before the steel workers in the brief laid before the WLB. While this brief applies specifically to the steel industry, its main lines are applicable to the whole of industry and labor. The grievances of labor have been compiled, organized and argued with clarity and force. Not a single contention made by labor has been refuted. But the labor movement only sits and waits and listens to the upper bureaucracy demand reaffirmation of the no-strike pledge.
Murray feigned surprise at the steel workers’ convention that the delegates showed so little interest in the wage question when presented to the convention. He wanted spirited discussion on this issue. But what was there to discuss? Two days before, the convention had reaffirmed the no-strike pledge. A rock-ribbed case was in the hands of the WLB. In the light of this real situation, what was there to discuss? The growing experience of labor, the facts in the case and the increasing realization that a stalemate has been reached indicate one thing and one thing only: labor cannot move so long as it adheres to the no-strike pledge.
 
An Impasse Has Been Reached
Murray, the two Greens, Thomas, Reuther and the rest of the AFL-CIO leadership know this. They know that an impasse has been reached. They know that the condition of the working class is not improving. They ought to know that it will steadily grow worse if some steps are not taken to halt the organized and planned offensive of the bourgeoisie and its government. This situation confuses and perturbs hundreds of thousands of workers. At the recent steel convention, the writer was discussing the question with some delegates who took the position: “We don’t want strikes during the war, but we are against this no-strike pledge. It ties our hands. “
In order to clarify the problem before the trade unions it is necessary to get at the roots of the difficulty. The problem is not resolved merely by saying that the union bureaucracy is pro-war. Thousands of workers are pro-war in the sense that they believe Hitler must be defeated or that fascism must be defeated. Thousands believe that the war is being fought for something they call “democracy.” There are other thousands who take a more positive and unambiguous pro-war position. But in the ranks of each of these groups are very militant workers who are thoroughly dissatisfied with the no-strike pledge and other events transpiring today. There is reason to believe that if a secret referendum was held the overwhelming majority of labor would vote to revoke the no-strike pledge.
 
AFL and CIO Differences and Similarities
The CIO leadership is pro-war, but there is a difference between the AFL and the CIO on this matter. With the AFL the pro-war position is a type of unadulterated and direct class collaboration. The AFL leadership goes along with “free enterprise” wherever it may lead, whether in peace or war. This leadership does not and cannot conceive of the labor movement as in any way divorced from capitalism even in its most conservative manifestations. The AFL can therefore .endorse Martin Dies for reelection and issue a statement on post-war planning that in no important aspect differs from the pronouncements of Eric Johnston, president of the United States Chamber of Commerce. To be sure, a part of the orientation of the AFL is based on its feud with the CIO and the preference of the big bourgeoisie for the older organization. Furthermore, the AFL is always concerned with using and protecting whatever bargaining advantages it may have as an organization of skilled craftsmen which has established a certain prestige and stability in the narrow field in which craft unionism operates. This prestige and stability and the preference of many employers for dealing with a “responsible” organization give the AFL some advantage when attempting to expand into the mass production field.
The AFL was never as ardent a supporter of the New Deal as was the CIO. The older organization was always a little suspicious of the value of government intervention in the solution of the problems of industry-labor relations. This attitude was based not only on the basic Gompers philosophy but probably on the experience of the leaders with concrete experiences the organization had had with such forms of intervention as court injunctions, the Sherman Anti-Trust Act and the Clayton Act. Long before the New Deal, Gompers had hailed Section 6 of the Clayton Act, beginning with, “The labor of a human being is not a commodity or article of commerce,” as labor’s “Magna Charta upon which the working people will rear their constitution of industrial freedom.” Despite this outburst of Gompers, a few years later the AFL was fighting all along the line for a change in the procedure of the courts in validating “yellow dog” contracts and holding them not in violation of the provisions of the Clayton Act.
Furthermore, the AFL, following the oft-quoted statement of Gompers, believed that the time had come for industry and labor to sit together at the council table to arrive at decisions in the mutual interest of both groups. The government should remain aloof and permit labor and capital to solve their own problems. The old-line trade union bureaucracy were and remain protagonists of a type of craft business unionism which developed alongside laissez-faire capitalism. This philosophy is reiterated and emphasized again in the recent AFL pronouncement on post-war planning.
While it must be emphasized over and over that both the AFL and CIO are pro-war and class-collaborationist institutions, the difference in approach to the solution of the problems of labor is important for understanding the dilemma of the CIO leadership.
 
New Deal Misunderstood
The pro-war allegiance of the CIO bureaucracy flows not only from their basic collaborationist position but also from the way this bureaucracy appraises the New Deal. In the long run, of course, any principled position they may have in connection with the New Deal is reduced in practice to simple support of Roosevelt, who to them is the New Deal made flesh and dwelling among men. It must be remembered that the CIO came on the scene in the heyday of the New Deal, which was hailed as labor’s new Magna Charta upon which the working people would surely this time rear their constitution of industrial freedom. It is not difficult to understand how such simple and primeval minds as Philip Murray’s might be beguiled into believing that New Deal capitalism was pro-labor. One can understand also why a leader such as R.J. Thomas, fortuitously hurtled to the top of the UAW, might not be able to grasp the meaning of the New Deal. It is easy also to explore the minds of the “socialists,” John Green and Walter Reuther, and see that to them the New Deal represented one rung in the gradualist ladder leading to “socialism in our time. “
Murray, and John L. Lewis too for that matter, did not understand that the New Deal was a relief measure. The fact that some of the more romantically exuberant and liberal New Dealers may have believed that their refurbished capitalism would bring plenty for all does not alter the fact that the New Deal was instituted in order to hold the line for capitalism. Roosevelt said this again and again but class collaborationist labor leaders are not famous for being guided by these utterances of bourgeois statesmen which are true and factual. The federal housing program was a relief measure and was never envisaged as a permanent feature of capitalist society competing with private construction. The forty-hour week was also a relief measure made for an emergency in order to spread the work. The capitalist press is correct in stating this insofar as the bare facts in the case are involved. The bourgeoisie hammers away at this for its own class reasons, of course. What the labor leaders have failed to do is to attack the scuttling of the federal housing program and the extension of the work-week in a way demanded by the class interests of the proletariat. The same goes ior the so-called premium pay which was relinquished without a struggle.
The more enlightened of the CIO leadership saw that the system of “free enterprise” had broken down. Roosevelt saw this also. He set out to repair the damage. The CIO leaders concluded that a part of the damage Roosevelt would repair was the damage which had been done the working class and the trade unions in the days of Harding, Coolidge and Hoover. The Republican Party was conceived in sin and born in iniquity, but the Democratic Party of Roosevelt had been washed in the blood of the lamb. They sensed that in the circumstances, government aid and intenvention were necessary. They called on the New Deal to protect labor, to rescue the people from want and insecurity.
Labor leaders either forgot or did not understand that business was also calling on the government for help. If their plea was not so loud as that of labor, business at least was willing for government to intervene long enough to help “free enterprise” to stand on its feet again. Also the labor bureaucracy did not realize that in days past business had not only acquiesced in government intervention but had demanded it. For decades and decades, for instance, business has demanded and received aid and protection from government in the form of increasingly high protective tariffs. And the story of the building of the railroads with government subsidies in cash and free land could have taught labor leaders some of the things important to know about whose interests capitalist governments really serve.
The New Dealers declared that they were out to help everybody. The CIO leaders took their representations at face value. These gullible men, politically ignorant and whose grasp of economic realities is as slight as that of Alf Landon, dragged the whole labor movement into the New Deal fairyland. In the long run, as is evident today, this meant to drag the labor movement into the net of the bourgeoisie. There were certain agitational and tactical advantages labor could have secured from the New Deal. But the class-collaborationist labor leaders, like all class-collaborationists, proceeded tactically and in practice not from a base of proletarian class principles, ‘but on a purely opportunistic platform which keeps the working class tied to the Democratic Party – which means: tied to Roosevelt and the bourgeoisie. This is important for any understanding of the dilemma the CIO leadership finds itself in. The root of the difficulty would be crystal-clear if the Republicans should win in November. It is in part to save themselves from this acute embarrassment that Murray and the others strive with might and main to force Roosevelt to run again, and will turn heaven and earth to secure his election.
 
Tied to Roosevelt
The coming of the Second Imperialist World War complicated things for the trade union bureaucracy, especially the CIO leadership. Not simply because, as believers in class collaboration, they would accept the war, but concretely for the reason that they were and are Roosevelt idolators. They are not only American patriots of the common garden variety, but Roosevelt patriots. They were blind to the relationship between the New Deal and capitalist society, but also to the relationship between the present war and capitalist society. They make no significant connection between the war, capitalism, the importunities of bourgeois society and the difficulties the labor movement faces. The CIO leadership still looks to Roosevelt as a savior; not just a lesser evil, but a real savior. To them there is only one evil, the defeat of Roosevelt and the victory of the Republicans. They see but two alternatives: Roosevelt or the Republicans. They follow Roosevelt even though he slay them and the labor movement.
This is why Murray is always disturbed by the raising of the no-strike pledge. A commitment has been made to Roosevelt. He is for Roosevelt and Roosevelt is for the war. This is the concrete way that class collaboration expresses itself right now. This is how and why in practice the CIO bureaucracy delimits the activity of the unions even on the wages question and other matters like longer hours, “work or fight,” job stabilization, income taxes, etc.
We said further back that the existence of the war is not relevant in a discussion of the wage demands or to insistence on revoking the no-strike pledge. It is now necessary to clarify this judgment. These considerations are not relevant if one is taking a position based on the needs and interests of the working class as a class. Labor resents the no-strike pledge, presses its demands for wage increases and continues to strike because the working class discovers out of its experience that it must do this to protect its organization and standards of living. That is, labor pursues the class struggle because of class need despite any attitude which workers may have on the war as such. We are witnessing today the formation of class-conscious attitudes in the ranks of labor. This is unquestionably due in part to the increasing success of the propaganda of the Marxists, which is surely being integrated into the experience of the proletariat.
The trade union bureaucracy has some meager understanding of what is taking place. They know that to yield only a little will cause the dam to burst and the result will be the rising of the resentment of labor to flood tide. Hence the appeal to patriotism, to the “support of the boys over there” and to keeping “our promise to the President.” In this sense, that is from their pro-Roosevelt, pro-war position, their advocacy of class peace and the feeling that there is no other place to go, the seemingly queer actions of the leaders are relevant.
 
Restoring Labor’s Power
It is interesting to note that whereas the AFL and CIO make a different approach to the problem of government intervention, the paths of both organizations converge and they move off together in the same direction: support of the Second Imperialist World War. And not only this, but each organization moves in the direction of the other in politics. The AFL for years has had the position that in politics they would “reward their friends and punish their enemies.” But that is precisely what the CIO position reduces to. The fact that the people supported by the CIO are less reactionary than some supported by the AFL does not by any means answer the real problems faced by the labor movement. Neither the AFL nor the CIO candidates for office are pro-labor in the sense of being against the Little Steel formula, high income taxes for workers, or any of the other measures put through by the ruling class. The AFL supports those candidates who are friends of labor as the AFL understands it. The CIO supports those candidates who support Roosevelt.
The no-strike pledge today represents the apex of class collaboration. The fact that it was given in relation to the war is not only significant as evidence of the support of the imperialist war by the labor bureaucracy but also as a manifestation of the willingness of the trade union leadership to push the working class as a class into capitulation to the bourgeoisie as a class. The rescinding of the no-strike pledge would not be merely an incentive for labor to press its demands by vigorous mass action but, far more important, it would mean that as a class labor had risen to its feet again, that it had improved its understanding, if not of the theoretical implications of their action, at least of the more practical manifestations of present-day imperialist society. Such a political act by the proletariat would certainly be understood by the bourgeoisie for what it really was: intensification of the class struggle.
Furthermore, in the course of the struggle against the no-strike pledge, those militant workers who are still pro-war would have their education enhanced. They would begin to understand the contradiction between support of the imperialist war and the insistence on their class rights and the defense of their class position. They would learn that the Little Steel formula is a class weapon of the ruling class in a period of capitalist war and that support of that war can only militate against asserting an independent working class position even on the seemingly simple question of wages in an era of gargantuan profits.
Revoking the no-strike pledge as a militant class action would also reveal to labor the real role of Roosevelt and the Democratic Party. In the ensuing class conflict labor would discover the need for independent working class political action, the most imperative need of the proletariat today. The continued activity of the Marxists in the labor movement and their persistent intercession in behalf of class struggle would open the way for the rehabilitation of the labor movement on a far higher and more political plane.
 




When in 1884 the small and weak Federation of Trades and Labor Unions passed the famous resolution calling for a nationwide demonstration for the eight-hour day, it gave the mightiest impulsion to the labor movement that it had received up to that time in the United States. The resolution read:
“Resolved by the Federation of Organized Trades and Labor Unions of the United States and Canada that eight hours shall constitute a legal day’s work after May 1, 1886, and that we recommend to labor organizations throughout this jurisdiction that they so direct their laws to conform to this resolution by the time named.”
 
Down Tools May 1, 1886
This call for mass action, for the workers to lay down their tools on May 1, 1886, and demonstrate in the streets, was issued in the midst of a small depression and right at the time when capitalist big business was organizing with all its might to wreck a young but vigorous trade union movement. The New York Sun said in an editorial:
“Five men in the country control the interests of 500,000 workingmen and can at any moment take the means of livelihood from 2,500,000 souls – – They can stay the nimble touch of almost every telegraph operator, can shut up most of the mills and factories, and disable the railroads. They can issue an edict against any manufactured goods so as to make their subjects cease buying them and the tradesmen stop selling them ... they can array labor against capital.”
The opposition and scheming of the capitalist ruling class did not scare or frighten the unions. They had grievances and they were determined to fight for their just demands. The call of the Federation of Organized Trades and Labor Unions caught on. Great enthusiasm was engendered for the May 1st demonstration and strike. This was true not only among the skilled workers, but among the unskilled, who worked the longest hours.
The demand for the eight-hour day became the battlecry of all the forces of labor, and their ranks moved inexorably toward the first great working class political demonstration ever held in the United States.
That is what the struggle for the eight-hour day was: a political struggle, a struggle of class against class, a struggle that would inevitably involve the federal and state governments on the side of capitalist law and order and against the demands of the workers.
In reply to the call, the workers poured into the streets on May 1, 1886, and instituted the first May Day. There were thousands of strikers and demonstrators from all the big cities. Many thousands of workers won the eight-hour day and many more thousands had their hours of labor reduced.
When we speak of the eight-hour struggle and the celebration of May Day, it is fitting that we recall the Haymarket frame-up and the martyrdom of Parsons, Engel, Spies and Fischer. We have inscribed their names on our working class banner. We observe May Day not only to celebrate the victories of the past, but also as a memorial to our brothers, sisters and comrades who gave their lives to make those victories possible.
THIS WAS WHAT THE LABOR MOVEMENT DID IN 1886, FIFTY-SEVEN YEARS AGO, BEFORE IT WAS WELL ORGANIZED AND BEFORE IT NUMBERED THE’MILLIONS IT DOES TODAY.
But of the eight-hour movement and the May Day demonstrations the AFL was developed and found itself at the head of the labor movement in the United States. Through long years of conflict and numerous crises – often meeting the forces of organized capitalism head-on – the movement grew and extended its influence.
 
Progress Through Struggle
All through the decades following the first May Day, organized labor learned through experience that it had to fight; that it had to strike and mass its thousands on the picket line. Quite often the leaders of labor were against the strike. They would listen to the siren voice of the capitalist enemy, capitulate before his threat of force or take to their heels when the capitalist government thundered from Washington. It was the pressure of the plain workers that lifted the movement to ever new heights and greater power and strength.
The labor movement today with its. millions is the heir of the struggles carried on during the years since the first May Day. We are the beneficiaries of the great militant strikes of the past half century: the militant railway strikes of the seventies, the bloody struggles of the miners and steel workers, of the garment workers, and all the other conflicts that brought the gains to labor that we enjoy today.
It was these militant and, often bloody struggles that brought what freedom the working class has today. It was through determined resistance to the capitalist ruling class that we gained the right to organize. Workers went to jail in the course of the struggle for the establishment of the unions and collective bargaining. This right was not granted freely by the capitalist employers nor was it granted and. protected by any “friendly” government.
A story has been going around the past ten years, fostered by trade union leaders, that the Roosevelt government, with its section 7A of the NLRA, gave the workers the right to organize “into unions of their own choosing.” This is a capitalist lie, a New Deal He. We won that right, along with every other right we possess, on a thousand picket lines over the past 125 years.
 
The Present and the Future
This is the brief story of our past. But what of today? What about the future? The labor movement cannot live wholly by its past. That is what some of our labor leaders of today would have us believe. They talk about the glorious past of the labor movement, and they are correct. They also talk about the future of the trade unions after the war. They tell us the story of their past militancy and what they will do in the future, “AFTER WE HAVE WON THIS WAR.”
R.J. Thomas proclaimed loudly in a UAW convention that he had called more strikes before Pearl Harbor than any other international president. He promised that after the war is over he will repeat that performance if the occasion arises. Phil Murray is proud of his record in the United Mine Workers’ struggles. The same can be said for any number of labor leaders. Even Sam Gompers once violated a court injunction.
Unfortunately, neither the capitalist class nor its government are awed or, deterred, even in their most timid moments, by the PAST militancy of the labor leaders. They know that this militancy never interfered seriously with capitalism nor with the accumulation of vast wealth by the capitalist class. The working class today, therefore, cannot live or make progress merely by contemplating its past militancy or by listening to the somewhat exaggerated role that the leaders claim for themselves.
We have to take stock of our labor movement today and the role played by the leadership right now. Waiting until after the war will not do. The capitalists do not wait until after the war is, over. Where their interests, power, profits and dividends are involved they make no distinction between before the war, during the war and after the war. The war to them is an episode – an important episode, to be sure – in the struggle for profits and the perpetuation of capitalism and a capitalist government.
 
Labor Since Last May
The struggles that have been forced on the labor movement since last May Day should make this clear. This period was notable because we witnessed open attempts of the ruling class to guarantee its rule and profits by demolishing the unions as bargaining agents for labor with power to enforce any demands made on the employers.
Even before the death of the New Deal had been announced by, its midwife, Roosevelt, the ruling class had brought this experiment in “capitalism for the millions” into the burial ground that big business had been preparing for several years.
The big capitalists succeeded in ,this by taking over the New Deal in a furious assault. The labor leaders, especially those of the CIO, had looked to the New Deal as the second great Magna Carta; the “Great Charter” of labor. They called on the New Deal government to protect the interests of labor, to defend the working class against the attacks of the big employers. When the war came, these leaders of labor, counting on the friendship of Roosevelt and “progressive” congressmen, virtually delivered the labor movement to Roosevelt and government boards appointed by Roosevelt. While the ranks of labor were not consulted, it was assumed that Murray and Green would be able to deliver.
The capitalist employers, however, had reason to be skeptical about this wedding between Roosevelt and the top leaders of the labor movement. They remembered the great mass struggles of the past and they knew that labor cannot so easily be brought under control. They especially feared the CIO unions – that had not reached the “age of discretion.” They had not become “responsible” labor bodies.
United States capitalism and the capitalist class were engaging in their second great imperialist venture. Capitalism at home must be made safe from attack by the workers.. The employers moved in and took over the New Deal. If Roosevelt wanted to be, a victorious war lord and war chieftain, then he must listen to the commands of the men of property. If he wanted appropriations and the agreement of the men of big business, then they must be accorded seats of control. THIS IS WHAT THE CAPITALISTS AND THEIR PRESS MEAN BY “LISTENING TO CONGRESS” AND BRINGING “PRACTICAL BUSINESS MEN INTO THE GOVERNMENT.”
Roosevelt submitted to the demands of the corporations, and not to the demands of labor. He didn’t have to obey the demands of labor. He had already very cunningly stripped labor of part of its power with the aid of the leaders of labor. He had their promise that the trade unions would not strike for the period of the war. The capitalists would go right on piling up their profits but the workers must consent to wage stabilization, job freezing, high living costs, the sixty-hour week, the Little Steel formula, the Smith-Connally Act and a national service act. They must submit to these iniquities because they had no way to break through this capitalist-New Deal barricade. THEY HAD GIVEN UP THE RIGHT TO STRIKE!
 
The Ranks of Labor Fight Back
With all this drive of the employers and the government, labor, however, refused to be pushed to its knees. The workers fought back. Faced by increasing threats to their already low standard of living, deserted by a cowardly leadership and faced with the annihilation of their unions, thousands of workers in numerous industries took to the picket lines.
Inspired by the indomitable courage and union discipline of the miners, a real upsurge of labor and a new birth of militancy took place in 1943. This was true not only of the CIO but of the AFL Jnions and the railway unions. The threat of further uprising was so ominous that the big bureaucrats of the labor movement began to bestir themselves against the Little Steel formula and for definite increases in wages and other demands that were being pressed an them by an aroused and betrayed membership.
The CIO convention did not endorse Roosevelt for re-election to a fourth term. The Communist Party’s delegates at the convention were, of course, ready for a blanket endorsement of Roosevelt, as was Hillman, but Murray knew that Roosevelt had betrayed svery Confidence that labor had placed in him. Murray could not, therefore, so easily shove this bitter pill down the throats of the CIO rank and file.
The attack of the employers and the government has been exposed, but it has not been halted. The imperialist war goes on, the capitalist employers want increased profits out of their war, the government at Washington wants the bureaucratic power and prestige which it gets from doing the will of its capitalist overlords. The drive against labor will continue. The WLB will not yield, Byrnes and Vinson will not yield. Stimson, Knox, Land and Roosevelt will press for their national service act. The employers will conspire and scheme for lower wages and longer hours. The drive will continue for piecework, wages. Congress will continue to be obedient to the demands of Wall Street, the United States Chamber of Commerce and the National Association of Manufacturers. There will be no reduction in workers’ taxes. There may be an increase. Government control of prices will continue to be the plaything of the food producers, processors and manufacturers, as it has been up to now. THAT IS, THESE EVILS, THESE ATTACKS ON LABOR WILL CONTINUE UNLESS WE OURSELVES DO SOMETHING ABOUT IT.
Reaffirmation of the no-strike pledge is not the answer-for labor to give. Support to Roosevelt or Dewey is no answer for labor to give. Labor members on the WLB and other government boards is “quack medicine.”
The miners gave the answer last year. And so did the rubber w.orkers. And so did thousands of workers in many industries. The steel workers made a beginning in December but Were halted by their leaders.
 
The Struggle Must Deepen
The voice of these workers was not loud enough, not insistent enough, not determined enough. What was done was only a mild gesture. It didn’t stop Roosevelt, nor Congress, nor the employers. It didn’t put sufficient heat under the labor leaders: the Murrays, Greens and Thomases. We haven’t put enough pressure on them yet. They cling to their no-strike pledge like drowning men to a small bit of board. They hang onto a few crumbs from the Roosevelt table as though there were not bread enough to go around.
What labor did since the last May Day was only a small sample of what we can do. The rising tide of dissatisfaction can swell into a mighty torrent. But we must take the no-strike halter from our necks. We must get away from the capitalist parties and into our own Independent Labor Party.
We must return to the spirit of ’86, which gave birth to our militant labor movement. We must carry on this year and the years to come in the spirit of militancy and aggressiveness that won for us what measure of freedom we have today. These victories were not gained with no-strike pledges!
 




The story carried in Labor Action last week on the defeat of George Bass and his fellow militants in the Goodrich Local in Akron should be a warning to real union progressives and militants. Bass, who has served four terms as president of Goodrich Local, was defeated by a coalition of reactionaries who conducted the type of campaign that reactionaries always conduct, whether in the labor movement or elsewhere. They lied, they appealed to the primitive backwardness of many of the workers, they played on the prejudices of these workers, they sought to make it appear that the finances of the local were in shady condition and they allied themselves with the labor-baiting Akron Beacon Journal.
Our correspondent writes that this reactionary clique made their appeal mainly to those in the union who were inactive and who were not in the habit of attending union meetings. These are the workers the reactionaries usually appeal to. They are the least educated in trade unionism, they know less than other workers what the union program is and they are the workers most likely to be influenced by sugar-coated anti-union propaganda which appears in the daily press.
The defeat of the Bass slate demonstrates, however, that there was something seriously wrong in the picture at Goodrich. There were 5,600 votes cast. Bass received only 2,496 to 3,102 for his opponent. What have Bass and his supporters been doing the four years they have been in the leadership of the local? What kind of campaign did they carry on for re-election? What kind of program did they have for the local and how well was this program understood by the masses in the rank and file? What platform did the Bass slate have for the election campaign, how did they organize for the elections and how much attention did they pay to the important matter of getting their platform and their record before every member of the local?
Our correspondent says that Bass expected to be re-elected because his supporters comprised the bulk of the active membership. Bass evidently forgot that the inactive also vote and that the vote of an inactive member is equal to the vote of an active member. Furthermore, hasn’t Bass learned yet that one of the problems before the militants today is to involve the largest possible mass of the membership in the activities of the local and to make every effort to get the maximum attendance at union meetings?
This is the only way to bring the union rank and file under the influence of the progressives and militants and win them away from the appeals of the reactionaries. This is part of the very essence of inner union democracy: to involve the greatest possible number of members in union meetings, union activity and participation in formulating the Union program and policies. Any other procedure is bureaucratic; whether indulged in by reactionaries or progressives. A small group leading the union, no matter how well-intentioned, no matter how militant, cannot substitute itself for the widest possible participation of the entire local membership. To attempt any such paternalistic procedure is to court disaster and defeat.
It is, furthermore, necessary for progressives and militants to proceed in the most democratic manner, involving the whole union membership, because this is the only way that the rank and file can be educated and led along the most progressive road.
 
What Progressives Must Do
Also it is necessary for progressive and militant leaders to remember that they cannot and should not depend too much on their popularity and past record. They must stand primarily on a clear and unambiguous militant and progressive program. They must fight for this program in the most forthright and uncompromising manner. To fight in a forthright manner means, first of all, to see to it that the program goes before the whole union and that the membership understands the program. Not only must the leadership be convinced that it is correct but they must bend every effort to guarantee that the rank and file are convinced that their leadership is correct.
Militant and progressive leaders must pay attention to the principles and tactics of organization. This means the devising of ways for penetrating the ranks of the union with the program; the organization of publicity and education; confronting the reactionaries with the militant program before the membership; refuting every lie and smear in the membership meeting, by leaflet and folder as well as by word of mouth.
Progressives must proceed in this manner because they must not and cannot resort to the tactics of the reactionaries. Progressives must not become a “power clique,” they must not be, in any degree whatsoever, mere place holders or job hunters. Theirs is the task of democratic and militant leadership and of education.
This means that trade union progressives must be prepared to lead today – now. Too many of them are living in the past in the remote past when trade union problems were simple and all one had to do was to go to the employer, beat the desk, utter a few threats and quite often walk out with a signed contract. If the demands were denied, the next simple step was to call the workers on strike. Despite the fact that things have changed, many militant leaders attempt to go on in the old way.
 
Role of the Government
With the entry of the government into the picture and with the whole ruling class lined up against labor as a class, the chief problems before the working class become political in nature, it is time that trade union militants learned this and prepared themselves to act accordingly. This goes for Bass and all the other trade union militants and progressives. Their opponents go into action with a political program: a reactionary, anti-working class political program. They are for the government’s no-strike pledge. They echo government officials and the employers about “inflation.” They sing the glories of “incentive pay” piecework schemes and month nonsense about “equality of sacrifice.” They are solicitous that the employer should have a “fair profit.” They wallow in spurious and fake patriotic blurbs about workers sacrificing for the war effort. They propagate the tricky and slimy catch phrases of reactionary papers like the Akron Beacon Journal such as “Decency, Honesty and Respectability Pay.”
This is politics and such a program is a political program, it is the political program of the government and the capitalist ruling class for labor. Any progressive leaders who does not understand this is out before he reaches first base. Such politics, such a political program, such an attack, can only be defeated by an open and democratic appeal to the rank and file on the basis of another program: a militant union program and a militant working class political program; openly propagated, explained to the’ masses and fought for without wavering or compromise.
 
Progressives Can Win
Many militant and progressive trade unionists draw back from this step. They often attempt to substitute cleverness or popularity or the assumed strength of a small group of loyal followers for understanding, a program, education of the membership and efficient and democratic organization. They always believe that they can “handle the situation” and that somehow they will come out on top.
One reason for this attitude on the part of some of the militants and progressives is their fear of “going too far,” of being seen in the company of the “radicals” in the union. They fear that the reactionaries will call them “Trotskyites” or “Labor Action people.”
What they forget is that they must adopt and defend a militant and progressive program and that they must associate themselves with those forces in the union which are the most loyal, the most militant, the most democratic and the most capable of formulating and carrying through a militant working class program.
They must do this with clarity, firmness and consistency and with full knowledge that such a course leads to political reorientation. Not to understand this is to fail in the most elementary responsibilities of militant and progressive union leadership today.
 




The American Federation of Labor has issued a long statement which can correctly be called its Political and Economic Testament for the Guidance of the Post-War World. The document lays down principles not only for the United States today and after the war but economic and political standards for the construction of international policy, now and following the war.
The document is essentially and basically a political pronouncement and must be judged as such by workers both within and outside the AFL. It will surely be judged and accepted in this manner of the capitalist ruling class and the government.
The statement is divided into four parts. Part One is Guiding International Principles. Part Two is Program for the establishment of “a lasting peace.” Part Three is Guiding Domestic Principles and Part Four is Immediate Domestic Program.
 
Echoes of the Past
The Federation begins its platform with the declaration that “war is the enemy.” The AFL recognizes that labor “has no future promise in a world living under the threat and burden of the war system ... the elimination of war as an instrument of national policy is a condition essential to the perpetuation ... of our democratic way of life.” There is nothing especially startling here, of course. All of this has been said before. The AFL statesmen have only dug into the pre-Hitler past for their language.
It is almost the identical language of the Pact of Paris (Briand-Kellogg Pact) signed August 27, 1928. In this pact war was forever “renounced as an instrument of national policy.” But this is not all; the AFL builders of international good will continue with the position that “lasting peace must rest on social justice and include all peoples.” They are in full accord with the international politics of Mr. Gompers, who “set forth this principle ... at the close of the First World War in the constitution of the International Labor Organization.”
Furthermore, the AFL is in full accord with the Atlantic Charter and “notes with satisfaction” the declaration of Churchill, Stalin and Roosevelt to the effect that these great democrats will welcome into their blessed circle “all nations ... whose peoples in heart and mind are dedicated, as are our own peoples, to the elimination of tyranny and slavery, oppression and intolerance.”
There is no hint that the Atlantic Charter is now of a part with the Briand-Kellogg Pact, that Churchill is finding it difficult to square the so-called principles of the Atlantic Charter with his declaration that “I did not become His Majesty’s First Minister to sit in at the liquidation of the British Empire”; that Stalinist Russia is a prison house and a slave pen, and that no one of the imperialist governments has expressed any intention of welcoming the exploited colonial peoples into the “world family of democratic nations.” The AFL political scientists declare that “the only safety from war is the international organization of peace.” The United States must participate in this.
This country must “do its full part to help develop a general system of mutual security.” The United Nations must be “ready and equipped ... to prevent the outbreak of war. This will surely require programs for policing and the use of armed forces.” There is more about achieving prosperity by a “free people under a regime of social justice,” the safeguarding of freedom of thought “throughout the world,” and the dependence of freedom of thought “upon the growth of public conscience.”
The AFL statesmen go on and on with their .”guiding international principles” until one becomes nauseated. They give the impression of being old men, physically and mentally decrepit, who have rummaged in second-hand bookstores among the musty and discarded volumes and offerings of post-Versailles and pre-Hitler days. They dig up all the old language, the old plans that a decaying capitalism, an unrestrained imperialism, and the threat of world fascism, have rendered not only naive and impotent, but filled to overflowing with danger for the world working class.
In the light of actual history and the present world situation these “principles” and the international politics of the AFL leaders are as outmoded and rusty as their craft union and reactionary trade union practices in the United States.
 
What About World Labor?
There is no call for the reforming of the labor movement of the world, for the solidarity of world labor, for the organization of the world working class on class lines, to include the German, Italian and Japanese workers and the miserably exploited colonial slaves. These intellectually bankrupt and ignorant bureaucrats can only talk in vague terms about maintaining peace with “political and military programs” associated with “a far-reaching economic program which will be designed not to advantage certain nations at the expense of others ...”
What nations are not to receive advantage at the expense of which other nations? And how can this come to ,pass in the minds of Green, Woll & Co. when they say in their statement that the United Nations must remain prepared to police the world with armed force? Policing the world with armed force is nothing new. Every imperialist nation has done this, at one time or another, for over a hundred years.
In its statement the AFL takes a position against world poverty. They say that “poverty, unemployment and widespread insecurity are not endurable in the midst of potential plenty.” Not endurable to whom? The starving millions of Europe? The millions of colonial serfs writhing under the imperialist lash? The stricken workers of Hitler’s concentration camps? The exploited millions of Japan and China? The hundreds of thousands in Stalin’s “socialist” factories and prison camps? Not endurable to the hard-pressed working class in the United States?
True, their present condition is not endurable to these millions. But they are forced to endure these things and the AFL gives them no ray of hope. They are not told what to do, they are not given a program for world labor as a class, they are promised no aid in the struggle which they carry on today.
 
The AFL’s “Program”
The AFL, however, does have a “program” for international peace and economic and political security. What is it? The Atlantic Charter and the Four-Nation Declaration of Roosevelt, Stalin, Churchill and Chiang Kai-shek. They don’t want a world government, but the United Nations are to form a “General International Organization.” Presumably it is this international organization that will function as policemen of the world. What the AFL leaders really call for is the domination of the world, after the war, but the United Nations, but principally by the United State’s.
They are imperialistic minded, demand ins the continuation of the world as it is and defending the imperialists of the ruling classes of England and the United States. Furthermore, they are white imperialists, calling for the continued exploitation of the colonial peoples by their present masters. This is all their “program” means and all that it can mean.
The AFL “planners” remember that there is such a thing as “livelihood,” that is, the workers .must eat, wear clothing and have a house to live in. They are for feeding the starving peoples of the world after the war. They want labor on the staff of the UNRRA. They call this relief, “charity,” and do not believe that the people of other countries “or the United States would profit from continuing charity after the restoration of normal conditions.”
This is a very noble sentiment, coming from these well-fed and high-salaried bureaucrats. It is in the best tradition of the “Sixty Families,” who were always afraid that “charity” would demoralize the workers. This statement, too, will meet with the full approval of the NAM, whose members fear that the Hottentots will get too much U.S. milk and there will not be enough left for the babies of the steel workers and coal diggers.
The AFL world “program” calls for long-range economic planning and “a certain number of international functional agencies ... to insure the consistent development of sound economic policies in a world which will be increasingly responsive to the advances in technology ...” What does this mean? What are sound economic policies? Since the AFL is committed, as much as the NAM, to the continuation of capitalism as a sound economic policy for the U.S., a sound economic policy in world planning can mean only the same thing. In turn, this can only mean the continuation of national economic and political rivalries which lead to imperialist forays, plunder and imperialist wars. Thus do labor leaders put forth their “plans” for world peace, security and justice.
 
Other Proposals
There are other international proposals which we can only mention. The International Labor Office “has abundantly justified its existence.” The Permanent Court of International Justice should be adopted (where have these people been for the past twenty years?) And for the safeguarding of “human rights” there should be a permanent international institute. It is assumed that all of these institutes, courts, organizations and commissions will be functioning under the protection of the bayonets and navies of the victorious United Nations.
This is the AFL’s contribution to foreign and international politics. It is a stale and musty document out of the cellars of imperialist balance of power politics. It does not even approach the empty vaporings of Woodrow Wilson ... It seemingly is not aware of the history of the world since the Treaty of Versailles. It pays not the slightest heed to the rumblings from the underground movements of Hitlerized Europe, to the insistent demands of the Italian workers, or to the anti-imperialist struggles of the Chinese masses. It expresses no sympathy for the traduced workers of Germany and Japan or for the aspirations of the black millions of Africa.
These bureaucrats of the labor movement, fat from their millions in per capita tax, do not know that world labor has moved beyond their day and their time. Gompers is dead and Gompersism is no answer to the world problems of the working class: certainly not today. Those workers of occupied countries, including Italy, will read this rubbish with disgust and loathing.
Certainly they want democracy, freedom, security and peace. But they know that these can come only with the development of their might and their power organized in the trade unions and workers’ political parties. They are beginning to learn that the “public conscience” is a capitalist and imperialist conscience, that international cooperation is the practice of diplomatic trickery and fraud; that economic cooperation between nations is a brotherhood of death organized by armament manufacturers, and a pillaging of the plain people by cartel agreements.
 
Working Class Plans
We of the working class must have our plans for the post-war world. But for us the post-war world is part and parcel of the world today and the world of the past. Our first consideration is the fact that an impassable gulf exists between us and the capitalists of our own country, and that this same impassable gulf spreads itself between the workers of every other capitalist country and their ruling classes. The present war does not dry up that gulf, does not destroy this barrier between us as workers and our capitalist and imperialist oppressors.
Our real guarantee against post-war insecurity or fascism is the organization of the working class – as a class – in every capitalist country, Germany, Italy and Japan included – into an international brotherhood of the toilers, organized into strong world unions and a world political party of the working class. Then we can talk about the “public conscience” because we, the majority of the people, will be that conscience. We can talk about peace because we who have no interest in war will not plunge the world into war. We will have security because we, the people, will own and control the instruments of production which are the foundation of security.
(To be continued)
 




The threat of twenty railroad unions to call a strike resulted in the taking over of the railroads by the government of the Roosevelt Democratic Party, but the railroad workers have been given a few cents increase in pay. Roosevelt reversed Vinson, who had decided that railroad labor was entitled to only four cents an hour increase.
When 175,000 steel workers refused to work without a contract or to trespass on the property of their employers, Roosevelt decided that his WLB was in error in their decision against retroactive pay for these workers.
Many of the trade union leaders, the liberal “friends of labor” and, of course, the Communist Party will claim that by these little bits of concession Roosevelt has once again proved that he is a “friend of labor” and that he would do more if a “reactionary Congress” would only let him.
 
FDR Is Patching
But Roosevelt is only doing a little judicious patching. The capitalist garment is bursting at the seams, the seat is worn thin and the pants are threadbare at the knees. Labor finally begins to understand in a somewhat vague way that this garment is too small; that it has become worn and shabby.
If this wasn’t clear to the workers at the beginning of the Second Imperialist World War, it is certainly beginning to dawn on them today that Roosevelt and the Democratic Party, with the aid of the AFL-CIO, leadership, betrayed the confidence that labor placed in them. This fact is becoming clearer and clearer each day to the working class in the AFL and the CIO. Two full years of the war have taught us something. One thing labor has learned is that a policy of constant retreat doesn’t pay. The workers quietly accept a no-strike pledge agreed to between their leaders and Roosevelt. From fifteen to twenty hours are added to the work week. The steel workers accept a Little Steel formula which becomes the measuring rod for all of industry and ties the workers to a standard of living below the subsistence level. The WLB replaces the foreman, the superintendent and the corporation president.
At the very top sits Roosevelt, saying to the workers that he will decide their grievances and they are to accept his decision. Collective bargaining is all but destroyed. Thousands of grievances pile up and contracts are buried in the files of the WLB awaiting excavation or for Roosevelt to return from a flying trip to Asia and Africa.
Accompanying the “stabilization” of wages was a heavy burden of income taxes and strong-arm tactics to extract money from the pay envelope for war bonds. “Ten per cent for war bonds.” Buy this, that or the other, “but buy a war bond first.”
 
Promises to Labor
Labor had been promised that if it agreed to the “stabilization” of wages, prices would be held down. After prices continued to soar and the OPA had admitted that “prices have got out of hand,” the government promised to “roll back prices.” But the meat packers, the canners, the milk companies, the egg and butter producers and all the other huge combines, corporations and coupon-clippers were willing for Roosevelt to have his little rollback joke so long as the land, factories, mills, railroads, mines, plants and banks were left in their hands and under their control.
These capitalists had learned a long time ago that the purpose of running a business is to make profits and that in time of war one must make sure that the profits are bigger even than in peacetime. And then when the war is over, the capitalist has a nice nest egg to tide him over the depression days when the workers are evicted from their homes and sent to the soup lines and the bunk houses.
And so, despite the fine talk about holding prices down, labor has seen the cost of living rise steadily and the profit jump to the highest levels in the history of “free enterprise.” The profits of 385 companies for nine months of 1943 are 11.4 per cent over 1942. The railroads gain 21 per cent over 1942 and the automobile industry 24 per cent. Twenty-eight officials of automobile (aircraft) companies are paid over four and a half million dollars in salaries for 1941.
This isn’t all, of course. What is important is the fact that this year, as in previous years, hundreds of millions of dollars will be paid in dividends and interest to that comparatively small group of capitalists who know that this war is being fought for them – and for them alone.
 
Labor Awakening
Now that labor begins to understand some of these things they become more assertive and forget the no-strike pledge which was put over on them in the dark. Following the lead of -the miners, who are not so easily fooled, the railroad worker and the steel workers talk of mass action.
Long after they should have known it, labor begins to understand; that when the government, the capitalist press, the Stalinists and the employers were trying to dig John L. Lewis’s grave, it was really the UMWA they were after. The capitalist bosses and their government knew, even if Murray and Green aid not, that it was not just Lewis they had to deal, with but 500,000 organized and well disciplined coal diggers.
The more conservative labor leaders of the CIO and the rail unions were forced to follow the leadership of the miners. Murray learned, that he too had to talk like Lewis. The hidebound elder statesmen of the rail unions used strong language – far stronger than even Lewis had used.
Strikes have been threatened or have taken place in spite of the Smith-Connally and all manner of state anti-labor bills. The capitalist press fumes and rants. Vinson and Byrnes, in the true style of capitalist government bureaucrats, raise the big stick. The WLB mutters some ancient jargon about Little Steel formula. The hired hands on Capitol Hill in Washington decide that the Brewster local of the UAW and its militant president, De Lorenzo, are the monkey-wrench in the machinery.
Crawford, chairman of the National Association of Manufacturers, makes the amazing announcement that “there is much talk of maldistribution. We have maldistribution due to the lack of productivity and to the failure of the underprivileged worker to produce enough to give him a fair share of the things he wants.” Crawford then promises the workers that if they will only be patient, “if we can continue the free enterprise system (capitalism – D.C.) for one more generation, we can have ninety-five per cent of our people above want.”
This should be comforting to a working class which starved through the last capitalist depression, which is being shot to bits on the imperialist battlefields today just as its preceding generation was twenty-five years ago, and whose only outlook for the post-war period of capitalism is more unemployment and hunger. It is interesting to note that Mr. Crawford doesn’t promise that capitalism will feed all of the people, even after the passage of another generation. According to this “industrial statesman,” even after the passage of another generation of capitalism (”free enterprise system”), and if the population should remain stationary, there will still be over six million people in need of food, clothing and shelter. And this is all that the leaders of capitalism have to offer after the war is over.
The emerging mass movement of the working class, which has been evident over the past months, is not only distrustful of people like Crawford, but also shows the beginnings of distrust of Roosevelt and the Democratic Party. Labor is learning out of the trials and tribulations of its own bitter experience. But we have taken only a short and halting step. Labor is sore at Rosevelt and the Democratic Party, but what about Willkie and the Republican Party?
This reactionary, anti-labor outfit lies in wait to cash in on the “mistakes” of Roosevelt. Willkie, the knight in shining armor, is ready for another start. He wants labor to have a place in the Cabinet and to have a say in the making of the policies of the government. This from a little Wall Street lawyer. Are we going to be fooled by Willkie and the Republican Party? Didn’t labor vote for McKinley, fifth cousin Teddy Roosevelt, Taft, Coolidge, Harding and Hoover? Are we going to be stupid enough to go through all of this again? From the frying pan into the fire and back into the frying pan!
Labor is surely on the move in the United States. But where are we going? By now capitalism and capitalism’s government have certainly taught us something. Or they should have taught us something. They should have taught us that the whole capitalist class and its government in Washington, from the Capitol to the White House, is arrayed against us.
This class of manufacturers, bankers and government officials presents a solid front against the working class. We should make no mistake about this. In the elections next year the capitalists will be concerned only with deciding which one of the two candidates will best defend capitalism and guarantee their profits. They want to win the war, but that’s what winning the war means to them: markets, territory, raw materials, profits, cheap labor, domination of the world.
 
Labor’s Demands
The working class wants jobs, decent wages, food, clothing and shelter, happiness, freedom, security and deliverance from destruction in the ever-recurring and ever more destructive imperialist wars. We want a government which guarantees these things to us, which fights for us, which represents us. This can only be a government of our own. We can get this kind of government through a party of our own, a Labor Party of workers and trade unions with that kind of a fighting program. Roosevelt and Willkie both know that if labor organized its own political party, based on the trade unions and the working class majority, and carried on a genuinely militant fight, labor would turn the capitalist parties out of control and take possession of the factories, mines, mills, banks and railroads and operate them in the interest of the masses of the people.
That is why Roosevelt is trying so desperately to keep things patched and in repair. He makes no basic alterations; there is nothing new. As the working class breaks through he puts on another patch. Crawford and the other capitalists hope and pray that the patch will hold.
But labor is on the march. On the the march toward renewed militancy, political understanding and independent political action. The old wineskins will not for long hold the new wine that is being fermented in the daily experience of the working class.

Work for an independent Labor Party in 1944!
 
Work for independent political action next November!

 




“A national service law, which, for the duration of the war will prevent strikes and, with certain appropriate exceptions, will make available for war production or for any other essential services every able-bodied adult in the nation.”
This is the heart, the core and the very essence of Roosevelt’s message to the new session of Congress. Roosevelt calls on Congress to take the final step for forcing labor into a legal straight-jacket which will leave the workers at the mercy of the capitalist bosses and their henchmen in the federal government.
Roosevelt asks Congress to enact a law “which for the duration of the war will prevent strikes.” How are strikes to be prevented? By making “available for war production or for any other essential services every able-bodied adult in the nation.”
In other words, Congress is to establish a LABOR FRONT, United States style. In this labor front not only will the workers be harnessed to the job selected for them by the government bureaucrats but their wages and hours of toil will be supervised by these same government bureaucrats.
Under such a law, the assault on collective bargaining will have been completed, and, should they submit, the unions may as well fold their tents, surrender and be prepared to submit to the snarls of every foreman and the unified attacks of the whole class of capitalist employers. The proof that no worker is to be allowed to escape the regimentation intended by Roosevelt is in the phrase: “... will make available for war production OR FOR ANY OTHER ESSENTIAL SERVICES every able-bodied adult in the nation.” Not only are the war workers to be included in the labor front but even those who are not engaged in war work. This is a demand on Congress to pass a law that will “unify” the working class, that will forcibly regiment labor as a whole in support of the Second Imperialist World War.
Roosevelt is clear and forthright in his demand for a national service law that will “prevent strikes” and make, every last man and woman (except the halt and the blind) available for labor in the factories, mines and fields. But he isn’t so clear and forthright in connection with profits, salaries, dividends and interest.
The “greatest President since Abraham Lincoln” asks for “a realistic tax law which will tax UNREASONABLE PROFITS ...” He demands “continuation of the law for the renegotiation of war contracts which, will prevent EXORBITANT PROFITS and assure FAIR PRICES to the government. For two long years I have pleaded with the Congress to take UNDUE PROFITS out of war.”
This is all that Roosevelt has to say about the billions in profits the capitalists have already taken and are taking in from the sweating of the workers in the field, factories and mines, and the blood being poured out by their brothers on the battlefields of the world.
 
What About the Profiteers?
Why didn’t Roosevelt demand that Congress include in his national service law that ALL the profits be taken out of the war? What does he mean by “unreasonable profits” and “undue profits”?
Why doesn’t Roosevelt demand that every dollar of profit from war orders go into the federal treasury?
Why doesn’t Roosevelt demand that, for the duration of the war, not a dollar of war profits go to pay dividends or interest?
Why doesn’t Roosevelt demand that, for the period of the war, every government official (including the President) and every corporation official have his salary and income “stabilized” in the same manner that the wages of the workers have been “stabilized”?
That is, why doesn’t Roosevelt demand that government officials (including the President and members of Congress) and all corporation executives have their salaries and incomes reduced to a bare maintenance level?
Why didn’t the President demand that corporation officials and their subordinates be tied to their jobs just as the workers are?
Roosevelt demands none of these things. He leaves the capitalist bosses just as they are today: in full control of their corporations, their salaries, dividends, and with all their tremendous power over the masses of the people untouched.
Roosevelt knows this and he knows also that Congress understands fully that it is not his intention to disturb the power and incomes of the capitalist bosses in the slightest degree.
 
What Is Labor Serving?
Congress understands fully that the national service act is to be directed at labor, and at labor alone. It will be a law aimed at smashing the unions.
This act will be aimed straight at the UMWA, the railroad brotherhoods, the steel workers and at all unions that show any degree of militancy.
This recommendation of Roosevelt to Congress is a warning to the steel workers, who are demanding an increase in wages, to tuck their tails between their legs and bow down before the coke ovens and the blast furnaces.
The national service act is to be a warning to Murray, Green and Lewis not to get out of line, not to give heed to the pressure of their rank and file. Lewis has authorized strikes of the miners, the leaders of the railway unions have been taking strike votes arid 75,000 of the steel workers in Murray’s union took a “holiday” away from the mills. Roosevelt now tells Murray, Green and Lewis that they are to close ranks with him, Congress and the capitalist bosses against labor.
The national service act (Labbr Front) which Roosevelt tearfully submits to a waiting Congress, will increase the power of the capitalist employers over labor and guarantee that the profits of the bosses in 1944 will be bigger than in 1943. There will be no avoiding this if the trade unions permit this act to become law. This will be the inescapable result, for the reason that this labor front act will so weaken the unions that they will not be in position to maintain collective bargaining rights either with industry or the federal government.
The message of Roosevelt takes nearly a full page in the capitalist press. It is so welcome to the bosses and their press that ten pages would be used if the message required it. There are many other questions. raised in the message but they all relate to the main point: to “prevent strikes” and round up the workers. All the rest of the message is mere decoration calculated to make the organization of a labor front more palatable to labor.
The Murrays, Greens and all the other labor lieutenants of the Roosevelt government, and all the labor recruiting sergeants for the imperialist war have their answer and their reward. They are being paid in full for their stupidity and treachery to the millions of workers they are supposed to represent.
 
Where Labor Stands
At the CIO convention Murray said, that he was displeased with what was going on in Washington. He wasn’t ready to endorse Roosevelt for a fourth term.
At the AFL convention, the numbskull Green was also displeased with the attempts to regiment labor.
At the UAW convention, Thomas said that before the war he had authorized more strikes than any other international president. After the war Thomas says that he will do the same thing if the bosses try to give the workers the run-around. But Thomas will be relieved of this now and after the war if the national service act becomes law. His friend Roosevelt will take care of the situation for him.
Perhaps now, considerably late, the working class will begin to understand what Labor Action and the Workers Party have been talking about for months, in issue after issue, when this paper has advocated independent political action of labor; that the working class shall break with the Republican and Democratic
Parties; shall break with the capitalist bosses and their government and form an independent mass labor party. This is one sure way to defeat the national service act and all similar anti-labor proposals.
*
Editor’s Note: There are other questions raised by Roosevelt in his message to Congress that will be treated in subsequent issues of Labor Action.
 




In his message to Congress, demanding the passage of a national service act, President Roosevelt makes the statement: “Although I believe that we and our Allies can win the war without such a measure, I am certain that nothing less than total mobilization of all our resources of manpower and capital will guarantee an earlier victory, and reduce the toll of suffering and sorrow and blood.” In other words, the act is not considered a win-the-war measure but only a means of bringing the war to an end sooner than could be expected without this act.
Bringing the war to an end with military victory for the United Nations involves many factors. There are the political and strategical aspects of the war, which are handled by Roosevelt and Churchill. There are the tactical and technical military aspects, which are under the care of the general staffs. There is the question of financing the war, which is under the supervision of the fiscal and legislative bodies. There is the matter of production, which is in the hands of the government production boards, the owners of industry and their hired technical, research and managerial staffs.
The other factor in production is labor. But labor has no control or appreciable influence in the determination of political decisions, strategy, appropriations for the war, research, planning, supervision, organization or military tactics. All of these matters are in the hands of the government and the owners of industry.
 
Labor Gives – Capital Takes
Labor’s role is to go into the plants, mills, mines and on the means of transport for the purpose of working under the supervision and direction of the government and the employers. It is admitted that labor has done this so well and to the extent that over 60,000 planes were produced last year. The steel industry produced up to capacity. Ships slid down the ways so fast and in such quantities that finding names and sponsors became a problem. Tanks rolled out in such huge quantities that the commanders on the fronts called for a let-up. Ammunition has been piled high all over the country. The workers have put hundreds of millions into war bonds, the Red Cross and the USO. Millions of workers are in the armed forces.
This is what labor has done. What have the capitalist owners of industry done? Their most outstanding feat has been to increase their profits, raise the salaries of their corporation executives without limit, pay more dividends than ever before in history and keep up an insistent demand for more rigorous control of labor by the government, for an increase in working hours, for a reduction in wages, and for higher prices. This has been the chief contribution of the big capitalist owners of industry toward winning the war or guaranteeing “an earlier victory” to “reduce the toll of suffering and sorrow and blood.”
 
FDR’s Little List
But Mr. Roosevelt calls for a national service act aimed solely at and against labor. This is the fact. Let the labor leaders explain this away if they can. To be sure, Mr. Roosevelt has other “demands” in his list of five: “a realistic tax law which will tax all unreasonable profits,” “a continuation of the law for the renegotiation of war contracts,” “a cost of food law,” “early re-enactment of the stabilization statute of October 1942.” This last is the infamous “anti-inflation” law which was to “stabilize” wages, prices and salaries.
Salaries went up, prices continued to rise and the only thing “stabilized” was wages. With the rise in prices, the real result was to lower wages.
Roosevelt says that he would not recommend a national service law “unless the other laws were passed to keep down the cost of living.” This means that the national service law probably will not be passed, and Roosevelt must know this. Congress may pass a law for the more stringent regulation of labor but it will never pass a law that will be equally rigorous with their masters, the capitalist employers and bankers. The capitalist government of Franklin D. Roosevelt will not and cannot pass a law that will effectively control prices or salaries. Such laws will only be passed and enforced when the workers are politically independent and have control of government themselves.
Here are some gems from the President’s message.
“National service is the most democratic way to wage a war.” This would be true of a real democratic war, of a genuinely people’s war, of a war being waged by the masses in their interest and in the interest of the nation as a whole. It is not and cannot be true of an imperialist war.
Imperialist wars are wars waged by one imperialist ruling class against another for the purpose of world domination and the exploitation and robbery of the workers and colonial peoples.
“It does not mean reduction in wages ... It does not mean that any substantial numbers of war workers will be disturbed in their present jobs.” This is nonsense. Any law “which ... will prevent strikes” will act as a bludgeon for reducing wages. The main reason that employers are against strikes is because strikes are mass pressure against that boss that forces him to yield to the workers’ demands for more wages or against a reduction in wages.
 
Hunger and Dictatorship
There is one part of Roosevelt’s message that labor should study again and again. He says that “true individual freedom cannot exist without economic security and independence ... People who are hungry and out of a job are the stuff of which dictatorships are made.” The first sentence is true, the second is a very dangerous half-truth.
For real individual freedom, economic security is certainly necessary. That is, to be really free, human beings must be secure from economic want, the fear of unemployment, poverty and the misery that the masses are heir to today. They must be free from the oppression of the boss. They must be free, too, from the necessity of serving in the ever-recurring wars of capitalist society.
Is Mr. Roosevelt trying to make us believe, however, that his national service law is a step in the direction of “true individual freedom” for the working class? How will such a law contribute toward “economic security and independence” for labor? A law which has been called “quack medicine” by Philip Murray and a law through which “the President wants to conscript labor for private profit,” according to spokesmen for the railway unions?
When the President of the United States makes the statement that “people who are hungry and out of a job are the stuff of which dictatorships are made,” he leaves out the main point. We presume that Mr. Roosevelt means fascist dictatorships. Very few even hungry and unemployed workers succumb to the rantings, ravings and trickery of fascist demagogues, and not just out of a clear sky or because they are stupid, or perverse, or because they are against democracy.
Workers, except for rare exceptions, are not supporters of fascism. If any follow the fascist scoundrels, it is because they are the victims of capitalism, of capitalist oppression, of capitalist wars and of all the miseries suffered at the whipping posts of capitalist society.
A working class which is defeated by fascism is also the victim of bad trade union and political leadership. It is a working class which has been miseducated by its trade union and political leaders to support imperialist wars, the capitalist bosses and the capitalist government. It is a working class which has failed to take the road to independent political action. It is a working class which has failed to understand the heed for a mass independent Labor Party and a workers’ government.
 





The Railroad Strike Vote
Before the railroad strike had been called off, the Cleveland Plain Dealer had an editorial entitled Strong Arm Tactics. This was the way this Ohio capitalist daily paper described the projected strike of the railroad workers.
After going through the usual capitalist class bunkum about how well the railroad workers had been the “‘good boys’ in the American labor movement,” the Plain Dealer asked: “What are they up to now?” According to that paper, the railroad workers were about to indulge in practices that the country associates with John L. Lewis.
What the Plain Dealer is afraid of, of course, is not so much that the handful of rail union leaders would act like Lewis, but that the rail unions would begin to act like the miners’ union.
The editorial goes on to say:
“The fact is that the railroad brotherhoods are attempting to put over a colossal bluff. They are in the same position as the player in a game of stud poker who has only a deuce in the hole but is relying on a loaded gun at his side to win the pot. We do not believe the brotherhoods actually intend to fire the gun.”
This is something for the railroad and other workers to think about. It is not good for labor to have the reputation of being only a bunch of big mouths who don’t intend to fight. “You’re only bluffing,” says the Plain Dealer, “and if the government and the bosses call your bluff, you’ll tuck your tail between your legs and slink off like a whipped cur.”
Of course, labor isn’t doing this, but we must be careful that we don’t give the bosses and the government any grounds for believing they can bluff us. Labor is not in the position of a poker player who has only a deuce in the hole. We have an ace in the hole – and an ace up. This is usually enough to win, and you don’t have to bluff. As a rule, when faced with such a hand, your opponents turn back and don’t risk their stack. A good player, determined to win, won’t take chances with hard-headed opponents. He makes the betting so stiff that the enemy is usually glad to run for cover. This is the position of organized labor today. We don’t have to bluff. We have the forces and the power. All we need is the guts to use them.
The Plain Dealer says that the workers depend on the gun at their side to put over the bluff and steal the pot. What’s wrong with this when we are dealing with an enemy who also has a whole arsenal at his side and who bluffs and blusters, steals and strong-arms all over the place? But we say again, labor does not have to do this. We have the numbers and the power. Above all, We have genuine grievances. The most elementary satisfaction of these grievances demands first of all far higher wages than the workers get today.
 

Labor and Renegotiations
The trade unions should pay more attention to the renegotiation controversy that is going on between the capitalist bosses and their government. Under Secretary of War Patterson, testifying before the Senate Finance Committee, reported that the Timken Detroit Axle Company had profits of 33% per cent on net sales for last year, before negotiation and taxes. In the period 1936 to 1939 net profits on net sales for this company amounted to 10½ per cent.
In the years 1936 to 1939, Timken Axle paid common dividends averaging $1,477,000 a year. In 1942, alone, however, Timken Axle common dividends amounted to $4,216,000. How about holding the line on dividends? If a worker asks for a dollar an hour, that’s inflationary. If a capitalist boss rakes in a $100,000 salary and another $100,000 in dividends, that’s rendering a patriotic service to one’s country in wartime.
Chairman Truman of the Senate War Investigating Committee has announced that eight billion dollars in war contracts have been cancelled to date. This will continue and many workers will be faced with unemployment. That is, unless there is a return to the production of consumer goods. This is another matter for the unions to give attention to. It is really far more important than wasting time trying to decide whether to support Roosevelt or Willkie for President.
Every last man and woman can be kept at work if the factories that are taken off war production are immediately converted to the production of goods for the benefit of the masses of the people. Workers should be more enthusiastic over producing clothing, food and houses than they are about bullets, tanks and planes for war purposes.
 




Eugene G. Grace, president of Bethlehem Steel Corporation, reduced his 1943 “incentive compensation” by fifty-eight per cent. The United Aircraft Corporation of Connecticut turned back $286,000,000 to the government. Company officials said that they were ashamed to take the money.
 
Some Facts – But Don’t Draw Conclusions Yet
The War Department announces that the government is paying twenty per cent less for equipment and supplies than two years ago. A bomber that formerly cost $238,000 now costs $137,000 – from the same company. A company that got $510 each for a .50 caliber machine gun now charges the government only $200. Light tanks that formerly cost $45,000 each, now are sold for $22,564. A radio transmitter that was given to the government two years ago at the bargain price of $3,194 is now bought from the same manufacturer for $1,302.
These figures are in a recent report by General Browning, director of purchases for the War Department. A total saving of nine billion dollars has been effected by the government in the last two years. But in addition to these nine billions, the War Department says that over twelve billions of savings had previously been effected in reductions in the estimated costs of equipment and supplies made by the department and in savings due to changes in contract prices after the contracts were let.
From these two sources alone, then, the government claims savings of twenty-one billion dollars. The manufacturers of war equipment and supplies got twenty-one billion dollars less than they would have if the prices had remained as of two years ago, and if there had been no change in budget figures or in the approved contract figures.
This is for the War Department alone and does not include the Navy Department, which also spends billions of dollars for war equipment with the same corporations.
These same corporations have also paid millions and millions of dollars in taxes the past two years. It is their constant claim that taxes are so “burdensome,” as is alleged in the case of the railroads, as to “not only deprive the carriers of a reasonable return on their investment but also menace the future of the industry.”
Perhaps the reader will conclude from all this that the capitalists – those staunch defenders of “free enterprise” and the “American way of life” – are in great difficulty, and that a “socialistic” government is about to put them into overalls, or hurl them into the breadline.
This would be a sad mistake. Capitalism still lives. It is in no danger from the government – from its government. While it is true that Mr. Grace reduced his “incentive compensation” fifty-eight per cent for 1943, he still had $42,546 remaining after he paid his income taxes.
It is true that the United Aircraft Corporation got “ashamed” and gave $286,000,000 back to the government. But it is also true that this corporation had $17,006,000 in net profits left after paying millions in taxes and putting “a little something” away for “unforeseen contingencies.” Before the war the highest net profit of this company was $5,000,000.
“Incentive pay” is working well on all fronts for the corporations, their officers, stockholders and bondholders. Big profits, fancy salaries, huge dividends and juicy interest checks to chronic loafers who hold the bonds are the order of the day.
The Securities and Exchange Commission, in its latest report on profits, tells a story that should make every worker ponder over the no-strike pledge and the labor leaders who insist that the pledge be kept.
 
A Mere 100 Per Cent of Profits on Investment
Six corporations in the heavy industries classification made profits in 1942 of over 100 per cent on invested capital after payment of taxes. Consolidated Aircraft made a profit of 117 per cent AFTER taxes. Of course, this corporation is among the howlers about taxes being too high, but its profit before taxes was 578 per cent!
The whole aircraft industry had the highest profits: 37 per cent after the payment of taxes. About two years ago it was reported that aircraft profits were to be limited to 15 per cent. Right behind aircraft was metal-working machinery with a 25 per cent profit, and screw machine products with 30 per cent. This is the “American way of life” in operation. This is the “free enterprise” system. One aircraft company came very near going broke in 1942. In 1941 its profit after taxes was 421 per cent, but in 1942 profits had been reduced to the starvation level of only 42 per cent. North American Aviation managed to squeeze put a 65 per cent profit after taxes. If there are any workers at North American who were there at the time of the strike they will remember that Roosevelt gave the Army its first combat experience against them before it was sent overseas. The International Machine Tool Co. made 89 per cent after taxes; Cleveland Tractor, 34 per cent; Vultee Aircraft, 47 per cent; Beech Aircraft, 153 per cent; Jacobs Aircraft Engine, 175 per cent.
 
Star-Spangled Millionaires Are Being Born
When these huge profits are approached in another way, it can easily be seen that the biggest crop of brand-new star-spangled millionaires ever known in history is being born today. Randolph E. Paul, general counsel of the Treasury, said that even if the war ended right now, present tax laws would give the big corporations a “windfall” of forty-five and a half billion dollars. This windfall is called a tax refund to be used for “conversion to peace.” The truth of the matter is that this so-called refund is a government subsidy to big business.
Workers’ wages are stabilized, the cost of living rises forty-five per cent, labor leaders chant their no-strike hymn, while the government gives a gift of forty-five and a half billion dollars to big capitalist monopolists to be added to their huge profits, salaries, dividends and interest. This is the “American way of life,” the “system of free enterprise.” This is the capitalist system.
 





WLB Penalizes Labor for Fighting
The practice of the WLB in rescinding maintenance-of-membership provisions or in penalizing locals in various ways where there have been strikes, only shows what a stranglehold this government outfit has been given by Congress and the Green-Murray union leadership.
In the case of a two-day AFL strike at a Philadelphia plant, the regional WLB penalized the local by limiting maintenance-of-membership rights “only to those who signify in writing their willingness to continue as members of the union.” This means that any backward worker, any scab-minded worker or any company union employee could get out of the union and begin the job of union-busting with the aid of the company.
In another instance the WLB denied maintenance-of-membership rights to a union because it refused to give a no-strike pledge after a strike. The regional WLB said that the union, an independent, was exhibiting a case of “cool, calculated ... short-sighted self-interest.” Furthermore, the actions of the union demonstrated, according to this board, “that its manner of operation was not of a responsible character which would justify ... granting a maintenance-of-membership provision.”
In the case of the Cramp shipbuilding employees, the WLB Shipbuilding Commission acted as a court and fined the workers for the strike. They were fined one month’s retroactive pay on any wage adjustment that would be made.
The WLB chastises the workers for not keeping “their” no-strike pledge. They are called “irresponsible” and violators of a “solemn contractual obligation.” In the shipyard case, John Green and Van Gelder were praised for their “courage” in ordering the men back to work. The board said that the penalty might have been more severe if it had not had the cooperation of these officials.
This is nonsense and the WLB knows it is nonsense. Congress knows it is nonsense, and Roosevelt knows it is nonsense. If the government and the capitalist employers did not have the cooperation of the leaders of the AFL and the CIO, there wouldn’t be any WLB to be “more severe.” Any day the labor leaders get off the WLB and back to their organizations where they belong, the WLB is finished.
Furthermore, if the labor leaders would stop giving “cooperation” to the government and to the captialist employers, and lead the millions of workers who pay them, there would be no Smith-Connally acts and no proposals from Roosevelt for a national service act. The WLB can’t build ships nor planes nor tanks. Congress can pass anti-labor legislation but these loud-mouthed placeholders at $10,000 a year, couldn’t produce a single airplane.
*

Hutcheson Likes His Kind of Unemployment
William Hutcheson, president of the Brotherhood of Carpenters, has written an article called Labor and the Presidential Election. Hutcheson’s union is the AFL international that has been accused for years of sending in too much in per capita tax. It is said that Hutcheson pays for members he doesn’t have in order to increase the vote of the carpenters at the AFL convention. Hutcheson is also a Republican and is the big guy that John L. Lewis knocked under a seat at the 1935 AFL convention. He is the Republican counterpart of Dan Tobin, who is the Democratic Party’s labor lieutenant.
At any rate Hutcheson has written a political article. There are six points or demands on the two major political parties for the 1944 elections. Hutcheson speaks for all of labor – so he says, and his points are labor’s demands – so he says.
The first point is “the preservation of free enterprise.” He fears that after the elections Roosevelt or Willkie may institute socialism, and Big Bill is against that. He’ll defend “free enterprise” any day against the onslaughts of Roosevelt and Willkie. Bill is for capitalism, because under socialism he would have to go to work. When a man has been away from the saw and hammer for thirty or forty years, unemployment at $20,000 a year is not to be sneezed at.
The second point calls for “the abatement of bureaucracy.” This is too sudden! The president of the carpenters’ international, an AFL craft union, comes out against bureaucracy. He says that “bureaucracy ... is choking our democratic institutions.” Which democratic institutions? The carpenters’ union under Hutcheson? The AFL executive council?
This is enough ... The other four points can be passed by.
 





Court Decision Favors Negro Shipyard Workers
A Superior Court judge in San Rafael, Calif., recently granted a rather sweeping injunction against the Boilermakers Union in favor of Negro shipyard workers who have been Jim Crowed into separate locals by the Boilermakers International. The injunction related to the 1,500 Negro workers in Marinship at San Rafael. The court said, in granting the injunction, that the Boilermakers are enjoined from “directly or indirectly refusing to admit into Local 6 on the same terms and conditions as white persons, or refusing to accept tendered initiation fees and dues ... from plaintiff and other Negro workers similarly located.”
The injunction furthermore restrains the union from forcing Negroes to become members of, or remain in, or pay dues to, Auxiliary Local A-41. Local A-4l is the Jim Crow local established at Marinship for Negro workers.
The injunction forbids pressure on the company by the union to compel firing of Negroes who refuse to join A-41. The agreement between the company and the union which provides for union clearance of all workers was declared void by the injunction so far as it concerns Negro workers. The closed shop agreement will remain in effect, if the union indicates it’s willing to, and does, accept “Negro workers into full membership in the same organizations and upon the same terms and conditions and upon equal basis with white persons.”
The company was enjoined from “directly or indirectly discharging or refusing to employ ... Negro workers” because they do not present job clearances from the union or are said by the Boilermakers Union not to be in good standing because they have refused to submit to the Jim Crow practices of the union.
It is unfortunate that Negro workers or any other workers are forced to go into the capitalist courts to get relief from the vicious anti-union and anti-working class practices of trade unions or trade union officials. But the Boilermakers Union is in the AFL of Bill Green, Dan Tobin and Bill Hutchinson. The AFL is distinguished for its anti-labor attitudes toward Negroes, white workers from Slav areas and Chinese workers. (These are known as “foreigners” and “coolie labor” in the AFL). The machinists, other AFL unions and the railway “brotherhoods” can be added to this disgraceful list.
There was nothing else for these Negro workers to do, and no blame attaches to them for taking this step. The War Manpower Commission and the FEPC knew about the situation as far back as last July and did nothing more than get off some gibberish and empty advice about not doing anything rash. Bill Green and the AFL top leadership did nothing but whine and utter empty platitudes.
If the labor movement wants to keep its dirty linen out of the capitalist courts, then the unions must prepare to do away with this slime and filth inside the councils of the labor movement.
 

The Importance of Union Seniority
An extremely serious situation is being faced by the unions in connection with the status of servicemen who have been discharged from the Army and Navy, and who were not union members when drafted. Seventy veterans were laid off by the Ranger Aircraft Co. in New York. The company says that the men were laid off “temporarily” because the plant is retooling preparatory to the manufacture of parts for a different plane.
The reactionary American Legion is demanding that discharged veteran have precedence over employees “without service records,” irrespective of seniority standing. The union in the plant, Local 661 of the UAW (CIO), takes the position that the layoffs should be done on a seniority basis.
The local is correct and should stick to its guns. The CIO unions have provided for the return to their jobs of its members, who have left for the military service – without loss of seniority. There are hundreds of thousands of union men serving in the armed forces. Thousands of them have been wounded in action and many have been discharged because of other disabilities incurred. They will return to their jobs and to their union locals. They will not lose their seniority ranking but will resume the status they had when drafted.
Furthermore. the UAW provided at its last convention that discharged veterans may join the union without the payment of initiation fees,
Virtually all workers had the opportunity to join a union before they were called to the army or navy. That they were careless about this elementary duty of a worker or that they were anti-union (as some workers are), certainly gives them no right to demand that the seniority provisions, made by organized labor be set aside for them. Such procedure could be used by such reactionary and anti-labor outfits as the American Legion to disrupt the unions.
Non-union workers discharged from the military service should not allow themselves to be used by the American Legion or other anti-labor organizations for their own reactionary purposes. These workers should join the unions now and become good union men. Those who were members but who had less seniority than others who remained in the plants should resume their places in their locals and build up their seniority rating.
Discharged service men should demand that the government which drafted them should provide for the upkeep of themselves and their families until they are employed or while employed at wages below the amount necessary for decent living.
They should not permit themselves to become a club in the hands of anti-labor groups like the American Legion, bent on union-wrecking.
 




Cringing before the anti-labor blows of a Congress dominated as always by its big capitalist masters, the international board of the United Automobile Workers lashed out last week against its own locals and membership.
The New York Times tells the story in exultant mood in a two-Column, head: UAW Adopts Drastic Strike Ban; Provocation No Excuse for Men. And then: International Board Orders Penalties in All Unauthorized Stoppage’s – Needs of Invasion Are Cited.
 
The New Ukase
In the new statement of policy the board says: “This union is determined to fully meet its responsibilities in the prosecution of the war – responsibilities which are all the greater by reason of the employment of our members in the critical war plants of the country.
“The constitution of our international union is clear that there shall be no strikes or work stoppages except upon authorization of the international executive board or the international president. The convention ... held in Buffalo in October 1943 resolved ... to reaffirm its no-strike pledge without any qualification.
“The considerations which prompted the action of the convention are even more compelling at the present time ... The overwhelming majority of our membership has scrupulously complied with the constitution of the union, its no-strike pledge and its policy ... However, an extremely small minority of our members have ignored their solemn pledge and have indulged in work stoppages ...”
The international board then painfully and almost apologetically admits that “an increasing number of corporations have taken advantage of the patriotic resolve of our membership and have deliberately pursued a course intended to deny them their rights under their contracts and to provoke them into engaging in work stoppages, the object being to discredit their union in the eyes of the public, to demoralize the union membership, to inspire repressive legislation against unions, and ultimately to destroy the organized labor movement.
“Difficult as is the situation thus created, the winning of the war nevertheless remains the all-important objective of labor; and the resort to work stoppages in response to the provocative acts of management not only had the effect of impeding the war effort, but plays into the hands of these corporations and provides them with the ammunition which they seek in pursuit of their invidious objectives.”
 
Let Us Consider the Above
Before we go on to discuss the penalties which the international board plans to take against UAW members who go on strike, we want to discuss the motivations of the board as expressed in the quoted parts above.
In the first place, the question is not whether or not the board has the right and duty to administer the affairs of the international union, to exercise control over the actions of members and locals and to exercise the veto power when deemed proper and correct, in the case of strikes or proposed strikes, as provided in the constitution and the decisions of the several conventions of the international. The authority of the international board is unquestioned and at times it is imperatively necessary that such authority be exercised against individual members and locals. We can think of two important cases immediately.
On the basis of the decision of the last UAW convention to disapprove of incentive pay schemes it becomes the duty of the international board to proceed against any officer or member who advocates or attempts to install such piecework schemes in any UAW contract. Or, again, the international board would certainly be expected to take drastic action against any local which discriminated against Negroes or other groups in any way whatsoever.
 
The Essence of the Question
The formal right of the board and its duty to carry out the decisions of of the UAW constitution is not, as stated above, the real essence of the situation which the board is attempting to deal with in the matter of strikes. The matter goes far deeper than any formal right to restrictive action or punitive procedure.
Workers are forced to strike because of real grievances – which the leaders cannot hocus-pocus out of existence by giving a no-strike pledge.
President Thomas and his associates on the board will discover this in the days to come when they find themselves faced with the problem of lifting a few charters or of expelling some of the most loyal, competent and militant of the UAW membership because they have refused to submit to the attacks of the Fords, duPonts and Chryslers.
Thomas and the board say that the considerations which prompted the no-strike pledge are more impelling today than at the time of the last UAW convention. And what is the reason for this? The Allied nations are poised for the invasion of continental Europe. But the very fact that the actual invasion is being arranged means that the Army is already supplied with the necessary materials, and that more material is on the way. This shows that labor has produced, that the strikes have not hampered the conduct of the war in any way. Nobody has had the “brass” to make such a statement, not even bone-headed Atherton who heads the American Legion.
 
On the Subject of Production
According to reports which leak out, the country is piled over with tanks, munitions, guns and planes. It is only common sense to assume that the British Isles are strewn from end to end with English and American war materials. Thousands of cargo ships certainly are not being made for the mere purpose of supplying work to shipbuilding workers but to transport the mountain of foods produced. Production has been so great that many manufacturers of war materials are talking about conversion of some plants to civilian production.
Furthermore, it is childish to attribute to labor any desire not to produce. That’s what workers get paid for: producing the things manufactured by the company they happen to be working for. Labor has no control over what is produced.
Under capitalism the worker just takes a job where he can get one and fights for the highest wage he can get, along with the shortest hours for that wage. That’s all that labor is doing today: working hard and long to keep high taxes and profiteers’ prices from reducing them to the level of emancipated slaves.
All this talk about labor and production is just so much eyewash: tragic eyewash when it comes from responsible labor leaders.
 
Of Course, Bosses “Take Advantage”
It is good to read, however, that the UAW board recognized that their members have some grievances and that the recent strikes may have had some distant connection with these grievances. The corporations have taken advantage of the no-strike pledge, says the board. Of course they have. The employers are only looking out for themselves, their business enterprises and their profits. That’s what they are in business for. Many workers must wonder at times what Murray, Thomas and Green are in business for.
And what is this, claptrap about corporations taking “advantage of the patriotic resolve of our members ...”? The corporations and their government are using the no-strike pledge given by the labor leaders behind the backs “of our members,” in order to kill the unions and strengthen the system of capitalism and private profit. The corporations don’t give a damn about the “patriotic resolve of our members.” And why should they?
Capitalist corporations are run for profit and wartime is only a season for making those profits bigger than ever. If Thomas and Murray haven’t learned this yet, they should return to welding and coal digging and start up through the ranks again.
 
A Peculiar Conclusion
After the UAW board admits the workers have a few grievances, they come to the conclusion which must spread joy in the breast of every capitalist employer and every government bureau: No matter what the grievance, no matter what the provocation of the employer, labor must lie flat on its back and permit the heavy boot of the employers and the government to knock its teeth in. And why?
The answer, according to the UAW board, is that the winning of the war “remains the all-important objective of labor.” This statement, of course, is in line with the usual infantile thinking of Thomas and other leaders. Thomas said at the Buffalo convention that even if the employers did not do their duty, labor must carry on – because “two wrongs don’t make a right.”
The all-important objective of labor, however, should be to carry on the struggle for higher wages, shorter hours and better working conditions. The all-important objective of labor remains the organization of the working class and the conducting of the struggles of the working class for economic security and political power. The class struggle goes on in wartime just as in peacetime. Does not the UAW board know this?
What do they think Roosevelt is doing when he demands a national service act and wage stabilization arid the freezing of workers to their jobs? What do they think he was doing when he sent the Army against “our members” on the picket line at the North American Aviation strike? In these wartime acts Roosevelt prosecutes the class struggle in the interest of the capitalist class which he represents.
Do the UAW board and other international boards think they can stop strikes and dam up the militancy of tax-burdened, exploited and sorely harassed labor by such fool pronouncements as this one of the UAW? They know better. They have witnessed the failure of their babbling and moaning and wailing. Their boot-licking of Roosevelt has produced only a demand from Roosevelt, Congress and the employers that they bend a little lower, eat a little more dust and do a little more licking. They oblige the employers, Roosevelt and Congress by preparing for a crack-down on the UAW locals and “our members.”
 
The Cause of Labor Discontent
The UAW board doesn’t concern itself with the cause of the discontent: low wages, profiteer and monopoly prices, long hours, grinding taxes, money out for war bonds, anti-labor bills, the insolence of management and its hirelings, etc.
They ignore the fact that labor has become disillusioned with Roosevelt. At last the working class is finding him out.
The UAW board and other labor leaders also seem not to understand that labor is beginning to catch on to what the employers are up to, with the aid of Roosevelt, Congress and the government bureaucrats. Labor reads about the agreements existing between duPont, General Electric and other firms in the United States with Nazi corporations to control prices. The workers learn that these agreements are in effect right now while the war is going on. They read about the Rockefeller Chase Bank being indicted for helping the Nazis – not ten years ago, but right now. They read about the powerful Anaconda Copper Co. sending “our boys” defective wire to use against the Nazis.
In the face of all this, here comes the board of the UAW talking about the main objective of labor remaining the winning of the war.
 
The Ax Will Fail
Despite all this, despite all the “provocations,” the UAW locals and members will feel the ax if there are any more “unauthorized” strikes. Whenever members are identified as the persons who advocated or caused strikes, “all services to such members and any intervention in their behalf in the event of disciplinary action against them by the management” shall be withheld by the international and its officers. In such cases the local union is instructed to file charges and prosecute such members. If the local fails to do so, the local may be summoned to appear and show cause why its charter should not be lifted.
The statement of the board also provides that whenever management is caught provoking a work stoppage, this fact shall be reported to the international board by the local involved. We presume that when the corporation heads read this part of the statement they will be frightened into reforming their ways and that they will sin no more.
All this decision does is to place the UAW international and local officers in the position of being cops for the employers and the government. It is an attempt of the leadership of the UAW to enforce a pledge given to Roosevelt and a pledge which the overwhelming majority of the UAW and of the labor movement is opposed to.
The workers have demonstrated that they are opposed to this no-strike pledge. They have had to violate it. Neither the government nor the trade union officials have left them any alternative. They have none now, and the recent order of the UAW board will hot change the situation one bit, except to create disorder, disgust and resentment in the international.
We can assure Messrs. Thomas, Addes, Reuther and Frankensteen that their latest piece of pro-war whimpering will benefit no one but the capitalist exploiters of “our members.” This is, if “our members” submit – which we seriously doubt.
 




The regular biennial convention of the United Mine Workers of America will convene in Cincinnati on September 12 to 21. The UMWA has had a unique history and today occupies a unique place in the organized labor movement.
For decades the miners were members of the American Federation of Labor, the outstanding example of Industrial union organization in the AFL long before the formation of the CIO.
It was the miners’ organization which led the fight inside the AFL for industrial unionism and later made the first cash contribution toward the beginning of industrial union organization. Not only this, but the miners also furnished the leading corps of experienced organizers for the new Committee of Industrial Organizations.
John L. Lewis, the miners’ president, was the first president of the CIO and remained at its head until the fall of 1941.
Today, however, the UMWA is an independent organization: outside the AFL, where it was affiliated for fifty years, and outside the CIO, to the formation of which the miners made the largest single contribution. This means thatt there arre today virtually three trade union organizing centers in the United States: the AFL, the CIO and the UMWA, with its District 50. The somewhat abrupt proposal made by Lewis in January 1942 for unification of the three organizations was rejected by the AFL and the CIO, in part through the intervention of Roosevelt (who selected a six-man board from the AFL) to meet with him on labor matters. Later the UMWA’s application to return to the AFL was turned down with the statement that the terms demanded by the miners were not acceptable to the AFL.
The coming convention of the UMWA is the first since the wave of militant strikes of 1943 which the miners carried through. There will be many things coming up in the convention in connection with these strikes, the results and the benefits gained. The final results are not in yet. Lewis pointed out in his Not Guilty article in Collier’s Weekly recently that the miners are still owed $18,000,000 in back travel time pay by the operators. Also, there are many other grievances yet unsettled, as can be seen in the recent strikes and stoppages in eastern and western Pennsylvania.
The 1943 strikes of the miners had the most stimulating effect on the labor movement. These actions by the UMWA created great enthusiasm among the most militant and aggressive workers in the CIO unions. These strikes, coming as they did at the time when the AFL and CIO leaderships were most vociferous in their support of the no-strike pledge, demonstrated to the ranks of labor that here at least was one labor union that did not intend to accept the no-strike pledge as an eternal principle of the labor movement, or to cringe before an anti-labor WLB.
 
A Welcome Militancy
The Workers Party and Labor Action enthusiastically welcomed this militant action by the miners and their great organization. Labor Action supported the four strikes of 1943 without qualification and without reserve. In fact, Labor Action, so far as we have been able to learn, was the only labor paper in the United States (aside from the UMWA Journal, of course) which gave full and unqualified support to the miners in these struggles right from the beginning.
Labor Action understood the issues involved and the justice of the demands the coal diggers were making. Furthermore, and just, as important, we know what kind of union the UMWA is. We knew that if their demands were not met the miners would lay down their tools and remain away from the mines in the most disciplined and loyal manner. This they did in 1943 on four separate occasions. They should have had the most enthusiastic support of the whole labor movement.
 
Organize the South!
Another field of organizing which the UMWA with its District 50 could take the lead in is among the agricultural workers in the South. Here are the most miserably exploited workers in the United States, black and white. They want to be organized. They would be among the most loyal and courageous workers in the whole labor movement. The UMWA could render a great service both to these workers and to the labor movement if it should begin to organize these .agricultural workers, sharecroppers and tenant farmers in the South.
The UMWA convention will have up for consideration the continually recurring contention over the matter of autonomy for the districts. For some weeks past, Ray Edmundson of District 12 has been carrying on a campaign in connection with the autonomy issue. Labor Action has already expressed its opinion on the matter of autonomy and of the Edmundson “revolt.” We said that we believe that all the districts should have autonomy, as this is understood and practiced in the UMWA. This should be the rule and not the exception. We can understand that at times, in the interests of union welfare it is necessary for the international board to assume control and administration of a subordinate section. But such administration should be temporary and only for the purpose of protecting the local, the district and the international. As soon as this has been achieved, autonomy should be restored. In general, we believe that the lifting of charters, the suspension of union officers and the appointment of administrators is undemocratic and quite often extremely reactionary. The trade union movement can only make genuine progress by the most enlightened and democratic procedures. As Labor Action said before, we do not intend that these observations shall serve as an endorsement of the Edmundson campaign. While we are for full democracy in the UMWA and all other unions, we are a little suspicious of the Edmundson movement. We would like to know just to what degree, if any, the Democratic Party nationally and in Illinois is involved and whether or not the Stalin-Browder Communist Political Association is crawling inside the pants leg of some of the Edmundson forces.
 
The Politics of Reaction
All of these things are important, but the biggest issue that will come before the UMWA convention is the political issue. Lewis and the UMWA Journal have already come out in support of the Republican Party and Dewey. Lewis and the editor of the Journal pretend to see in the promises of the Republican Party platform something of value to the working class and organized labor far superior to anything which the Democratic Party has to offer.
Lewis evidently believes what the Republican platform says about it opposition to the freezing of wages and its protestations on labor front trends of the Roosevelt government. This is certainly a very naive and we might say non-political manner for the leader of a great organization like the Miners Union to render or withhold political support to either of the two capitalist parties.
In his stand, Lewis is fundamentally neither better nor worse than the other labor leaders. He and Hutcheson go to the Republicans. Tobin and Murray go to the Democrats.
When we say that the Republican Party offers nothing to labor, do we intend the inference be drawn that the miners and the rest of labor should support the Democratic Party? We do not. We say to our fellow workers throughout the ranks of labor: Don’t support either of these two capitalist parties. Don’t throw away your vote. “But there is an election coming,” you reply, “and we must vote for somebody.” That is what we have been taught by the capitalist politicians and the capitalist employers; that we have to vote for their candidates; that if we don’t vote for their hand-picked candidates, then we throw away our vote.
 
Organize Labor’s Own Party
We don’t have to vote for the candidates of the Republican and Democratic Parties, the two capitalist parties. We can organize our own party, a LABOR PARTY, and vote for pur own candidates; labor’s candidates selected from the ranks of labor and under our own control.
The fact that we have not organized our party yet is no reason for supporting the capitalist parties. We can start today attending to our own political business as workers. Important labor conventions take place before the November elections. We can start in these conventions with resolutions for independent working class political action and a Labor Party.
For the railroad workers’ paper, Labor, and the UMWA to chastise the CIO Political Action Committee for chasing after Roosevelt and themselves go chasing after the Republican Party and Dewey, is no answer to the anti-labor policies of the Roosevelt government.
The miners cannot settle the labor problems of the day by mere adverse criticism of the CIO and AFL. In the political field, where all important questions must be answered today, the UMWA is not one step in advance of the AFL and CIO. This is a serious matter for such a militant organization as the UMWA. Here we see tremendous and outstanding militancy on the one hand and appalling political backwardness and indifference on the other.
 
A Great Choice for Miners
The choice for the miners and labor is not the petty bickering that goes on in our ranks among the leaders as to which capitalist politician we have put into office, but for all of labor to decide to get rid of the whole crew of boss-dominated capitalist politicians. Not whether to vote for Roosevelt or Dewey, but to reject and repudiate both of them; the parties which they represent and the capitalist masters whom they serve.
A mass party of labor is the answer. The miners took the lead in militant trade union action. They took the lead in breaking away from the outworn practices of craft unionism and established the industrial union movement. Let them break from outworn political action, from subservience to capitalist political parties and candidates. Let them take, the lead in forming labor’s own independent party: a national Labor Party.
 




CINCINNATI – At the time this is being written, the thirty-eighth constitutional convention of the United Mine Workers of America has been in session for four days and the most important of the questions to come before the convention, except for the report of the committees on scale and constitution, have been disposed of. The really controversial matters – the autonomy issue and the Roosevelt-Dewey election question – were disposed of a day before the convention recessed over Saturday and Sunday.
Before I take up the autonomy and political questions I want to remark that this is perhaps the only labor convention taking place this fall in which the no-strike pledge does not enter. Nobody here seems to be conscious of the fact that there is such a thing as a no-strike pledge. There has been no mention of it in the convention either from the platform or from the floor. Also there has been no report from the battle fronts by officers who had to travel to Europe to discover the sentiment of the soldiers on strikes and the production needs of the armed forces. To this must be added the fact that there was no telegram of greetings from the President. There have been no speeches by cabinet officers or assistant secretaries or members of Congress! No photograph of Roosevelt is on display. There is only one of John L. Lewis. The flags of “our allies” are absent; one sees only the United States and Canadian flags. There are two bands, the Monagh, W.Va., and the band of the Canadian miners. After the usual opening speeches of local officials on the opening day, the only “outsider” to address the convention was a representative of the United Service Organizations.
 
Autonomy Issue
The autonomy issue came before the convention in the report of the Resolutions Committee on the third day of the sessions. Percy Tetlow, provisional, president of District 17, West Virginia, reported that there were 138 resolution dealing with the topic, 86 in opposition to autonomy and 52 in favor. The committee recommended that
“upon proper presentation of substantial requests for autonomy in any district or districts, the International Executive Board shall take into consideration such requests and with due consideration for the protection or advancement of the rights of our members in such districts and the stability and efficiency of the organization, shall be authorized at its discretion to instruct any such district that substantial autonomy is granted ...
”Under the precise supervision of the International Executive Board the district shall meet in district convention and adopt a constitution ... provide for the nomination and election of district officers, except president and secretary-treasurer; and otherwise provide for district self-government ... The only exception to the above recommendations are the offices of presidents and secretary-treasurers in such districts, who shall continue to be selected by the International Executive Board and designated to hold such offices subject to international and district laws until such time as the International Executive Board shall provide otherwise.”
This was only a reaffirmation of the policy established by the conventions of 1938 and 1940 and reaffirmed in 1942. The reasons given by the committee for reaffirmation, and also the reasons given by Lewis in his speech on the question, are extremely interesting, despite the fact that they are somewhat irrelevant and beside the point. “We believe,” said the resolution, “that the above suggestions fully meet the needs of the situation, are protective of the rights of the membership and at the same time give to the international organization that small measure of advisory supervision that is conducive to the proper discharge of the obligations resting upon the international organization.” Furthermore, inherent in the resolution was the position that the present set-up is necessary to protect the organization in facing the “competitive problems arising out of producing and marketing coal.” The connection was also made with the problems of government control over wages and problems of the post-war period.
 
Bureaucracy, Democracy
In his speech on the subject, Lewis went into more detail. He said: “This is not a question to be decided in emotion or amid excitement, because it is a cold, mathematical, business proposition for the United Mine Workers to consider.”
Lewis then went on to say that while some locals in a district may desire autonomy, the majority of locals may not “and the overwhelming number of local unions and the overwhelming number of our membership do not lightly accept the suggestion that their district union be turned over, sometimes, to men without the necessary experience to operate it properly.”
Lewis then recited events that had taken place in certain autonomous districts. There was District 26 in Canada, where the officers “affiliated their union with the Red Trade Union Communist International and repudiated their contractual agreements with the coal industry. I threw them out of office on the toe of my boot. ... In District No. 10, Washington ... those officers ... either got scared or they sold out, and they negotiated a wage reduction, contrary to the policy of this union, with the coal operators of that state. Well, what was I to do? Have that contract taken for a base for a general wage reduction in this country?”
Lewis said that there was more to the autonomy proposition than meets the eye. “I don’t think our membership should get excited. I don’t think they will, and I am sure they will not follow behind some prancing windbag with a tin whistle trying to imitate the Pied Piper of Hamelin!” This was evidently a reference to Ray Edmundson. Lewis intimated that the autonomy move in part was a desire for jobs. “I think it is too bad, but it cannot be helped, that apparently in some districts there are just not enough offices to go around to meet the demand.”
When the vote came on the resolution, out of 2,500 delegates only about 100 voted for autonomy for the districts. Someone on the platform said that there were only thirty-eight votes for, while I read one estimate of fifty. But with a rapid count there were certainly nearer to a hundred voting for autonomy. Twenty-five delegates from fifteen different locals asked that their votes against the motion of the Resolutions Committee be recorded in the minutes.
 
Autonomy Issue Not Solved
The vote in the convention cannot be taken as a gauge of the sentiment of the delegates on this question. The Edmundson autonomy campaign had such a bad odor that even rank and file delegates who were for autonomy hesitated to carry on a fight for fear they would get smeared with the bad-smelling Edmundson brush.
It was very clear that the Edmundson group was not a pure and simple autonomy group and that non-union, anti-Lewis and anti-UMWA forces were interested in the struggle which Edmundson was engaged in.
One can agree that the Edmundson fight was not a real autonomy struggle. One can agree with all that Lewis said about the history of defalcations, ineptitude and inefficiency on the part of some district officers in the past. One can agree that the coal operators are interested, for their own purposes, in dealing with autonomous districts. One can agree that it may be difficult now to find efficient officers for all the districts.
Yet this is no reason for such a non-democratic, medieval and unprogressive attitude as that appearently held by the leadership of the union. The significant thing that the statements of Lewis proved is that there is a crying need for educational work in the UMWA. Lewis’ speech only demonstrated that among this magnificent, loyal and courageous group of workers there is a tragic lack of education in the principles of trade unionism, its history and the many problems of capitalist society that the miners are confronted with.
The International should spend some of the $10,000,000 in its treasury to educate the membership by a sound and progressive program of trade union education in all of its many phases.
 
Political Action
There are some other aspects of the autonomy, issue that I will discuss in a later article. This will include the role of the Negro delegates on this question and more on the Edmundson affair. Right now it is necessary to
get to the resolution on political action. This is a very strange resolution. It was presented to a convention after the president of the union and the Mine Workers Journal had already endorsed the Republican Party and its presidential candidate.
The same situation exists in the CIO. Before any of its affiliates had held their national conventions the top officers of the CIO had already endorsed the Democratic Party and its candidate, Roosevelt.
Despite the fact that Lewis and the UMWA official organ had already endorsed Dewey and the Republican Party, the resolution called for no endorsement. After vigorously and correctly flaying Roosevelt for six triple-spaced pages, fifteen lines of the mimeographed resolution are devoted to the praises of Dewey and the Republican Party. Very naively the sponsors of the resolution tell the coal diggers and the country that “the labor plank of the Republican Party’s platform promises labor the recognition and representation that belongs to labor. It promises economic freedom and to abolish all policies that lead to regimentation, the freezing of wages and binding men to their jobs.” The only assumption that one can make is that the officers of the UMWA believe that the only alternative to the anti-labor acts of the Roosevelt Administration is to swallow whole the “promises” of Dewey and the big business Republicans. There was one resolution in the convention for a Labor Party, but of course the Resolutions Committee recommended “non-concurrence.”
 
Plugging Hoover’s Dewey
“Dewey has not met the expectations of the betrayers of labor, the misleaders of labor, or the Communists who dominate the CIO and the Political Actionites. Such leaders are appendages geared to the Roosevelt Administration and, in many instances, old-world ideologies, and are ready and willing to sacrifice the economic freedom of the American way of life if need be to promote their personal welfare.”
What do these mysterious and cryptic sentences mean? Who are the betrayers of labor whom Dewey has disappointed? And why do the officers of the UMWA persist in the lie that Communists dominate the CIO? The CIO is dominated by Philip Murray and Lewis should know this. And who are the “Political Actionites”? What are the old-world ideologies mentioned in the above quoted paragraph? The most harassing, oppressive and strangling “old-world ideology” that labor is confronted with today is capitalism, the capitalist state and a capitalist government. This is an “old-world ideology” which was imported into this country directly from England. It is the only ideology dominant in this country. This ideology is sponsored, defended and accepted by both Roosevelt and Dewey, and by Republicans, and Democrats.
The 1936 convention endorsed Roosevelt and the union contributed a huge sum to his campaign. To be sure, the resolution says that Roosevelt “was given the endorsement as an individual candidate. The Democratic Party was not included.” This is pure nonsense. The CIO leaders will say today that they are not including the endorsement of Hague, Kelly and Bilbo in their endorsement of Roosevelt. But what do Hague, Kelly, Bilbo and the rest of the Democratic Party leaders care about this? We suppose that Lewis and his supporters will say that they are only endorsing Dewey and the Republican Party labor planks. They are not endorsing Taft, Mellon, Pew, the Republican Party politicians who are at the same time owners of coal mines and fascist and semi-fascist elements who are on the Republican bandwagon? Yet, as a matter of fact, a change only from Roosevelt to Dewey is merely a swing from one boss party to another. Support of either party is detrimental to the best interests of labor.
The convention is not over as this is written and I will resume this report in the next number of Labor Action.
 




In my article, Toward a New Trade Union Program, published in the June New International, it was stated: “The main question is, how shall the working class secure the economic and political leadership which will provide that program necessary for promoting class-consciousness and raising the political level of the masses ... We pose the more restricted question of class-conscious political action, procedure and organization ... All of the revolts, ‘unauthorized strikes,’ grumblings and dissatisfaction on the part of the militant trade unionists today are inchoate, primitive, but ominous demands for a new program for the movement.” The purpose of this article is to elaborate these ideas.
In this connection it may be necessary to clarify what I mean by a new trade union program. I do not mean a program for transforming the unions as such into political parties or a political party. I do not mean to advocate raising the unions to a political level in the sense that they retain the name of unions but function as political organizations primarily. I do not mean a program for the “bolshevization” of the unions and a sectarian withdrawal from the struggle of the masses in the manner of “third period” Stalinism. What I do mean is to suggest a new program that will intensify and fructify the economic struggles of the trade union movement and orient the militant trade union vanguard toward independent proletarian political action and organization. The trade unions would remain trade unions functioning, however, on a higher plane. They would remain fundamentally the primary economic organizations of the working class with the difference from today that the movement or some sizable section of it would move progressively from a program of class peace to class struggle.
As the proletarians imbibe the lessons of class struggle, climb the steep ascent to class-consciousness and apply this consciousness and experience to the problems of their existence, the practical result will be: concrete political organization of the working class in the United States. It is with this political consummation that a new program and a new leadership for the labor movement must be concerned.
 
The Bourgeoisie and Labor Political Action
The bourgeoisie today is vitally interested in any slightest manifestation or trend in this direction. It is openly alarmed over the entry of the CIO into politics with its PAC. It has not been so disturbed over any movement of the working class since the days of the organized unemployed movement or the founding of the CIO. It is more disturbed at the impertinence of the working class toying with the idea of political action than it was at all the marching and storming of the unemployed legions. This for the reason that the bourgeoisie understands these things better than the ranks of labor and far better than the leaders of labor. The unemployed made demands on the government of the bourgeois to give them a minimum of food, clothing and shelter. Active participation in congressional and presidential elections today by organized workers, with jobs, is objectively a demand for a measure of control in government and industry. For the bourgeois, government, industry and finance are his exclusive domain. For the unemployed to storm a relief station for bread in a period of trade union disorganization and diminishing membership is one thing, but for a disciplined and well financed organization of mass production employed workers to go into congressional districts in opposition to bourgeois congressmen, or to invade the holy precincts of bourgeois political conventions is sufficient cause for the ruling class to view with alarm the state of the nation.
I am not interested right now in the policies of the CIO-PAC. That will come later. We are in disagreement with their theory and practice. What I am emphasizing now is the mere fact that even the threat of political action by the proletariat has caused mild hysteria among the bourgeoisie. Dies, of poll-tax infamy, learning of the PAC campaign fund and the intention of the CIO politicians to invade his district, decides not to run. “Rampant un-Americanism” and any and all “subversive activities” are forgotten as the great man prepares to spend the rest of his days in autobiographical pursuits. How many congressmen would have chosen not to run, how many who did run would have been defeated if labor had been in the fight with a party and ticket of its own? That’s what the bourgeois understands and that or worse is what he fears in the days to come. He knows that political action is the road to power. He is fully aware from centuries of experience that politics and political organization have practical aims and a practical goal: the acquisition of political, economic and social power by a class and the wielding of that power in the interest of a class. It is the irreconcilable and irrevocable determination of the bourgeois so to distort the mind of the working class that it never get a vision of that Promised Land.
 
The Class-Conscious Bourgeoisie
The bourgeoisie must attempt to hold the proletariat completely inside the bastion of the bourgeois way of life because for it this is the only safe course. It fears that if it give an inch the workers will take an ell. The bourgeoisie takes itself very seriously. It is very solemn about its claims that it, and it alone, is the anointed one, chosen to decide all political, economic and social questions for the country and the world. It must impress this on the people, including the proletariat and the middle class. It succeeds in part by being solemn or by simulating solemnity and seriousness. The bourgeois never laughs at himself or indulges in raillery at his own expense. His errors and blunders may have ludicrous aspects: he may prove himself a first-rate dolt in the operation of the country’s industry or an irredeemable nincompoop in affairs of government in so far as these activities relate to the welfare of the masses of the people, but this does not deter the bourgeois from perennial affirmation of his right to own, manage and control the economy, as well as operate the state and the government.
The bourgeois knows one thing well. He knows what his class interests are and how to protect them. He may be an ass, yesterday, today or tomorrow, but he knows that so long as he can maintain the organizational, political and social integrity or unity of his class on important matters and at the same time impregnate the proletariat with the belief that the working class is incompetent and impotent, he and his class are safe.
The ruling class puts forth the claim, in one form or another, that it has the right to rule, to govern; to own, manage and control. At one time the method is blandishment and wooing of the working class, at another chicanery and conspiracy, at another use of the police power of the state, and force. The claims of the bourgeois can be made to look very impressive because his class has had an appreciable degree of success, and success can be glorified and sanctified. To aid in the process of sanctification, the bourgeois may call on the petty bourgeoisie and particularly on the educators, publicists and religious leaders. The educators provide the young and the old with judiciously selected excerpts from our past history, placing a halo on the heads of the founding fathers and emphasizing with what extreme rectitude our great men have always followed the path of democracy and fought the battle of the common people. The preachers, rabbis and priests, from their high and holy station, have played their r61e also in the glorification of the bourgeoisie and the capitalist social order. One of the chief functions of the religious leaders has been, and is today, the blessing of the armed forces, the preparation of the mortally wounded for heaven and the call on the god of battles for victory over the enemy.
As I have already indicated, the bourgeoisie is especially insistent in its determination to wield the political power. In capitalist society this is where he moves and lives and has his being. The first aim of the bourgeois who understands, that is, the enlightened bourgeois, is to obscure and conceal the real situation. In the first place, he will never admit that political power has any class meaning or content. According to him and his apologists, whereas there may be economic classes, the fact of the existence of such classes has or should have no connection with the nature of the state and the role of the government. As a rule, when the bourgeois talks about “the classes and the masses,” he is speaking in terms only of those who have money or wealth and those who do not. He attempts to make it appear that the main difference in this connection is the difference between those who have some money or wealth and those who do not. This he explains by differences of fortune or misfortune, of frugality or profligacy, of ability or the lack of ability. The embarrassing matter of inheritance is taken care of by leaving a few dollars to the butler and cook, a few thousands to a favorite charity and by designating several millions for the establishment of a “foundation.”
 
Political Action and Social Power
One of the aims of the bourgeois is to conceal the fact that political, social and economic power are in the hands of a small minority. Any move on the part of the proletariat to achieve political power is resented by the bourgeois because he knows that political power is indissolubly related to social and economic power. This problem of the transfer of power is very acute with the ruling class in these days of bourgeois importunity, flowing from the decline of capitalism, the harassments in connection with the maintenance of the world market, real or fancied encroachments of the New Deal bureaucracy, the breaching of bourgeois democracy by fascism and the clamor of the proletariat for easier conditions of existence.
To say that no step yet taken by the proletariat is really a step in the direction of political power concretely is beside the point. Every glance by the workers toward political action is examined by the ruling class and all its big propaganda and agitational guns are brought into action. The leaders of the ruling class know that a little learning by the proletariat is a dangerous thing, that even a sip of the Empyrean springs of political activity may result in progressively increasing demands for a larger place in the sun.
Implicit in this demand today is at least some elementary knowledge of the fact that the government is not or should not be a neutral body sitting above capital and labor and impartially adjudicating the disputes which arise between contending classes or groups. The proletariat has seen the intervention of the New Deal government: first, in the early days of its ascendancy and later during the Second Imperialist World War. In the minds of the most progressive and militant workers the demand for labor’s participation in the government was not prompted by any conscious class collaboration concepts but was a simple effort to push the government in die direction of partiality toward labor. In a very elementary way we are witnessing for the first time in the United States an awakening of the proletariat to the real role and function of government in a class society.
The bourgeoisie understand also that any beginnings toward political action by the proletariat contain springs of action leading to the use of the government by the working class for the same purposes for which government is used by the bourgeoisie: the protection of a class and the promotion of its welfare. With the advance of the political thinking of the masses the certain result would be use of the government by the proletariat to control property and the rights of property. Such development would expose and lay bare the basic evil of bourgeois democracy in its political aspects: the fact that under the cloak of capitalist democracy the capitalist ruling class exercises a dictatorship over society. As its eyes were opened, the proletariat would surely become incensed at the spectacle of a dictatorship exercised by a small minority, not by virtue of service to society but solely through a monopoly of social and economic power, and the protection of that power by the capitalist state and bourgeois government.
 
The Function of the State
It is true that these things are only vaguely understood by the proletariat today. It is for that reason that the trade union bureaucracy is successful in pursuing its class collaboration and class peace policies. The proletariat has not adequately grasped the concepts of class, state, government, bourgeois democracy and the general notion of capitalist society. This deficiency is the source of the objective acceptance of class collaboration by the working class. The ruling class understands these ideas and notions. The bourgeois or his professional ideologists know that historically it has been the practice of each class seeking living space and the opportunity to develop its interests and protect itself, to transform the old society into a social form suitable for the class aims it had in view. The crowning achievement of the bourgeois in the field of political theory and action is the bourgeois or capitalist state. This is the permanent and basic political organization of the bourgeoisie. Its main function is to give legal sanction to bourgeois private property and to protect the bourgeoisie in the possession of private property. It is not only what might be called tangible or concrete property such as land, buildings, machines, tools, transport and communication equipment and raw materials, that the bourgeoisie holds and owns under state sanction and protection. The bourgeoisie also claims and is awarded other less tangible rights: patent rights, the protection of business good will and above all the right to make contracts and to have those contracts enforced by the state. In this connection the bourgeoisie is quick to demand that the worker shall have the right to choose freely who his employer shall be and freedom to join or not to join a union. That is, the bourgeois demands that the worker shall be free to enter into a contract with an employer of his own choosing and free to join or not to join a union. In neither instance, the bourgeois insists, must there be any coercion. According to the protagonists of the “system of free enterprise” with its “free workers,” the laborer should have the right to sell his labor power or to withhold it. By the same token, and in a “free democracy,” according to the bourgeois, the worker should be free to join a union or not to join.
The ruling class, however, is not so “liberal” in its ideas about political action and organization by the proletariat. In the course of the decades this class has come to accept, grudgingly, it is true, economic organizations of the working class. For reasons which we do not need to go into here they agree on the whole that capitalism can live side by side with the unions. But when workers begin moving toward political organization and action as a class, that is going too far. The capitalist has no objection to being barred from membership in the workers’ economic organizations, but he will fight bitterly, and in the name of “democracy,” “Americanism” and “justice,” against being barred from the workers’ political organization. I do not mean by this that Morgan, Mellon, du Pont, Roosevelt or Dewey in person would make application for membership in a workers’ party. Probably not; but they send their representatives. These may be an obscure or prominent “liberal” congressman, a college professor, a small business man, a minor government official or a junior executive in a big business or bank. These “friends of labor” are always bearers of the ideas and notions of the bourgeoisie. Their role is to head off any real independent political direction of labor and to keep the proletarian political organization inside the framework of bourgeois politics and the bourgeois parties.
 
The Main Aim of Political Action
To be sure, the ruling class also wants its ideas and notions to prevail in the workers’ economic organizations. It schemes and conspires in all manner of ways to accomplish this. This has been dealt with in previous articles. But there is an extremely important difference that must be emphasized over and over. That is the fact that political organization and action has a significance far beyond that of trade union action. All political organization and action has or should have one main practical aim: to take control of the government, to transform the existing state, to achieve social power for the class which the particular political organization represents.
In the capitalist countries where the bourgeoisie already has the social power, the function of the bourgeois parties is to protect the ruling class in the retention of power. A working class organized politically would inevitably be forced into a political struggle with the bourgeoisie. The sacred property rights of the ruling class would be placed in jeopardy, the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie would be revealed and the economic base of that social power and dictatorship would be exposed. Furthermore, in the course of political struggle the proletariat would learn another important lesson which the bourgeois has hidden beneath the whole mass of bourgeois-democratic mythology. That is the pregnant lesson that never in history has social power been achieved by exercising the franchise. On occasion, it has been the case that it proved impossible even to hold social power by the use of the ballot. On these occasions other means are resorted to.
The ruling class, of course, attempts at first to retain its power and rule by use of that fiction that since each adult has only one vote, rich and poor alike, and since the rich are in the minority, it is possible foe the masses of the people to get the kind of government they want by use of the franchise. There is no need therefore for the proletariat to separate itself apart and form its own political organization. If labor is displeased with Wilson it can switch to Harding. When Harding dies the saintly Coolidge emerges from coma. When Coolidge chooses not to run, and if labor’s aesthetic sense is jarred by the thought of grass growing in the streets, they may reject Smith and vote for Hoover. Should Hoover not keep his promise to provide a chicken for every pot and a car in every garage, they may try Roosevelt and the New Deal. And when the New Deal fails and the whole world becomes a vast shroud in the midst of the Second Imperialist World War, the proletariat, according to the bourgeois, still has no need for class political action and organization. Why? Because the Democratic Party is not the only political party in the country. Thanks to the “political genius of the Founding Fathers,” “the American Way of Life,” “our system of free enterprise” and the “Four Freedoms,” there is another choice: the Republican Party and Dewey.
 
The Sacred “Two-Party System”
The bourgeoisie is very zealous of the “two-party system” in the United States. Not only is it violently opposed to what it calls the “one-party system of Russia and Germany,” it is also against three parties or four parties. There must be precisely two parties, no more, no less.
The position of the ruling class in this matter is somewhat similar to that of the old English bourgeois blatherskite on the Church of England: “When I say religion I mean Christianity. When I say Christianity I mean protestantism. When I say protestantism I mean the Church of England.”
A disgusting and extremely reactionary illustration of this attitude by the bourgeoisie appeared in a recent New York Times editorial, from which I quote: “One great error which the Italian and German democracies shared in common was proportional representation ... Its fatal defect, as exemplified in Italy and Germany, was that it shattered the electorate and the legislature into a multitude of parties and factions of bitter extremists who would have had no real chance of getting into power under the majority-voting system and the two-party system.”
The actual meaning of what transpires in bourgeois society is not apparent to the proletariat. Hence labor is enticed into class collaboration, enmeshed in a process of tail-ending and the masses are forced into a state of political subservience, non-resistance and humility. The main reason is not the lack of militancy but of political and theoretical enlightenment. The militancy of labor remains on the crudest bread-and-butter level. No appreciable portion of the proletariat has yet grasped the distinction between social power, with the accompanying political ascendancy based on the ownership of property, wealth and the instruments of production, and formal or juridical political rights. Labor remains tied to the myth disseminated by bourgeois propagandists that one man is politically equal to another in the United States because no man has more than one vote. Certain outstanding aspects of this rather empty platitude might prove a stimulus to the thinking of the working class. For instance, it is rather interesting that any number of the bourgeoisie never bother to register and vote. It is an open secret that in city after city the heaviest per cent voting takes place in the wards bordering on the river, across the railroad tracks and in the neighborhood of the factories. It is of some significance that the bourgeoisie is quite willing to grant the proletariat and petty bourgeoisie a virtual monopoly attendance at the polls on election days. Furthermore, it might be well for the working class to stop and ponder the fact that the result of this exercise of “political equality” is state legislatures, city councils and a national Congress composed overwhelmingly of persons from the bourgeoisie and the upper petty bourgeoisie. The proletariat votes, but, unlike the king, the bourgeoisie both reigns and rules.
 
The State and the Government
Secondly, the proletariat has not yet grasped the distinction to be made between “the state” and “the government.” Herein, at least in part, lies the confusion which makes it possible for the bourgeoisie to go on and on with the myth of equality and non-class democracy.
I have already explained how the state exists for the protection of the ruling class and its economic interests. It is not necessary that the political organizations of the ruling class be identical in every capitalist country nor the same in one country from period to period. It is sufficient that they conform to the requirements of the bourgeoisie in any country and at any period, that such organizations be and remain in consonance with bourgeois class and property relations and the peculiar state form established by the bourgeoisie to protect and perpetuate those class and property relations.
The government is not the state. The government is the given administrative set-up. It is the function of the bourgeois government to maintain the economic status quo, to protect the social power of the bourgeoisie and to guarantee the existing class and property relations. The government achieves this end through the constitution of the country, through laws and administrative orders. What must be emphasized is that the constitution, the laws, statutes and orders follow a certain pattern. They define and delineate the nature of the state and are always compatible with the foundation principles of the state; particularly those foundation stones supporting the property and class relations.
Therefore what we call “the government” may be changed but the class and property relations remain unchanged; that is, there is no change in the nature of the existing state. Because they confuse the two or because they do not understand the difference, the proletariat seeks to resolve the economic, social and political difficulties with which it is faced by a mere change in the management. The bourgeoisie, of course, encourages this confusion and misunderstanding. This is the objective today of the defense and maintenance of the “two-party system.” The capitalist state with its class base, with its roots in the dominance of the bourgeoisie, with its instruments of class oppression, is screened by a political organizational front composed of two parties; both bourgeois in theory and practice. A shift from one of those parties to the other is therefore only a change in the administrators. The old-fashioned historians were theoretically correct objectively when they headed the chapters of their school histories: “The Administration of William McKinley,” or whoever it happened to be.
In times of social stress and strain it is not unusual for the bourgeoisie to consent to the participation of labor in the management and administration of the state. This is exemplified in England today and to a lesser degree in the United States. Labor has its representatives on some government boards, and there is a demand for a Secretary of Labor from the trade union movement. Willkie went to far as to suggest that labor be represented in all phases of government, even in fiscal affairs. These efforts always fall far short of what labor and the liberals have in mind and result in the rankest and crudest class collaboration. This is inevitable for the reason that in such instances the proletariat is attempting to manage without owning, without social power.
 
Capturing the Primaries
This helps explain the futility of workers trying from time to time to capture the Republican or Democratic Parties, or to win out in some Republican or Democratic primaries, or to force the endorsement of certain people known as “labor’s candidate.” Suppose labor did “capture” one of the bourgeois parties, or a bourgeois primary, or force the election of labor’s candidates. Nothing would be gained unless the candidates were from the ranks of labor and committed to a program formulated by labor and based on the class needs of the proletariat. But neither of the bourgeois parties will endorse such a “labor candidate.” That candidate would be a class enemy of the ruling class, and the bourgeoisie does not take its class enemies to its bosom. The bourgeoisie is extremely cautious and class-conscious. It will not even trust any and every defender of capitalism, as was clear in the rejection of Wallace.
Talk of capturing a bourgeois party or primary is to begin a campaign of storm and fury that could only result in labor capturing itself, if anything. The bourgeoisie can withdraw and form another party. And then labor would have to act independently or follow the bourgeois “splitters.” The bourgeoisie does not wait to have its political organizations “captured” by the proletariat. Whenever the working class shows evidence of any influence whatsoever in bourgeois parties, the most hardened among the ruling class begin the formation of new and more orthodox alignments. They campaign against those in their midst who have become too friendly with labor, they ignore their past utterances on the “two-party system” and form blocs cutting across the artificial dividing lines between the two parties. The reason that the bourgeois can and does deport himself in this manner has already been elucidated: the Republican and Democratic Parties are the political instruments of a class. They cannot serve the interests of a class. They cannot serve the interests of the proletariat, which is an alien class to the bourgeoisie. The proletariat cannot be admitted to citizenship in the bourgeois parties. To make such a demand is to attempt to exact from the ruling class social, political and economic equality which can only be the reward of that class which has social power. To demand equality from the bourgeois government is to demand that such a government forsake its class base and its class allegiance. For the proletariat, the little propertyless people, to stand before the capitalist state, before the men of property and power, and demand a place in the sun, is to demand a transformation of that state by the class which can profit only from the status quo.
This sets a real challenge before the proletariat; the challenge to organize politically, independently, with class-conscious clarity and militancy. I shall resume this series of articles in the next New International with a discussion of the more concrete aspects of the question. The last article will deal with an international program for labor.
 




Millions of workers in the United States, members of the CIO, the railroad unions and the AFL, are preparing for the conventions of their internationals and federations.
These workers have already elected or are in the process of electing delegates to represent them at these conventions.
These conventions of international unions will legislate for labor for the period extending from one convention to the next. The decisions and actions of these international conventions will therefore officially bind millions of workers for one or two years. International officers will point to the decisions made at these conventions as authority for their acts. The employers and the government will remind labor of the legislation enacted “at your last convention.” The capitalist press will keep up a constant din in the ears of labor.
That is, the press, the employers and the government will hammer away incessantly with this propaganda during the coming year – if organized labor, in its several international conventions, votes to reaffirm the no-strike pledge. This is what will happen if the delegates to the various conventions allowed themselves to be beguiled, browbeaten or sobbed into putting up their hands again in support of leaders who will surely demand continuation of the no-strike pledge.
If the thousands of delegates to the conventions permit themselves to be drugged by the demagogy of leaders just back from the battle fronts, by clever and oily speeches by government officials and, worst of all, by the grossly indecent exhibition of innocent wounded men from the front, then they will only place a halter around the neck of labor that will be pulled tighter during the next year by the employers and the government.
The no-strike pledge is the main question that will come before the conventions.
This is the chief question tactically. It is the all-important issue from the standpoint
of organized labor to get itself into a more advantageous position to deal with matters of collective bargaining right down to the every-day grievances/ in the shops. It is important in connection with the desire of labor to come to grips with the anti-labor WLB and NLRB. With the maintenance of the no-strike pledge we are powerless to knock out the Little Steel formula and raise our wages to meet the 43.5 per cent rise in the cost of living.
 
What the No-Strike Pledge Does
The no-strike pledge chains us to passivity and subservience to the employers, the government boards and the bureaucrats of the War and Navy Departments.
The no-strike pledge is a barricade standing between labor and effective action on cutbacks, the closing of plants and the summary and bureaucratic dismissal of workers from their jobs.
And in a very important sense the no-strike pledge is a deterrent to independent political action by labor by keeping us generally tied to Roosevelt, the Democratic Party, or to Dewey and the Republican Party.
The ramifications of the no-strike pledge are manifest in every sphere and avenue of labor life and activity. Every worker, even the most violently patriotic worker, should know this by now. Prices advance 43.5 per cent, but labor can do nothing to increase wages. The steel workers asked for a seventeen-cent increase last December, but the WLB calmly ignores the demand. It says nothing, sees nothing and hears nothing. There is nothing to hear because the steel workers have given a no-strike pledge.
The employees of the Big Four meat packers are denied a wage increase by the WLB and are reminded that there is a Little Steel formula.
The UAW has been notified in advance by the WLB that this mighty union will not be listened to if demands for wage increases are made when the GM contract comes before this little board.
The UAW will be forced to knuckle under if its coming contention reaffirms the no-strike pledge. That is, the locals will have to knuckle under or run the risk of having their charters lifted and their officers suspended by Thomas, fresh from the battlefields of Europe.
 
Workers in Great Danger
Every worker in every union is confronted with the imminent danger of a lowered standard of living, due for one reason or another, to a reduction in the “take home” pay. The U.S. Labor Press Service of the OWI publisher a report of the War Foods Administration stating that “only a small percentage of workers eat adequate, nutritional breakfasts.” Or the housewives interviewed in the survey, “in practically every case, one important food, generally fruit or cereal, was missing.” In a California war plant, “eighty-four per cent of the women and forty per cent of the men had eaten breakfasts rated ‘poor’.” Fruit for breakfast, indeed, with a can of pears calling for forty-four points and thirty-five cents, and fresh fruit selling at its weight in gold!
Workers are faced with a conspiracy on the part of employers to reduce wages and lengthen hours. Workers who are the victims of cutbacks and the closing of plants are forced to take jobs at wages lower than the rate in the plant from which they go. The capitalist employers and Congress are playing with a plan to wreck the unions by using ex-servicemen and women against the seniority rules. “Assistant President” Byrnes, under the lash of the Army and Navy brasshats, issues a manpower order which contains many of the essential features of a labor draft.
 
Unions Face Disruption
Labor is faced with unemployment today, not only after the war. First come the cutbacks, layoffs and a scramble for new jobs which will be doled out by scheming employers at a lower rate of pay. In each instance where this occurs the local union will be disrupted, as in the Brewster case.
Later there may come a general reduction in the working time with the total elimination of overtime. This will reduce the standard of living and make it impossible for families to make ends meet at all; This because at present a large part of the income of the workers comes from the time and a half and double time pay. This hag been the policy of the Roosevelt government functioning through Davis’ WLB. If the workers wanted more money, they were told to work longer hours or to accept piecework systems, which did not “increase the unit cost of production.”
We have just witnessed the defeat of the Kilgore bill through the machinations of “Assistant President” Byrnes and a combination of Democrats and Republicans.
Roosevelt was silent on the Kilgore bill, but perhaps he had talked to Byrnes.
These are the ominous situations confronting labor as the organized workers prepare for their conventions, as they gird themselves for action on the no-strike pledge, the WLB and all the tremendously important questions that are life or death for the labor movement.
Most of the big international unions will hold conventions in September arid October – the automobile and aircraft workers, miners, rubber workers, metal miners, shipbuilding workers and radio workers. These conventions will have their own individual problems to iron out, but not one of these organizations, including the AFL unions, will be able to skirt around the great national issues we have mentioned.
The no-strike pledge, the WLB and the coming presidential election will be before each convention. Many locals have passed resolutions against the no-strike pledge and calling for withdrawing the labor men from the WLB. The Little Steel formula and the whole wage question will face the delegates for action. They will not be able to dodge any of these questions and face those who elected them when they return to their respective locals.
 
Bureaucrats on the Spot
President Green of the shipbuilders’ IUMSWA will not be able to skirt around the wage question as he did last year with the asinine position that wages are in the hands of the government. This little fellow, who seems to believe that the way to operate a union is, through appointed bureaucrats called “administrators,” may also face opposition on this score.
President Thomas of the UAW will have to bring up more than tears, threats or pleading to get his beloved no-strike pledge renewed.
The Stalinist-dominated and strangled United Electrical, Radio & Machine Workers will have to dish out more than incentive pay, the no-strike pledge and Harry Bridges to satisfy the delegates.
The Mine, Mill & Smelter Workers will meet in Pittsburgh. We haven’t heard what Reid Robinson and the Stalinists have prepared for these workers but they will certainly be faced with a resolution to approve Roosevelt and the no-strike pledge.
The rubber workers’ URW will meet in New York. Here President Dalrymple will have an organized effort against his stupid and ignorant bureaucratic procedure in this international.
The miners’ UMWA will meet in Cincinnati, where the question of restoring autonomy to the districts will be fought out.
We can expect to be deluged with speakers of all kinds from Congress, government bureaus and various cabinet officers. Each convention of course will have a telegram from the “Commander-in-Chief,” the new title which the labor leaders have bestowed on Roosevelt, whose command, according to tradition and the constitution, is restricted to the Army and Navy. As an added effort to jam through reaffirmation of the no-strike pledge, the union officials may be expected to have wounded men from the Army and Navy on hand.
But not even on the question of political action will there be unanimity. Several of the conventions will have resolutions calling for independent political action and the formation of an independent Labor Party. Militant and aggressive delegates will have such an opportunity as never before to wage a fight for changing their internationals from cringing and retreating organizations to fighting unions, ready for an offensive against all who would destroy them. These militants, however, will have to act differently from their manner of operating at former conventions. They will have to act in concert, in an organized manner. They will have to act with courage and determination. Every convention should ring with opposition to servile and futile bootlicking of the employers, the government and Roosevelt. Whatever militant delegates do at the conventions of the internationals will be welcomed by the masses of their brothers and sisters back home.
Any victories which militant delegates are able to win at the conventions of the international unions will serve as a warning to the CIO and AFL conventions not to repeat their capitulations of former years.
 




Editor Adams of the United Mine Workers Journal and political spokesman for John L. Lewis, is highly pleased with the “labor” planks in the Republican platform and with the nomination of Governor Dewey. We take it that Governor Bricker is also acceptable to Lewis and Adams.
In fact, it is rumored that Lewis and Bill Hutcheson, with Hutcheson in attendance at the convention, helped to formulate the Republican “labor” plank. This is the same Bill Hutcheson that Lewis knocked under his seat at an AFL convention in Atlantic City over the issue of industrial unionism. It was also noised around among political scandal-mongers that Hutcheson was being considered as the Republican choice for Vice-president. While we know that there was no real possibility of this happening, it does tickle one’s funny-bone to contemplate Hutcheson in any position, outside the Carpenters Union, requiring even the most elementary and primitive intelligence. To hoist this 300 pound hulk of ignorance and stupidity into any position requiring any brains at all would be as ludicrous as expecting modern intelligence from a resurrected and mummified caveman.
 
GOP “Charms” Labor
At any rate, John L. and Big Bill got together with Republican platform fixers to hurl a few brickbats at the Democrats and throw fools’ gold into the camp of labor. Here is a choice bit from the GOP “labor” plank. “The Republican Party is the historical champion of free labor. Under Republican administration American manufacturing developed, and American workers attained the most progressive standards of living of/any workers in the world.” This is one of those statements issued from time to time by capitalist politicians for the purpose of catching suckers. As the champion of capitalist business enterprise it is true that the Republican Party “is the historical champion of free labor.” Capitalism must have a working class or there can be no capitalist business enterprise. There must be workers for the mines, mills, factories, railroads and offices. There must be production, and it is the workers who are the main force in production.
The Republican Party was against slavery because capitalist industry could not develop with slave labor. For capitalism to develop there must be a supply of “free labor.” That is, the workers must be free from the land and free from the ownership of tools, machines, buildings, raw materials, railroads and banks. Under capitalism, all that the workers own is their labor power, that is, the capacity to do work. Since they own nothing but this labor power, they must sell it to the capitalist or they will starve.
This was what the Republican Party was fighting for when it opposed slavery and fought the Civil War. This is the meaning of the statement in the Republican platform that this party is the champion of free labor. It means that the Republican Party was against chattel slavery and for wage slavery. It was opposed to a system in which the employer had to feed, clothe, house and doctor the worker when he was not working or when he got sick. It was against a system in which you owned the worker like you did your horse or cow; you could not fire him when he did not work, or was sick, or was too old to work.
Historically, the Republican Party fought for a system under which the worker could be fired when he was no longer needed: when there was enough coal in storage; when there were more shoes than could be sold; when there wasn’t enough money in the workers’ pockets to buy the huge quantities of potatoes or beef which had been produced; when a war was over and there was no longer a need for more cannons, guns, ship, tanks and airplanes. This is “free labor” under capitalism and this is what the Republican Party is talking about in its platform.
 
Whose Parties Are They?
Today, in this same sense, the Democratic Party is also the “champion of free labor.” It is also a capitalist party, not one bit different from the Republicans. Roosevelt is a capitalist candidate, Dewey is a capitalist candidate. Both parties are run and controlled by big business men and big bankers. Both conventions were run by big business men and big bankers operating through their favorite senators, governors. These big business men and bankers don’t appear on the convention floor. They don’t like to be seen because if they show themselves the little people and the workers will get wise and find out who runs the country. They sit behind the curtain like the man in the control room of a radio station while a broadcast is in progress. Of course, there are some important differences between the two parties, but these are differences over which gang can best run the profit system.
There are the Morgans, Lehmans, Fords, Mellons, du Ponts, Graces, Wilsons, Vanderbilts, and all the rest. Some are Democrats and some Republicans. They all belong to the Chambers of Commerce, to the same clubs, the NAM and are pillars of the church. They marry into Presidents’ families; senators and cabinet officers marry their daughters. They split their votes and donations between the Republican and Democratic Parties. Quite often they don’t vote, thousands of them don’t even register before elections. They do their voting at their clubs, at the meetings of the NAM and at private conferences with their political deputies in the federal, state and city governments.
The Republican plank says that the workers attained the most progressive standard of living of any workers in the world under “Republican administration.” Was Hoover a Republican? We wonder. Furthermore, what is a “progressive standard of living”? Was the standard of living of the miners, the steel workers, the sharecroppers progressive under Republican administration? Can twenty-five cents an hour give a progressive standard of living?
The Democrats, not to be outdone by the Republicans, make the same claims for their twelve years of rule. But the workers live in shacks under both regimes. Under both they pay high taxes out of their low incomes. Under both parties, the workers grub for food. Under either administration in wartime, before and after, from Lincoln to Roosevelt II, the nation’s crop of millionaires has steadily increased.
 
“Standard of Living”
Suppose the standard of living of the worker in the United States is higher than in any other country. Does this prove that our standard of living is what it should be? A standard of living must be judged by what is possible, based on actual and potential production in a certain country and in the world.
There is no need in the world today for hunger and misery in any country and among any of the world’s populations. The capitalist countries of the world are equipped or can be equipped to feed, clothe and house the whole world in comfort and plenty. Capitalism has demonstrated that there is no need for want and misery. When they wanted guns, ships, tanks and planes for their imperialist war they produced them. When they wanted food for war purposes the food came forth. When money was needed to finance their imperialist war the money was found – billions and billions of dollars of it. There is no difference between the Republicans on this point, even in their platforms.
The Republicans “condemn the freezing of wage rates at arbitrary levels and the binding of men to their jobs as destructive to the advancement of a free people.” This was too much even for a solid Republican paper like the New York Herald Tribune. The Tribune and the Democratic New York Times attacked this plank in identical language. Both of these organs of big business know that the Republicans in power would never carry this condemnation into action. What these papers are afraid of is that workers will take this lie seriously and begin making demands for the unfreezing of wages.
There is an important aspect to this statement of the Republicans. Some part of labor, including Lewis or a simpleton like Hutcheson, may believe that the Republican wage statement means that the GOP is for wage increases. Aside from the purely vote-catching aspect of this plank, it is true that the big business men for whom the GOP speaks, is against government control of wages today. They are opposed for two reasons: first, they don’t want government interference right now and secondly they believe that wages are too high. They want to unfreeze wages so that wages can be lowered and hours increased.
 
Words, Words, Words
The Republicans “condemn the gradual but effective creation of a labor front,as but one of the New Deal’s steps toward a totalitarian state.” And further: “The American labor movement and the Republican Party ... reject the communistic and New Deal concept that a single group can benefit while the general economy suffers.”
The working class should certainly be on the alert for any “labor front” tendencies and be always vigilant against any effort either to curtail the democratic rights of labor or to hinder our advance. The Democratic Party, following practices laid down by the Republican Party in its years of domination, certainly cannot be trusted to maintain or fight for workers’ rights. It would be sheer stupidity to go to the Republican Party for such protection. When they talk about a “labor front” they are only using campaign agitation, for the winning of votes. They are not against a “labor front,” but only against the control of labor by the Democrats. A Republican “labor front” would be wholly acceptable to them.
The Republican Party and the labor movement will strive to better labor’s status, says the Republican platform. That means that U.S. Steel, Morgan, Mellon, Taft and Vandenberg will strive with Green and Murray for the improvement of the condition of the working class! The Democrats make the same claims. That means that the big capitalists who vote for Roosevelt, Howard Smith, Bilbo and Hague will strive for the betterment of labor.
It is notable that the Republican platform did not call for the repeal of the Smith-Connally Act, the blow at labor hatched by the Democratic administration of Roosevelt and supported by the Republicans. Even the senile and mentally decrepit Bill Green called the platform “disappointing,” and felt that the Republicans had “missed a great opportunity.”
 
Empty Heads at Work
At the 1940 convention of the CIO, John L. Lewis remarked that he had looked into Green’s head and found nothing there. We have an idea that there are a few empty compartments in Lewis’s head also. Politically he has the mind of a serf. This means that in these important questions of the political welfare of the working class he is as naive and thick-headed as Phil Murray, Bill Green or R.J. Thomas. Faced with what he holds to be the only two alternatives for labor, he patiently and with a languid flourish selects the party of Hoover, Pew and Mellon. If he had made his choice by tossing a coin, we would have said that here is a labor leader tied up to the capitalist parties but at least he has a sense of humor. We could have said that at least he knows that both Republicans and Democrats are rotten, reactionary and anti-labor. But Lewis did not do this. He makes a choice between two gangs and invites his miners and other workers into the gangs’ den.
It would be too much, of course, to expect Lewis to understand that there is another way for labor: the way of independent political action, the road to a break with Republicans and Democrats and the formation of labor’s own political party. Here he is in unison with Murray and Bill Green. Murray is a barker for Roosevelt, Lewis beats the tom-tom for Dewey and poor Bill Green only sighs and longs for the day when labor and capital can sit together in prayerful peace around the council table and arrive at decisions “in the mutual interest of both groups.”
 




The working class in the United States is once again confronted with national elections. We are face to face with the coming elections and the tremendous international and domestic problems involved, with no political and organizational preparations for using the elections in the class interests of organized labor and the whole working class.
There was the Atlantic Charter, with its scribblings on the Four Freedoms for the peoples of the world. There were Casablanca, Teheran and Dumbarton Oaks. In all of these conferences the imperialist powers, the United Nations, under the leadership of Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin, not only plan the military defeat of the Axis powers but at the same time conspire together against the collective interests of the masses of the people. They each sought to enhance the economic interests of the particular national ruling class which they spoke for and represented.
To each of the Allies this is known as the establishment of foreign policy – what will be done with this, that or the other country after the war. They talk words and more words; millions of words, just as they did during and after the First Imperialist World War. Words and agreements and documents about “democracy,” “peace,” “security,” freedom from want” and “freedom from fear.”
Of course, these political chieftains and imperialist warlords talk also (but not so openly) about “trade routes,” “world airways,” “exports,” “sources of raw materials” and “the colonies” (the colonial slaves are never included in the Four Freedoms).
 
What Labor Got Already
In our own country, where we toil for our existence, we are chained to a no-strike pledge, bludgeoned by a Smith-Connally Act, harassed by a War Manpower Commission and stripped of our earnings by exorbitant taxes and the stranglehold of capitalist profiteering prices. Not only this, but there is the Little Steel formula, the cutbacks and the specter of post-war mass unemployment.
These are gifts to labor from the Roosevelt Administration and the Democratic Party. This is what Roosevelt and the Democratic Party offer now. This is the kind of regime they enforce now. They will not and cannot offer more after the war is over. But this man and this party have taken care of business.
Aside from the billions which have been distributed in salaries, dividends and interest, the corporations have stored away forty billion dollars in cash reserves from the support of the “war effort.” Not satisfied with this, the Roosevelt Administration and the Democratic Party have made arrangements by which corporations may have their post-war profits guaranteed and protected from impairment by tax reductions.
The Republican Party, with its rocking-horse darling of the Wall Street nursery, comes before the working class as the “historic champion of free labor.” They have a “foreign policy” and also a “domestic policy,” too. Dripping at the mouth and panting to get at the public treasury and to ride on the backs of labor for at least four years more, they enter the arena against the three-time winner. They can adequately be described in the way John Randolph spoke of a famous “statesman” of his day: they are “like a dead mackerel in moonlight; they shine and stink.”
 
Tweedledee & Tweedledum
And so, there they are. The successor of “Bloody Thursday” Hoover. Franklin Delano Roosevelt: savior of capitalism, Roosevelt of the Little Steel formula, of wage stabilization. The same Roosevelt who tied us on the job like serfs, who made the employers a present of the no-strike pledge and aided them to strike blow after blow at our unions.
And then Dewey with his Republican Party, no better and no worse. After the same thing and with the same basic ideas, aims and goals.
Where is the choice for labor and the working class between these two men and these two parties? There is no choice. Hundreds of thousands of workers know this. Millions in the ranks of labor at least have a vague feeling that all is not well, and only hope that somehow they will escape the miseries of another ten-year depression. It is our opinion that the overwhelming majority of workers will vote for Roosevelt and the Democratic Party. They will vote for what they call the “lesser evil.” They say that Dewey and the Republicans are worse than Roosevelt and the Democrats. Furthermore, millions of workers have been beguiled with the propaganda of the capitalist bosses and their government deputies to get out the vote.
Another argument made is that since there are only two parties and two sets of candidates, one of them will be sure to win. Therefore in order not to be left out in the cold, the workers must be in on the victory. And since there is no Labor Party, then the only thing to do is vote for the candidates of the two capitalist parties.
None of this is true except the statements that someone will be elected and that there is no Labor Party. We do not have to vote for capitalist candidates. We have been left out in the cold after Republican victories and after Democratic victories. This will continue so long as we cling to the propaganda of the politicians who do the dirty work of our employers and the capitalist class.
 
What Kind of Labor Politics?
The CIO leaders organized a Political Action Committee and told us that it was time for labor to get into politics. But under Hillman, Murray and the rest of them, the only politics the PAC has engaged in is political activity for the re-election of Roosevelt: champion of the Little Steel formula, the no-strike pledge, the WLB and the savior of capitalism. They have taken our money and used it exclusively in the interest of Roosevelt, the Democratic Party and the capitalist bosses.
While this is a most brazen betrayal of the interests of the working class, even this slight, gesture toward political action by labor has frightened the capitalist ruling class. The PAC, despite its weaknesses and against the will of Hillman, Murray and the others, has demonstrated what we could do if we really went in for genuine independent working class political action. We could really put the fear of the working class into Roosevelt and Dewey, the Republicans and the Democrats and their capitalist masters.
What should the working class do on November 7? Precisely what we should be doing now, what we should have been doing years ago and what we should be doing after the election is over: TALKING FOR, AGITATING FOR, FIGHTING FOR, ORGANIZING FOR INDEPENDENT WORKING CLASS POLITICAL ACTION. This is what we should be doing now, this is what we should do on November 7, this is what we should do after November 7. We should attend to our own class political interests and let the capitalist bosses and their political stooges attend to theirs if they can. We should not be concerned now, nor on November 7, nor afterward with the puppets the ruling class puts up for us to elect for them and to defend their class interests.
The worker who throws away this vote on November 7 will not be the worker who stays away from the polls but the one who goes to the polls and costs his ballot for Franklin D. Roosevelt or Thomas E. Dewey. Our-business is to fight for our own party, to organize that party, to use our time on November 7 to teach this to every worker and win every worker to independent working class political action and the formation of a LABOR PARTY!
 




The coal miners came together in Cincinnati early in September for their first meeting since the great strikes of 1943. At the time of the convention, despite the fact that the WLB had rendered its decision on the wage scale, including portal-to-portal pay, and the mines had been returned to their private owners, there were many grievances that had not been adjusted. There were back wages due. The question of mine safety and the passage of a federal mine safety bill was uppermost in the minds of UMWA membership. While the convention was in session a communication arrived telling that more bodies had been recovered from the Powhattan mine in Ohio, where a most tragic “accident” had occurred.
Aside from these grievances the convention convened in the midst of a presidential campaign. The fact that Roosevelt was a candidate for re-election was in itself enough to make the November election a paramount issue. The miners came to Cincinnati bitter and convinced that this Administration had directly and deliberately attempted to wreck their union.
 
The Issue of District Autonomy
An equally important question was the autonomy issue which this year had been intensified through the activities of Ray Edmundson, formerly the appointed president of District 12 in Southern Illinois. This was really the first event of the convention that could be called a contest. Edmundson had resigned as the appointed president of District 12 and it was reported that he had gone back to work in the mines. He appeared at the convention, held a caucus of his forces and announced that he would withdraw as a candidate for UMWA president against Lewis if Lewis would consent to the restoration of autonomy to the twenty-one districts where today the president and secretary-treasurer are appointed.
I do not know all the facts nor the most important facts in connection with the Edmundson campaign. It is clear however, that it was in no sense a movement primarily to restore autonomy to the twenty-one districts. Two pages in The New International are not sufficient for any details in connection with this or other important questions, so only the barest outline can be given. There is every reason to believe that the autonomy grievance was seized on by anti-Lewis forces outside the union to wage a reactionary struggle against Lewis and the UMWA. Coal operators may have been involved. Roosevelt Administration forces were probably active in this alleged autonomy move. There is concrete evidence for the position that Browder’s Communist Party Political Association had very jubilantly joined the Edmundson caravan and had as its representative the secretary of the committee, a miner from West Virginia.
Events at the convention confirmed any suspicions that one may have had in advance that this so-called autonomy movement had other purposes. Edmundson’s right to his seat as a delegate was challenged. His eligibility was challenged on the ground that he had not worked in the mines during the period required by the union constitution. His right to a seat was challenged on the ground that he was not in good financial standing in his local. None of these challenges was accepted and no one rose in the convention, not even the secretary of the Edmundson committee, to defend Edmundson’s right to a seat. It semed clear that the “autonomy” movement had been initiated mainly as an anti-Lewis campaign and that the legitimate demands of locals for autonomous districts was used in a way that could benefit only those forces bent on a career of weakening the UMWA.
This created an extremely unfortunate situation for those militants, progressives and democratic elements in the union which came prepared to wage a correct fight for the restoration of democratic rights to the districts and locals. It also gave Lewis the opportunity to use irrefutable facts “in the matter of past delinquencies of elected district officials in the most demagogic and undemocratic manner. While no sensible person will deny that the coal industry and the political, economic and social conditions in the coal fields create great difficulties for the union it does not follow from this that the perpetuation of rule by the national officers is the answer to the dilemma. The only cure for this situation is a combination of vigilance and competency on the part of the leadership, trade union and political education of the membership and the deliberate practice of internal democracy in the union. This is the answer, and neither Lewis nor anyone else will be able to find any other answer to this question. The autonomy question will arise again. It will continue to rise, and this is as it should be. The issue cannot be met by an increase in bureaucratism nor by the perpetuation of economic and political ignorance.
 
The Miners and the Elections
This was also evident in the discussion around the resolution On Political Action. Here was a resolution in which Roosevelt was soundly and correctly castigated. But in the same resolution Dewey was just as enthusiastically praised. At the end, however the resolution stated that the union should follow its traditional policy and refrain from making an endorsement. The fact is the resolution did endorse Dewey. But this fact was detected by only a few of the delegates. No delegate rose to question the propriety and the right of Lewis and above all the UMWA Journal to come out with an endorsement of Dewey before the convention and without the consent of the membership of the international.
It is a moot point as to whether or not the convention would have voted to endorse Dewey. There were many delegates who were convinced that had the vote been taken, the overwhelming majority would have been for Dewey. We cannot say anything on this except that if Dewey had been endorsed it would certainly not have betn a pro-Dewey but an anti-Roosevelt vote. In a measure too it would also have been an anti-PAC vote and an anti-CIO vote. One of the tragedies of this situation is that far too many of the miners have the feeling that the CIO is against them. Many of them actually believe that the sentiment of the rank and file in the CIO is against the miners. Of course, nothing is farther from the truth and the leadership of the miners commits a crime against the UMWA, the CIO and the interests of labor when it does not make every effort to dispel this very dangerous illusion.
 
Role of the Negro Delegates
It is necessary to say something on the role of the Negro delegates at the convention. It seemed that there were fewer Negro delegates than at the 1942 convention. Their main interest seemed to be in the autonomy issue. The overwhelming majority of them were opposed to district autonomy. This was strange and disturbing: Negroes opposed to internal democracy in a union and standing against the democratic rights of a union membership! When the matter was discussed with them, however, the whole problem of Jim Crow in the United States stared one in the face. One was confronted with the results of decades of discrimination, insult and segregation. In the minds of these Negro delegates, their opposition to autonomy was itself a part of the struggle for democracy, that is, part of a struggle for their democratic rights in the union, a struggle against discrimination.
They were not talking about their national officers, their district officers or about the general situation in the international. They know better than that. They know their union and its history on this point. They were talking about individual white members of the various locals and groups of such individuals in the various locals. This attitude was held most strongly by Negro delegates from the South. These Negro delegates said that they would get more, that is, more recognition, under the present set-up than under autonomy where district officials are elected and where such elected district officials would have the power to appoint people to important paid posts in the district. What they meant was that the white members would, as a rule, confine their support to white men running for office and that white men would be favored in the making of appointments. To what extent this is true I cannot say. All I can say is that the Negro delegates who opposed autonomy were firm in their convictions on this point.
This issue of course is not confined to the miners. It is a problem of the whole labor movement: North and South; AFL, CIO, railroad brotherhoods and UMWA. And just as is the case with all the other crucial problems of the labor movement, it can only be answered by more education of labor, more struggle together on a militant program and more political education and working class political action.
 
The Question of Strikes
To these adverse criticisms it is necessary to add extremely important praiseworthy considerations. The first is that the convention of the UMWA was the only convention in which no discussion of the no-strike pledge was necessary. The miners had given due consideration to that problem by four strikes in 1943 in which the whole international had participated. Lewis told the convention that on the matter of mine safety it would be necessary for the miners to consider refusing to work in any mine they considered unsafe. The convention instructed the scale committee to include in the coming wage negotiations that: “all explosives, cables, detonators, batteries, fuses and all accessories used in blasting, be furnished by the employers without charge to the mine workers.”
Furthermore, “to insert in the next agreement a provision requiring employers to furnish union-made tools and explosives.” Also, “that it will not be a violation of the wage agreement for the mine workers to cease work to prevent shipment of coal to a consumer whose employees are engaged in a legal strike.”
This, of course, means that the miners are not committed to a no-strike pledge; that if they ever had one they have already repudiated it. It means that the UMWA is committed to proceed with the organization of the duPont powder empire and other sections of the chemical industry. It means further that the UMWA is committed to the organization of machine tool companies supplying tools to the mining industry.
Finally it is worth while to comment on the fact that Lewis remains the undisputed leader of the mine workers, and with their consent. This does not mean that every miner is fully satisfied with the Lewis leadership or that Lewis is not a bureaucrat. What it does mean is that when the miners look at Murray, Thomas, Green and the rest, they know that Lewis stands head and shoulders above the field. They may be for Roosevelt or for Dewey, but it is always Lewis and Roosevelt, or Lewis and Dewey. It’s Lewis first. No one should make a mistake about this or try to fool himself.
 




In his speech to the Foreign Policy Association last Saturday evening, President Roosevelt promised that the German people would not be enslaved by the conquering, victorious Anglo-American allies. The reason given by Mr. Roosevelt for not establishing slavery in Germany was: “the United Nations do not believe in slavery.” Now, since it is clear that in using the word “slavery,” the President was not talking about actual chattel slavery but a form of military rule that would deny democratic right and national independence to the German people, it is important that the working class examine this statement of the President.
He said further that the German people would be given the opportunity, by their conquerors, to climb the steep ascent back into the family of democratic nations. Their rehabilitation would be assisted by taking one burden off their backs: the German people, according to Mr. Roosevelt, will not have to bear arms while they make the ascent. Not only will this assistance be given the Germans immediately following the end of the war, but the attempt will be made to see to it that they never have to bear arms again.
This is something for labor in the United States to think about. If the Germans are kept from having arms someone will have to be armed to enforce this prohibition. Who can this someone be except workers in the United States and England, their sons and their grandsons. The United States is to remain a military camp. Millions of workers are to be retained for years in a permanent standing army. Universal conscription will prevail and every boy as he reaches a certain age will be compelled to take his turn at the job of keeping arms out of the hands of the German and Japanese people.
Mr. Roosevelt did not discuss just how this scheme will work. Suppose the German people should decide that they prefer to make the decision for themselves as to whether or not they want munitions factories and a large army. Suppose one of the “allies” of today, say England or Russia, should decide next year or five years from now that her interests no longer coincide with the decision of today on disarming Germany. What would Mr. Roosevelt or Mr. Dewey and the Republican and Democratic Parties have to offer then?
They would do precisely what imperialists always do when their national and imperialist interests are placed in peril. They would do exactly what they aid in 1918 and in 1941. They would take the country and the working class into the Third Imperialist World War.
This is what is being prepared today. This is the only meaning that can be given to Roosevelt’s speech on relieving the German people of the burden of bearing arms. This would be true whether the President at the time was Roosevelt or Dewey, whether the party in power was the Republican or Democratic Party. And this in fact is what every worker will be voting for on November 7 if he casts a ballot for Roosevelt or Dewey, for the Republican Party or the Democratic Party.
 
What Labor Faces
The necessary domestic policy to fit into the post-war plans of the capitalist ruling class will require a blow at the unions. For the capitalists to get the full measure of profit and plunder, wage reductions wall be necessary in the United States. If you want to reduce wages it is necessary first to weaken or wreck the unions.
Civil liberties and democratic rights carinot be allowed to nourish in a period when the ruling class is out to ransack the whole world, to maintain a huge military establishment, to increase profits, to place the biggest part of the burden on the working class and make them foot the bill. The unions and the working class will resent these encroachments by the capitalist ruling class. All the imperialists know this, whether they are led by Roosevelt or Dewey, the Republican Party or the Democratic Party.
The working class cannot escape this fate unless they are politically organized. The road to political organization of the working class does not lead to the ballot boxes of the two capitalist parties, the parties of Roosevelt and Dewey. The path to political and organizational independence of the working class does not end in any capitalist party but in a class party of labor: a mass party of all the toilers, from the mines, mills and factories, the ships, the fields and the forests.
The Workers Party has long advocated that labor form such a party, a mass labor party based on the trade unions. Of course, such a party cannot be formed before November 7. But this is no reason to vote for Roosevelt or Dewey, the Democratic or the Republican Parties. Why vote for our enemies just because we have been too slow in getting our own party started. Let’s fight, organize and plan TODAY for our own Labor Party. Let’s agitate on November 7 for a party of our own. Not a worker’s vote for Roosevelt! Not a worker’s vote for Dewey!
 
Two “Socialist” Candidates
It is necessary to comment briefly on two other parties that will be on the ballot on November 7. They are the Socialist Party and the Socialist Labor Party. The former is the party of Norman Thomas and he is the party candidate for President. The Socialist Party says that it is for “democratic socialism,” “social ownership,” and many other grand and noble things that all decent human beings want to see achieved. We have to remark, however, that so far as we know there is only one kind of socialism and that is the socialism of the founders of scientific socialism, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels. Socialism is democracy for the reason that in a socialist state the government would represent the majority and not, as in the case of a Roosevelt or Dewey government, the small minority of capitalists and their hangers-on. If a party believes in socialism and the struggle for socialism there is no need to talk about “democratic” socialism, because the heart of socialism is the establishment of genuine democracy and not the fake capitalist democracy of the ruling class and its two parties.
On the point of practical politics for labor, it is necessary to say that a vote for the Socialist Party is a vote for a party that has no roots among the masses, no influence in the labor movement, no adequate program for the problems of labor and which has given no clear indication on how it will achieve what meager and shadowy aims it has announced. The Socialist Party is a confused, semi-pacifist, impotent sect that has not yet been able to take a clear and unequivocal stand against the imperialist war. It is for and against the war; it is for and against peace now.
The Socialist Labor Party is also on the ballot. It represents the utmost in futility, senility and sectarian impotence. For years this diminishing sect had one simple slogan and one only: “capitalism must be destroyed.” For decades they have declared ultimatums in every issue of their paper, for the “unconditional surrender of capitalism.” In the program of this sect it is a waste of time for workers to fight in their unions for “immediate demands,” for “capitalism must be destroyed.” They turn their backs to the labor movement, refuse to carry on a fight for the day-to-day interests of the workers.
Evidently the SLP decided this year that the way to secure the unconditional surrender of capitalism was to invoke the U.S. Constitution. They say in their platform: “the Constitution of the United States provides for its own amendment. The Constitution thereby recognizes and legalizes revolution. The working class, the majority, holds the government in the hollow of its hand. We propose accordingly, that the revolutionary change be effected by the peaceful and civilized means of the ballot.”
The Workers Party believes that Capitalism is a rotten, exploitive and misery-creating Social Order. Capitalism is the perpetrator of imperialist war, colonial slavery and oppression of the working class. But to rid the world of capitalism and imperialism requires the mass political organization of the working Class. This can never be accomplished so long as the overwhelming mass of the workers support the Republican and Democratic Parties and vote for their candidates. That is why the Workers Party proposes the mass independent Labor Party to effect the beginnings of political thinking and class political organization of the workers. That is why the Workers Party enjoins labor to stay away from the polls on November 7 and to use the time in agitation for labor’s own party.
We say again: Not a worker’s vote for Roosevelt or Dewey!
 




In connection with the biennial convention of the coal miners, I wrote last week about the autonomy scramble and the resolution on political action. It is necessary to add a few words on these two important questions. In the first place it is clear how that the attitude of the UMWA leadership in relation to autonomy for the districts was only part of a more general attitude. This more general attitude was the belief of Lewis and the other leaders that at this time a high degree of centralization is necessary in the International during the post-war years.
For instance, the convention accepted the recommendation of the Constitution Committee that international and district officers be elected for four-year terms instead of two, and local officers for two-year terms instead of one as at present.
Furthermore the constitution was amended to have the next “constitutional convention” in 1948 and the next “scale and policy convention” in 1946. This means that for at least four years the membership of the UMWA will not be in position to deal with any matters which require Constitutional change or sanction. Just what is “policy” and where any proposed policy conflicts with the constitution presumably is left to the wisdom of the international board for decision.
 
Autonomy Issue Will Go On
It is my opinion that the autonomy issue will not down in the UMW. As the miners acquire more and more grasp of the fundamental issues facing all labor in the country and begin to learn that if the union is to maintain its strength and prestige, it will be necessary for the present leadership to be strengthened by new people arising out of the ranks. This will not occur under the present method of procedure and the present somewhat bureaucratic set-up, no matter how benevolent, efficient and determined it is to protect the interests of the coal diggers.
One unfortunate situation in the UMWA is the seeming conviction of a large part of the membership that the miners stand alone, as far as the rank and file of the workers in the country go. This, of course, is not true and it does the miners no good for the leadership to foster among them such a distorted picture of labor in the United States. Furthermore, the opposition of Roosevelt and the Roosevelt government to the UMWA is being overstressed and overemphasized. I mean the opposition of Roosevelt is overemphasized in the sense that it is not being made clear to the miners why the Roosevelt government has been so tough on the miners.
It is certainly not clear to the rank and file miner that the Roosevelt government acted as it did in 1943 because the UMWA was the only labor union which was challenging the government and the capitalist employers. The Roosevelt government attempted to break the UMWA because this union by its actions was upsetting the wage-freeze applecart and in fact repudiating the no-strike pledge. Its leader, Lewis, unlike Murray, Green and Thomas, did not rush from mine to mine exhorting the men to return to work.
The mine strikes of 1943 were political strikes; they were strikes that might have brought the whole labor movement into rapid and militant action.
Strike, a Political Fight
A capitalist government will not tolerate political strikes, if it can help itself, not even in peacetime. The fact which the miners must learn sooner or later is that the same treatment would have been handed out to the automobile workers or the shipyard workers if they had done the same thing. It is a safe guess to say that if the automobile workers had walked out in a mass, as did the miners, and Thomas had acted in the same way that Lewis did, the attitude of Roosevelt and the government would have been worse than it was with the miners. The Roosevelt government attempted to bust the UMWA because it feared that the actions of he miners would inspire other workers to follow suit.
For the miners to believe that what was done to them was occasioned by some personal dislike of Lewis on Roosevelt’s part or in a fit of petulance by Davis, “the little patent lawyer,” is to miss what is really important and fundamental in the whole situation. And for the UMWA to attempt to solve the problem by flying into the arms of Dewey and the Republican Party is a tragedy from which these workers will suffer for years to come.
The Republican Party, if it had been in office, would have acted precisely as did Roosevelt. When dealing with a militant and fighting union, coal operators, automobile manufacturers or steel companies do not function as Republican or Democrats but as capitalist employers. They do not look to see whether the name is UMWA, UAW, AFL or CIO. They do not care whether the leader’s name is Lewis, Green, Murray or Tobin. They consider only what is being done, what action is taking place and act accordingly to protect their class interests. I say again that the government was not concerned with Murray and Green because Murray and Green were bootlicking around the White House while the miners were, to a man, refusing to “work without a contract.”
The steel workers’ contract expired last December and they asked for a seventeen-cent increase. They did not get it. They remained at work and are still at work. Why should Roosevelt, the steel companies and the capitalist press be worried about Murray and the steel workers? Capitalist employers and capitalist Presidents do not concern themselves to try to smash unions that give them ho trouble.
The miners and all other labor organizations have to learn and understand that it is the strength of the labor movement and not its weakness that makes capitalist employers and capitalist governments organize campaigns of union wrecking. The UMWA began a struggle last year. They have not completed that struggle yet. They will have many more days of “refusing to work without a contract.” This is recognized in the scale resolution approved by the convention and which contains the following wage agreement proposals:

All explosives, cables, detonators, batteries, fuses and all accessories used in blasting be furnished by the employers without charge to the mine workers.
 
To limit the number of supervisory and technical employees exempted in the wage agreement and provide for their proper classification in the wage schedule.
 
To insert in the next agreement a provision requiring the employers to furnish union-made tools and explosives.
 
That it will not be a violation of the wage agreement for the mine workers to cease work to prevent shipment of coal to a consumer whose employees are engaged in a legal strike.

To this must be added the statement of Lewis that the time has come for the miners to refuse to work in a mine that is not considered safe.
This is a militant program such as has been adopted by no union in any convention that has been held so far. But do Lewis and the rank and file militants among the miners have any childish illusions that such a correct and militant program will endear the UMWA to Dewey and the Republican Party?
It would be very embarrassing to Governor Dewey and to Lewis also for the Governor to be asked in a public meeting what he thinks of these UMWA proposals. It would be embarrassing to Lewis, because Dewey could not support such proposals any more than could Roosevelt.
In an important sense these proposals are anti-capitalist in that they would tend to promote the militant solidarity of labor. Furthermore, the implication in paragraph (c) is that the UMWA plans to organize the duPont empire and the companies making mining tools and machinery.
A highlight of the convention was the exchange of telegrams between the Interior Department and the UMWA. We only have space for some of the best paragraphs from these replies of the convention.
*
First Telegram to Ickes
The Secretary of the Interior
Washington, D.C.
Your telegram addressed to the president of this union has been referred to the delegates of this convention for action and reply. We do not like the anonymity of the message. We think you should sign your name to messages bearing your title ... We note what the message says about the legal strike of supervisors at certain mines. We have been trying to be helpful on this matter; and our officers, too. The trouble as you know is the pulling and hauling of the various government agencies, all at cross purposes, and each issuing orders that conflict with the other. We think one of the main troubles is that Park Avenue fellow, the big industry patent man, named Davis, who always has his knife out for our union and our officers. He is always having the President sign something which causes more trouble. The clerical, technical and supervisory employees in the mines are getting a rotten deal from the government. This, of course, follows the rotten deal which the government gave to all the coal miners in 1943 and 1944 ... YOU know, Mr. Secretary of the Interior, the coal miners are doing a job producing coal to win the war; they are buying bonds, too. We hope you will study the record on these facts. With nearly 300,000 less men employed in the anthracite and the bituminous industries, we will produce this year nearly 45,000,000 tons more than was produced in the war year of 1918.
This brings up another question about how our men are being killed off in the coal industry. The records of this convention reveal that there were more than 276,000 casualties in the coal industry in the four years 1940–43, inclusive. The ratio of accidents is increasing and in this year of 1944 every ton of coal will be smeared with mine workers’ blood. The President is now seizing a lot of coal mines, and you, Mr. Secretary of Interior, are supposed to be operating them. We know that this government seizure and operation are a farce and is merely a device on the part of the President and the coal operators to defeat the aims of the coal miners and to deprive them of their rights. We think, however, that as long as you purport to operate these mines you should keep them safe. The United States Bureau of Mines, which is under your orders, have authority under a federal statute to inspect that mines at will. As government operator of coal mines, you have the authority to instruct coal operators to make immediately effective each and every order and recommendation of the inspectors of the United States Bureau of Mines. Why not do so and save the lives of some human beings, so that we can continue to produce coal for the war effort? We urge you to order a rigid forthwith inspection of each coal mine which the government has pretended to seize and ask that you publicly direct the coal operators in these mines to make the safety findings of the federal inspectors effective. This will help a lot and will restore confidence to thousands of mine Workers now who have ho confidence in the non-union supervisors, who are joining with the coal operators and agencies of government to fight our union.
*
Second Telegram to Ickes
Honorable Harold L. Ickes
Secretary of the Interior
Washington, D.C.
Your wire. You do not seem to understand that our telegram to you was adopted by the unanimous standing vote of 2,700 delegates elected by the mine workers of the nation in their home communities. This convention is the supreme authority of the union. We are the employers of John Lewis and he is responsive to our orders. While this convention is in session we will answer his telegram if we elect to do so. When we go home you can move in on him if you desire, but watch your guard and protect your wind – protect your wind. We think that he will go around you like a cooper around a barrel. We told you in our message that we are trying to be helpful. Our officers too.
Your suggestion that we do not keep our agreement is an insult to every mine worker in the nation. We have an unbroken record of fifty-four years of meticulous observance and punctilious regard for the sanctity of contracts. Your statement that the mine workers could produce more coal is based on absolute ignorance of mining practice and is a display of personal malice unbecoming a cabinet officer.
No, Harold, our message was not political. Bread and butter are not political. Dead men in coal mines are not political. The tears of women and the cries of children around blasted mine tipples are not political, Harold. They are elemental human considerations that the shallow vaporings of professional politicians cannot hold in check.
The mine workers of this country, through this convention, are asking for fair treatment from you who are a public officer grown fat in public office.
Do they get it, Harold – do they get it?
Signed – Thirty-eighth constitutional Convention, United Mine Workers of America
 

   The CIO Union News service announces jubilantly that the United states Chamber of Commerce, through its board of directors, has unanimously approved the labor-management charter which was signed by Murray, Green and Eric Johnston. The News Service says that“this decision will stimulate local chambers to meet with labor leaders on local levels to promote such charters in their communities.” Thus does the open betrayal of labor by the top labor bureaucracy go its class-collaborationist way. Philip Murray evidently believes that he has proposed something new. Bill Green certainly knows better, since he is an offspring of Sam Gompers, who, along with Mark Hanna, headed the National Civic Federation many decades ago. The National Civic Federation was only a more honest edition of the ever-recurring scheme for labor-capitalist cooperation than is this latest brew of Green, Murray and Johnston. Old Sam Gompers came right out with it. He mouthed none of Murray’s pious vapor and none of Green’s blockhead whimpering. He said frankly that strikes were out of style and that the time had come for labor and capital to draw together around the council table and arrive at decisions in the mutual interests of both classes. Murray talks about “labor” and “management”’just as though he believed that foremen and the little executives in industry could settle the disputes between the workers and the corporations. One would never guess that there were bond-holders, big stockholders, bankers and other loafers and non-producers who are the real culprits the working people have to deal with. That is, the working class has to deal with the capitalist ruling class as a class.   A Sage Saying Years ago Frederick Engels, the collaborator and friend of Karl Marx, wrote that people had been advocating the unity of capital and labor for many years but the working class was right where it was before visionaries, labor traitors and muddle-heads received their harmony revelations. What Engels said over fifty years ago is just as true today. There can be no such thing as a charter between capitalist and worker unless the worker agrees to give the capitalist full right to starve him and his family. In every local where this capitalist-labor charter fakery appears it should be promptly and rudely assigned to the garbage pail. Murray has something more up his sleeve than his CIO-Chamber of Commerce scheme for benefitting the working class. He has given his steel workers some advice on how to keep employed, when cutbacks come and “reconversion” begins, the steel workers are to hold“plant-wide meetings; discussion on employment possibilities;consultation with management for reconversion to civilian production;rousing of community sentiment for the use of plants heretofore only with a war production history for civilian production; meeting with municipal and civil authorities, chambers of commerce and associations of manufacturers for full production and full employment in the industries located there.” We are, for some of these things mentioned above, but taken together they sound like recommendations to the Boy Scouts or to the Federation of Women’s Clubs. Altogether they add up to zero. We wonder why “labor-management committee.” The working class has all that we need to handle this matter of“reconversion” save one thing: a working class program and a leadership with the guts to fight with the ranks of labor for the program. The workers would follow if they only had somebody to follow that was going somewhere except to Truman and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. The way to keep a job is to keep it: Workers can’t keep their jobs if they allow themselves to be put out of’ plants.They won’t get their jobs by holding long conferences with“municipal and civic authorities” and “associations of manufacturers.” It’s all right to negotiate with employers or the employers’ government while the masses of workers are sitting in the plants, but to hold conferences in the manner suggested by Murray will get labor nowhere but into the soup lines.   
    The Foster-Browder Debate and the “New Turn” in the CPA, Labor Action, Vol. 9 No. 25, 18 June 1945, pp. 1 & 4. The new eruption now making its way through the top of the Communist Political Association (Communist Party) over the Duclos “disclosures” has come before the public in a“programmatic” statement contained in a resolution by the National Board. All of the board except Browder voted for the resolution. The majority includes such political contortionists as William Z. Foster, Robert Minor and Roy Hudson. Public “discussion” on the questions under dispute inbeing carried on in the Daily Worker and the Sunday Worker. So far the leading protagonists of the two points of view are Browder and Foster. It seems, from surface indications, that Foster is the leader of the “opposition” while Browder remains the sole defender of the wartime line of the American Stalinists. Both have expressed their points of view in writing. Both groups are resorting to “self-criticism.” The Foster group accuses Browder of “errors” and“revisionism.” Foster says that Browder has taken the position that “capitalism is now progressive ... Comrade Browder’s theories violated many basic principles of Marxism-Leninism. They were a complete departure from Lenin’s analysis of the present imperialist stage of capitalism.” What were some of the “errors” and “revisionist ideas” of Browder? Support of the Second Imperialist World War?No, that was not an error. That was not a “complete departure from Lenin’s analysis of the present imperialist stage of capitalism, ” according to the Foster group. Did Browder’s “revisionism” reside in the fact that, he advocated the support of Roosevelt? No, because “our general wartime policy of supporting the Roosevelt Administration was correct.” Then what was the “error”? According to the new streamlined Marxism-Leninism of the Foster group it was “under Browder’s influence, of failing to criticize many errors and shortcomings of the Roosevelt government.” And what was one of these “errors” of the Roosevelt Administration? Nothing less than “our recent defense of the appointment of Stettinius, a reactionary, as Secretary of State.” Roosevelt, you see, should have appointed a “progressive” as Secretary of State, say Mayor Hague of Jersey city (who was supported by the CP)or Dan Tobin of the Teamsters Union, who last year was taken to the bosom of the Stalinists, Foster, Minor, Hudson and the others. Was one of Browder’s “errors” the fact that he did not call upon labor to break with the Republican and Democratic Parties and with the Roosevelt Administration? Was Browder, according to Foster, a revisionist because he failed to call upon labor to resort to independent political action under its own banner and form an independent Labor Party? No, this was not Browder’s error. He erred in that he did not “demand that organized labor be admitted into the Roosevelt government on a coalition basis”;Browder did not demand that labor “be given adequate representation in the Roosevelt cabinet.” The Foster group saw this coalition work so beautifully in the War Labor Board, in which labor had representation. They conclude that the Roosevelt cabinet was the next place to try this noble experiment. Was Browder a “revisionist” because he did not call for the expropriation of the “Sixty Families, ” the conscription of the war industries, the nationalization of the banks, the big industrial monopolies and transportation systems? These were the demands put forward by the “Trotskyist” Workers Party during the Second Imperialist World War. But this failure was not Browder’s “error, ” according to the Foster faction in Stalin’s American party.  Tweedledum-Tweedledee Browder’s “revision of Marxism-Leninism” was that he failed to “attack the trusts as such.” He was very cool to demands inside the leadership that the party should stand firm for the regulation of the big monopolies; not to “give the monopolists a free hand” and not “to leave the people at their mercy.” Browder was only for those “regulations of monopoly practices” to which “the monopolists themselves should agree.” Foster could not agree to this. He stood firmly on the foundations of “Marxism-Leninism, ” the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Federal. Power Commission and the Interstate Commerce Commission. The Foster group stands solidly with the trust-busters of all the ages. None of the Browder kind of“revisionism” for them. They have their own kind. The Foster New Order “Marxism-Leninism” discovered that Browder showed a “desire not to offend the big capitalists.” “Frankness compels the admission, ”says Foster, “that Roosevelt, Wallace, Murray and others did a better job at exposing the reactionary content of this big business slogan than Comrade Browder did.” This is the “content”of the Foster-Minor-Hudson line. Roosevelt was more “progressive”than Browder. Roosevelt exposed the reactionaries of big business. Roosevelt was for capitalism and the war and so was Browder (and Foster), but Roosevelt was there progressive in his defense of the war and capitalism. Roosevelt was for incentive pay and so was Browder (and Foster), but Roosevelt was progressive while Browder was in error. Roosevelt demanded a no-strike pledge and so did Browder(and Foster), but Browder was wrong and Roosevelt right. Foster writes that Browder made an “attempt to exorcise imperialism out of existence.” This is the “Marxist-Leninist”Foster of the present factional dispute in the Stalinist ranks. But Foster wrote a pamphlet in 1942 entitled: Labor and the War.In this pamphlet, Foster wrote: “This is a just war; one which the peoples of the world must support with every ounce of their strength. It is a fundamentally different type of war than that of 1914–18, when the struggle was between two rival groups of imperialist power.” (Emphasis mine. – D.C.) And Foster talks about Browder’s attempt to “exorcise imperialism.” This is not an imperialist war, said Foster in January 1942, it is a “great war for national liberation.”  Tweedledee-Tweedledum What was Browder saying about the war and imperialism in this same year of 1942? In July 1942, Browder said in a. speech, “Victory Must Be Won”: “With full faith in the justness of the United Nations cause, as a people’s war of national liberation;with full faith that our own true national interests coincide with those of other peoples, ” etc., etc. Browder and Foster were saying the identical things in the very same words. And Minor, who now agrees with Foster, was the chairman of the meeting at which Browder made this speech. Minor said in part: “... It is fitting to present a great American who clearly foresaw the crisis in which our beloved country is now fighting for its life ... we welcome back to his place of active leadership a true leader of the great American people, a great American patriot.” Also it should be remarked that up to the time of the “new turn” Minor was one of the staunchest defenders of the war as a“sacred war” and wrote theoretical articles explaining and defending “Browder’s line.” To be sure, Foster did not always think and write as he did in1942. He held a different view in 1941. In that year he wrote in his pamphlet Socialism that “The Roosevelt Administration, despite its peace promises, has steadily pushed the United States deeper into the war.” He called the lend-lease bill the“war-dictatorship bill.” (This is the precise description of the bill used in a streamer headline by the Chicago Tribune.)Foster in 1941 goes on to say that the purpose of the bill “is to set up a military dictatorship in this country and to plunge us fully into the war.” Furthermore, “American imperialism – the great capitalist interests and the Roosevelt government, supported by renegade liberals, pro-war Social-Democrat sand reactionary trade union leaders – has no less mercenary objective than Britain and Germany in this war.” Was Foster in disagreement with Browder in 1941? He was not. Foster’s pamphlet quoted above was written in March 1941. But in January 1941, Browder wrote a pamphlet entitled The Way Out of the Imperialist War. In this pamphlet Browder said: “President Roosevelt has submitted to Congress what is called a ‘defense budget.’ ... It is for defense only in a very special sense that it is a ‘defense’ of the ambitions of Wall street, of the Sixty Families.” In this pamphlet Browder called Roosevelt a demagogue and added that “... America is in the imperialist war for imperialist aims despite all the chatter and prattle about ‘liberty’and ‘democracy.’” “Monopoly capital”was the “real ‘fifth column.’” And in this pamphlet Browder talks about “Roosevelt’s war dictatorship” just as Foster was to repeat two months later inSocialism.   “New Turn” of the Communists – II, Labor Action, Vol. IX No. 27, 2 July 1945, p. 4 In discussing the new ferment in the Stalinist Communist Party in the United States, which William Z. Foster calls the return to“Marxism-Leninism, ” we compared the record and writings of Foster for the past few years with those of Earl Browder. The printed record reveals no fundamental difference. On the contrary, it reveals that Foster and his friends were in full accord with Browder(and Stalin) on every important and significant question. Foster, Minor and Hudson agreed with Browder on the Stalin-Hitler pact. They agreed with Molotov that “Hitlerism ... is a matter of taste.” They were completely satisfied with the position of Browder in1939 that there was little difference between the government of Great Britain and the United States on one side and the government of Germany on the other. In 1941 they agreed with Browder that the war was an “imperialist war.” In 1942, when Browder (and Stalin) decided that it was no longer an imperialist war, but that the U.S. was fighting for national liberation, Foster rushed to the side of Browder and Minor and added that “this is a sacred war.” But now Foster, Minor, Hudson and the rest of the “majority”discover that they were “misled” by Browder. They reach back into 1939 and come up with a stinking Stalinist concoction which Foster has the brazenness to label“Marxism-Leninism.” Although Browder had no such intentions, in his reply to the Fosterites he objectively exposes the quality of the Foster-Minor-Hudson Marxism. Foster accuses Browder of flirting with capitalism and leading the CP into reformism. Browder quotes from an article by Foster in the June 1945 number of Political Affairs (the CP substitute for the Communist International, monthly magazine published up to. the time the GPU took the“dissolved” Third International underground), as follows: “By far not all American capitalists favor a policy of aggressive imperialist expansion. Large numbers of them follow the general Roosevelt line. These more far-sighted elements among the capitalists, the Kaisers, Krugs, Nelsons, etc., realizing that their class interests dovetail with the nation’s interests ... are accepting the general policies laid down at Teheran and Yalta.” Browder comments as follows on the Foster position that there are good and bad capitalists: “The true understanding of American imperialism and American imperialist policy is that it is represented not only in Vandenberg and du Pont, but is equally represented in the Kaisers, Krugs and Nelsons.” Browder adds that the Kaisers, Krugs and Nelsons are the true representatives of the interests of their class, ”whereas the Vandenbergs and du Ponts “fail to see the true interests of their own class.” We are certain that every worker will be profoundly touched by this question: which group of capitalists truly represents the interests of the capitalist class? This is one of the. things Browder and his “opponent” Foster are quarreling about. Far more important, however, is the fact that Foster, who accuses Browder of “revisionism and a departure from Marxism, ”attempts to discover good and bad capitalists. Kaiser, according to Foster, is better for the working class than du Pont, Nelson is better than Ford, Krug is better than Vandenberg. This is Foster’s “Marxism-Leninism.”Every worker who has toiled in the mines, mills and factories knows that this is pure rubbish. “Not all American capitalists favor a policy of aggressive imperialist expansion.” What other kind of imperialism is there except aggressive imperialism? Imperialism means to seize, to suppress and exploit colonial and small nations and their peoples for the benefit of an imperialist capitalist ruling class. The oppression and exploitation is accompanied by armies and navies with all the weapons at their command. Has Foster ever seen a pacifist, or meek, or modest imperialism? British, perhaps? Or American? Or Russian?  Where Was Disagreement? At what other point does Foster disagree with Browder? He and Browder disagree on the possibilities of “socialism in our country.” Foster charges Browder with the “curt dismissal of the whole question of socialism in our country, not only as an immediate political issue (in which he was correct) but also in the sense of mass education (in which he was wrong).” When did Foster find himself in disagreement on this important question? When was Foster advocating mass education in socialism? In his pamphlet Socialism, issued in March, 1941, Foster talked about socialism. “There is no system of society except socialism that can free humanity ... In a socialist America the people will enjoy freedom in its fullest sense and also the material well-being which must serve as its base ... To grease the chute for our final plunge into the war, the war-mongers are asserting that this is a war to save democracy ... What a familiar stench that ‘argument’has. It was a lie in 1917 ... and it is a lie now .... “John L. Lewis was correct in charging that there are 52, 000, 000 shrunken bellies in this country ... TheRoosevelt government, the spearhead of American imperialism, is leading this work of reaction behind a mask of progressive phrases... ”Capitalist exploitation of the workers and farmers is ... the basic cause of war ... “The New Deal Administration, obeying the dictate of Wall Street, has abandoned its makeshift’pump-priming and is going the way of all capitalism, into wholesale munitions production and war ... “The dictatorship of the proletariat ... is therul2 of the workers and peasants ... “Only by militant struggle can the workers and their farmer and other allies protect themselves from the ever-increasing evils of hunger, fascism and war ... They should support the right to strike by fighting against all anti-strike legislation, by repudiating in action the no-strike policies of their leaders.” Thus wrote Foster in March 1941, Was he to the “left”of Browder? Was his pamphlet Socialism a polemic against Browder or against Browder “errors” and “revisionism”?The record is against Foster, for in January 1941 Browder wrote in his pamphlet, The Way Out of the Imperialist War, as follows: “Today in the midst of the second imperialist war, we commemorate Lenin by applying his teachings ... The Roosevelt Administration is about to enter into military action which cannot but be directed against Ireland ... The war administration of Roosevelt arrogates to itself the right to enclose the whole hemisphere in its control ... This is not democracy. This is imperialism.”   Communist “New Turn” – III, Labor Action, Vol. IX No. 28, 9 July 1945, p. 3 As we demonstrated last week, Foster & Co. were marching arm in arm with Browder and without protest up to the time of the appearance of the Duclos article. They knew better than to protest even if they actually disagreed because they were fully aware where the position taken by Browder came from. Stalin’s GPU representative was always present to see to it that Browder and all the rest carried out the decisions of the Kremlin. This of course is what makes the feeble protestations of Foster appear so ridiculous and puerile today. Foster did not decide his “line” in1941 or 1942 and he is not deciding it day.  Russian Line Dominated Right here it is necessary to inject one observation lest threader get the impression, from the above quotations, that either Foster or Browder was a revolutionist or a communist in the period between the signing of the Stalin-Hitler pact and the German invasion of Russia in June 1941. Despite the fact that the CP leadership could write so radically during that period, it was only a spurious radicalism. Its function was to harass the American capitalists and government, in the interest of the pact which Stalin had made with Hitler. After the attack on Russia, the CP leadership threw off even this spurious radicalism and openly embraced a program of full, complete and uncritical support of capitalism, the Roosevelt government and imperialist war. The Foster line today is in all essentials a return to the spurious radicalism of the period of the Stalin-Hitler pact. And for the identical reason: the protection of the bureaucratic and reactionary interests of the Kremlin. This will be brought out clearly when we examine the recent resolution of the Foster majority:The Present Situation and the Next Tasks. For the moment this point can be illustrated by Foster’s comment on Browder’s stand on “socialism in our country.”Foster wrote that Browder was “correct” to take the position that socialism was not an immediate political issue. This is Foster’s position in 1945. But it was not his position in March1941, as the quotations above proved. In his pamphlet Socialism, socialism WAS an “immediate political issue.” He even went so far as to discuss the “dictatorship of the proletariat.” Socialism was the only way out for the American working class. And Browder, in his writings, was in full agreement with Foster. Roosevelt drew the country into war “by the Hitlerian tactic of concentrating upon a single step at a time ... We Communists conspire only in the open, as the sun conspires against darkness and night ... The present imperialist war will be brought to an end by ... revolution in one or more of the major countries of Europe ... The destruction of these democratic rights is an inseparable part of the Roosevelt ‘power’ bill.” (The word “power”here is really a quotation from the Chicago Tribune.) After June 1941 (when Hitler invaded Russia) Foster changed his line. (Or better, Stalin changed HIS line.) Not only was socialism not an “immediate political issue” but even the suggestion that the working class should resort to independent political action (as proposed by the Workers Party) and form a Labor Party was viciously opposed by Browder and Foster together. Foster writes today that Browder was wrong in his opposition to the use of mass education to teach workers the principles of socialism. But when were Foster and Browder in disagreement on this point? There is no record of such disagreement. Did Poster write his pamphlet Labor and the War in 1942 to give the working class some socialist education? “This is a just war ...” said Foster in that pamphlet. “Attempts of ... pseudo-socialists ...to condemn this war also as an imperialist war constitute help to Hitler.”  Misleading the Workers How could the worker members of the CP understand this man or their party when just the year before he had compared the Roosevelt Administration with that of Woodrow Wilson. In March 1941 he wrote:“What a deadly parallel it makes with World War today.”Roosevelt, wrote Foster, was leading us along the same “fatal path” as Wilson “with even more ghastly results in prospect.” The record is clear and we remember it. It is in print for every worker to read, over and over. It exists in every union and in every organization where the Stalinists were permitted entry and tolerated. In their craven and debauched support of the imperialist war, in their depraved and brazen fight for the continuation of the infamous no-strike pledge, in their advocacy of piecework wages(incentive pay!), in their organized orgy for the complete subordination of the unions to the capitalist employers and the Roosevelt government, the Fosters, Browders, Minors and Hudsons and all the rest of the Stalinist leadership do not appear before the working class with clean hands. They are dripping, not with the blood of capitalism and imperialism, but with the blood of the working class!   Communist New Turn – IV, Labor Action, Vol. IX No. 29, 16 July 1945, p. 4. In previous articles we have dealt with the question of the various positions which Foster and his group assumed in line with the demands of the Kremlin bureaucrats and murderers. We have demonstrated, right out of the writings of Foster, that he had no fundamental differences with Browder; that he did not have any political line different from Browder; that Browder and the whole crew received the line for their politics and their trade union activities from Stalin. All of them together cried “Me, too” when Stalin signed a pact with fascism; when Stalin said “this is an imperialist war”; or when he changed the line and said “this's a sacred war”; when he ordered the American Stalinists one year to organize strikes and the following year to support the no-strike pledge. All of them fell into line without a murmur of dissent when Stalin was against Roosevelt. They were just as fervent in support of Roosevelt when Stalin, for his own reasons, decided to go all-out for Roosevelt. The Workers Party has explained again and again in Labor Actionwhy this is so; that the antics of the Stalinist parties is decided by Stalin in line with the foreign policy of the Russian bureaucracy. This foreign policy is always decided by the needs of these bureaucrats in their frantic efforts to hold on to power in Russia and to keep the Russian workers suppressed and enslaved. Stalin is never concerned with the welfare of the working class or the trade union movement anywhere. Now Foster and Browder have a falling out. The sparks are flying in the Daily Worker. They are having a “discussion, ”a period of “self-criticism.” Browder is a “revisionist”and Minor is filled with “prattle.” What we must not forget is that what we have here is the hand of Foster but the voice of Stalin. It is an Edgar Bergen-Charlie McCarthy act. The Foster “majority” has published a new program; The Present Situation and the Next Tasks. We are going to examine this “new program” in detail. We are going to find out what, if anything, is new. We are going to discuss this new trap the Stalinists have prepared for the working class in the United States.  The “New” Line The draft resolution which contains the program starts off with a lie and goes on to another and still others. “The military defeat of Nazi Germany ... has already brought forth a new anti-fascist unity of the peoples in Europe marked by the formation in a number of countries of democratic governments representative of the will of the people.” Where has this taken place? In Italy? Poland? Greece? Rumania? Czecho-Slovakia? Hungary? France? In no country in Europe, France included, is there a government “representative of the will of the people.” Greece is under the domination of Churchill’s tanks dripping with the blood of the Greek workers in order to guarantee the payment of the interest on the 100 million pounds owed by Greece to the British imperialist Hambro Bank. Where is there any government in Italy “representative of the will” of the Italian people? Do the British and American imperialist armies represent the will of the Italian people? The bloody sword of Stalin hangs over the Polish, Rumanian and Yugo-Slav peoples. These puppet regimes are undoubtedly what the CPA resolution has in mind when it speaks of “democratic governments.” Was the reactionary monarchist, De Gaulle, doing the will of the French people when the resistance movements were disarmed, scattered and pushed into the background as though it was they who had collaborated with the French and German fascists? Do the broken down kings, queens and other royalty who have returned or will return to Belgium, The Netherlands, Norway and Denmark, represent the “will of the people” of these countries?These are scoundrels and cowards, who deserted “my people”ran off to London and New York, and left the people to be trampled under by the fascist barbarians. There are no governments in Europe “representative of the will of the people.” The government of Europe are regimes imposed on the people by the Anglo-American-Russian imperialist conquerors. These regimes are supported and maintained by the armed might and the espionage systems of these conquerors. The statement of the Foster (Stalin) resolution is a lie. It is a lie told to delude, mislead and drug the working class in the United States so that the workers may continue to support American imperialism. The resolution states that a “sustained struggle” must be carried on toward the “complete destruction of fascism in Europe and throughout the world ...” Why? “... because the extremely powerful reactionary forces in the United States and England, which are centered in the trusts and cartels, are striving to reconstruct Europe on a reactionary basis ... the most aggressive circles of American imperialism are endeavoring to secure for themselves political and economic domination in the world.” This is the new Foster-Stalin program. The reactionary forces in the United States are not centered in capitalism and imperialism as such, but only in the biggest capitalists. It is only the “most aggressive circles of American imperialism” which want to dominate the world. What is capitalism today but the trusts and cartels? What are the aggressive circles of imperialism? Is there such a thing as a non-aggressive imperialism? Passive imperialists?Good imperialists?  Foster’s “Old” Line Does any worker think that it is the little grocer or the five-acre farmer who is out to “dominate the world?” Did Foster believe in September 1941 that the “most aggressive circles of American imperialism” were not after “domination in the world” when he wrote: “What before was an imperialist war has now become a war for the freedom and independence of all nations and peoples.” Then the imperialists, even“the most aggressive circles” were fighting not for world dominion but for national independence. That is, the U.S. did not have its national independence in 1941 and had to fight for it. The Foster line in 1942 was for saving the cartels and trusts. If Hitler should win “the capitalists would have their power clipped, their profits slashed ... It was thus that Foster moaned for the poor cartels and trusts. But as for the workers, they too must protect themselves “by the avoidance of strikes.” Foster urged the workers “to do their share ... not to strike while the war emergency lasts ... this decision should be adhered to strictly throughout the ranks of labor.”   Communist New Turn – V, Labor Action, Vol. IX No. 30, 23 July 1945, p. 4. Among the horrible things contemplated by “American Big Business, ’’ according to the “new turn”resolution of the Foster (Stalin) faction in the Communist Political Association, is the prevention of “a truly democratic and anti-fascist Europe in which the people will have the right to freely choose their own forms of government and social system ... Washington together with London is pursuing the dangerous policy of preventing a strong, united and democratic China; while they bolster up the reactionary, incompetent Chiang Kai-shek regime ...” The Foster resolution says that Washington and London act in the manner they do because they are under the influence of “American Big Business.” That’s true. That’s why the war is being fought: to establish the domination of “American Big Business, ” the ruling class in the United States, over Europe and the rest of the world. Throughout the course of this Second Imperialist World War, the Workers Party pointed this out to workers, week in and week out in the columns of Labor Action.The Workers Party said that this is not a war for democracy, it is not a war against fascism – it is an imperialist war. An imperialist war between two groups of imperialist nations:Anglo-American capitalist imperialism on one side and German-Japanese fascist imperialism on the other. The Workers Party said that Russia was engaging in the war in one of the imperialist camps: the Anglo-American camp. What was the Workers Party basing itself on when it made this analysis? The WP was basing itself on the principles of revolutionary socialism: primarily on the teachings of Marx, Engels and Lenin. The WP was basing itself on the teachings and writings of Leon Trotsky, co-organizer with Lenin of the October Bolshevik revolution, organizer of the real Red Army. (Not the present-day Stalinist Russian Army.) It was this Red Army under Trotsky which defeated all the Russian reactionaries as well as their supporters from the outside, led by Great Britain and the United States.  CP Attacks Trotskyites What did the Browder-Foster Communist Party say about the position of the Workers Party on the war? It is all summed up in a pamphlet by George Morris entitled: The Trotskyite 5th Column in the Labor Movement. This pamphlet was issued January 1945. What was a “5th Columnist” according to the Browder-Foster(Stalin) line of six months ago? The Trotskyites “Oppose the war ... Oppose national unity ... Oppose labor’s wartime no-strike pledge ... Concentrate fire chiefly upon President Roosevelt and the other Big Three United Nations leaders ...”The Workers Party called for “nationalization of all industry”under “workers control.” The WP said that Roosevelt was“a spokesman for ‘Wall Street’ and ‘American imperialism.’” The Foster-Browder Stalinists disagreed with all of this. They supported the war. (After June 1941.) They acted like a vast spy agency, like secret police in support of the no-strike pledge. They supported and fought for the speed-up with their“incentive pay” program. They supported the WLB, scabbed on the Montgomery Ward strike, called for the guarantee to England that she would not lose her foreign trade, demanded that venin the post-war period labor should agree not to strike. These are the people who are talking today about what“American Big Business” is doing and planning to do. The Foster group, just as Browder, supported big business and imperialism throughout the war. They were concerned about big business profits and England’s foreign trade. They wanted labor to guarantee this by submitting completely to Roosevelt and the big business which he represented. They have been doing everything in their power during the war to guarantee that the peoples Europe will be under the domination of “American Big Business” and the GPU of Stalin. The Foster program pretends great concern over the fate of China. “Washington” and “London” are preventing a “united and democratic China, ” they “bolster up the reactionary ... Chiang Kai-Shek.” Is this anything new?Haven’t Washington and London always been enemies of a united and democratic China? Did not Foster know this when he was going into one tail-spin after the other about support of the war? Of course he did.  Hypocrisy in China Furthermore Foster evidently believes that we have very short memories or that all the written records of history have been destroyed. Who is chiefly responsible for Chiang Kai-Shek being in power in China today? Stalin and his yes men in the Communist parties of the world. During the Chinese revolution of 1927–28 it was Stalin who ordered the Chinese Communist Party, right on the eve of the victory of the Chinese workers over their oppressors, to liquidate itself into the Kuomintang of Chiang Kai-Shek. In the months following, Chiang Kai-Shek butchered and murdered hundreds of Chinese communists and revolutionary workers. And now Foster steps forth dripping with the blood of the Chinese working class to tell us that “London” and“Washington” support a reactionary Chiang Kai-Shek. We say that their blood is on the head of Foster because he did not oppose this monstrous policy of Stalin. He went along with it, just as did Browder and Minor and all the crowd that today is yelling for the scalp of the weasel-worded Browder. Stalin sold out and betrayed the Chinese workers just as he sold out and betrayed the Spanish workers during the Spanish Civil War and the working class in the United States during the present war. * The Foster resolution tells us that “Reactionary forces – especially the NAM and their representatives in Congress – are planning a new open-shop drive to weaken or smash the trade unions ...” Since we are at the end of our space we will take this up next week. It is necessary to remark, however, that no mention is made of the United States Chamber of Commerce. We suppose that the C of C and its president, Mr. Eric Johnston, represent what Foster calls “the good capitalists.”   



After its success in pushing General Motors Corporation into a corner, throwing obstacles in the path of the anti-labor capitalist press and placing itself in a favorable tactical position before the “public,” the UAW, as a final conciliatory step, made a proposal to General Motors for “voluntary arbitration” of the strike dispute. The union made the offer of arbitration just one day before the strike took place, setting as the deadline for the corporation’s reply, 4:00 p.m., Tuesday, November 20. The only reply received from the company was an acknowledgment of the UAW arbitration proposal and the statement that its reply would be ready Friday, November 24. The company having failed to reply by the time set by the union, the strike went into effect the morning of Wednesday, November 21.
The UAW arbitration letter included the following:


The parties submit this dispute to a three-man board of arbitration composed of one representative of management (the corporation), one representative of labor and a chairman selected by the other two members.
 


The board of arbitration shall have full access to the books, records and other documents of both parties which, in the judgment of the board, are essential to an intelligent and factual solution of the dispute.
 


The board of arbitration shall make a final and binding decision of this dispute ... We challenge you to match our action in relinquishing use of the strike by laying the arithmetic of this wage dispute before a board of arbitration ... We prefer the conference table and the hearing room to the picket line. Do you?


It can be assumed that the UAW offer of arbitration, as set forth above, was only one more carefully planned step by the union to place the corporation on the defensive, to expose the unwillingness of GM to bargain collectively and to win the support of the “public.” Furthermore, it may be assumed that the UAW leaders were convinced that the reply of GM would be a blank refusal to submit the dispute to arbitration. Even if this is granted, however, we express disagreement with the union leadership on the question of arbitration in the specific and concrete conditions which existed at the time the offer was made. In the first place, the negotiations had been in progress, in one way or another, for a three-month period. The union said in its letter to GM that “for the past three months the UAW-CIO has been attempting to carry out collective bargaining in the constructive spirit called for by President Truman. The General Motors Corporation has persisted in treating its bargaining with the union as meaningless and futile, or, in the words of President Truman before the Labor-Management Conference, ‘as a step-child.’”
 
Why the Arbitration Proposed
The next point to be considered is the fact that the union had thoroughly indoctrinated the membership with its intention not to be deflected from its determination to tackle GM in the most thorough-going manner. A few months before, so set was the leadership on its GM course that strikers at Kelsey-Hayes were disciplined for an action which the UAW leaders said was interfering with the progress of the organization of action against GM. Furthermore, the whole course of the negotiations, the nature of the union’s demands and the preparation of the membership for decisive action, had created a situation in which a last-minute proposal for arbitration, coming from the union, could only disorient the membership and create demoralization, not only immediately in the ranks of the UAW but among other unions and workers who were watching anxiously to see what the UAW would do. This is one of the most important considerations in connection with the arbitration proposal in the concrete situation which prevailed at the time the offer was made.
While it is true that the whole question of arbitration as against militant class action is involved in the consideration of this particular arbitration offer, it is not the point which we are stressing right now. We say, for the reasons given above, that whatever the position of a union may be on arbitration, the proposal made by the UAW was incorrect and if indulged in will certainly defeat the organization in its present fight with General Motors.
The UAW proposed that a three-man board be selected and that its decision be final and binding. But first there was the problem of getting the three-man board. The two members from industry and labor were to select the third man who would be the chairman. Obviously this would take time and while labor and industry haggled over the naming of a chairman, to be followed by long days of discussion in which GM would certainly not have given an inch, disintegration of the solidarity of the membership and demoralization would have set in.
 
What the Proposal Means
The proposal to go to arbitration ignored the real nature of the demands made by the union. The demands made on the corporation were not simple wage demands. The “arithmetic of this wage dispute” included as a a fundamentally new departure the demand that the corporation open its books so that the union could demonstrate to the consumer that the company could increase wages without increasing the price of its product This was a higher form of “arithmetic” than has been used heretofore by the labor movement in collective bargaining and transcends the traditional bounds of collective bargaining.
At the time the offer to arbitrate was made and under the concrete conditions the union really could not submit this particular dispute to arbitration. The demands made by the union and what was implied in them, thoroughly understood by the corporation, could not really be submitted to arbitration. As we said above, this flows from the pre-arbitration proposal negotiations and the militant nature of the demands.
“We prefer the conference table and the hearing room to the picket line.” Such a position was really preposterous in the concrete situation. If there was ever a situation in which the mass militant picket line is indicated it is exactly this situation where a union demanded the right to examine a corporation’s books and have a say in what prices should be charged for the product. The whole capitalist ruling class, including the press, rushed to the side of GM when the UAW made what the corporation called “unreasonable demands.”
It is the position of the Workers Party that in issues enjoined between the working class and the ruling class, between the unions and the employers, the rule should be to resolve the conflicts in militant class struggle action. There can be no such thing as an impartial arbitrator in a dispute between labor and capital, drawn from the ruling class. All arbitrators in labor disputes do come from the ruling class or from its middle class hangers-on. It was just such an individual who would have been the chairman of the three-man board proposed by the UAW. This would have meant that the ruling class would have had two members of the board and labor one. And this, in a situation where the union is demanding that its experts examine the corporation books and that the union have a say in the control of prices.
We say again that this particular proposal to arbitrate was particularly flagrant and only underscores the need for extreme caution by labor in writing arbitration clauses into its agreements with the employers. The content of the proposal tended at least to the acceptance of arbitration as something to be accepted as a regular procedure in the dispute between the ruling class and the working class. It was in effect a proposal to substitute the conference table, dominated by the ruling class, for militant class struggle action by the workers and the unions themselves. This is the all-important factor in this situation as it is usually the important factor in all the relations between the working class and the capitalist ruling class. We hope that the membership of the UAW will maintain an alertness and a constancy that will serve notice on the leadership that the union is prepared to fight this strike through until its aims are won.
 




An unholy alliance is about to be consummated between the International Executive Board of the UAW-CIO and the Ford Motor Co. Unless the UAW membership and’ the whole labor movement come down on the heads of the leadership of the UAW, Henry Ford will get from the union itself, and without a struggle, what he was never able to accomplish with his anti-union thugs and company-made blackjacks.
Richard Leonard, Ford director of the UAW, acting for the IEB, has submitted to the Ford Motor Co. the UAW’s reply to the corporation’s demand for “company security.” “In the event of an unauthorized strike ... any employee or employees found guilty of instigating, fomenting or giving leadership to an unauthorized stoppage of work shall be subject to discharge.” For those workers who participate, “and whose guilt has been determined by the umpire,” fines are provided. For “first participation ... $3.00 for each day of the stoppage (or major fraction of any subsequent day). Second participation... $5.00 for each day of the stoppage (or major fraction of any subsequent day). In the event of a financial penalty, the company shall deduct the fine from the earnings of the worker involved. It is agreed that all fines levied under this section shall be donated to the President’s Infantile Paralysis Fund.”
It is extremely difficult to write with restraint about this “plan” which Leonard has been authorized by Thomas, Reuther and Addes to present to the Ford Motor Co. But this must be the procedure because every worker who reads Labor Action must understand the real and full meaning of this corporation “security” proposal.
 
Content of Reply
The “security plan” is the reply of the UAW leadership to the demands of Ford that before he signs another contract or discusses wages the union must take steps to guarantee security to the corporation.
Ford demanded that in so far as the union and the workers were demanding security and protection from the corporation, the corporation had the right to demand security and protection from the union and the workers.
The notion behind such a demand is nt new. In the earlier days of CIO militancy, this organization was contrasted with the more conservative AFL. The AFL was praised as the more “responsible” organization. The CIO had not reached ‘‘maturity,” it had not attained to the level of “responsible trade unionism.” The capitalist employers and their spokesmen in the editorial offices and in Congress meant by this that the CIO was more difficult to control than the AFL. It was less amenable to persuasion from the employer, it was less likely to compromise, it rejected “sweetheart” agreements; it was more likely to resort to the picket line than was the AFL.
The plans of the employers for the unions took very concrete form. They proposed that their notion be enacted into law. The unions should open their books to the “public.” The International Ladies’ Garment Workers Union was held up as a model of “responsible trade unionism” adhering to the “American way of life” because this organization published its annual financial statement in the daily papers.
Proposals were advanced and an attempt was made to enact them into law, that union organizers should be licensed and that trade unions should be looked upon in law, in practice and by “the public” as in no way essentially different from a corporation. The general position of the capitalist employers was summed up in their attitude that “responsible trade unionism” must mean the settlement of all grievances around the Council table, by the decision of an “impartial arbitrator” or through the intervention of the government. The whole plan was an organized one and directed primarily against the one powerful weapon in the hands of the unions and the working class: THE STRIKE.
This is particularly important for the employers today. Their main concern right now is with WAGES, PRICES, TAXES and PRODUCTION. All of the strikes today and those in the making revolve first of all around the question of wages. Strikes halt production; this is their chief tactical purpose. This is the point at which the working class is in complete control of its own actions and can act in complete disregard of the desires and plan’s of the capitalist employers.
 
Who Is Secure?
The proposals made to the Ford company by the UAW are in total disregard of the facts and the history of the past few years. The Ford Motor Co. and all other capitalist corporations are already protected and secure. The capitalist ruling class, which owns these vast manufacturing corporations and the big banks, is protected and secure. Any further protection and security which they need, they can give themselves. They are protected and have security because they own all the property: the mines, mills, factories and the land. They own the banks, the railroads, the communications systems, the public utilities, the big stores. They make huge profits and pile up billions in capital, plant and equipment. They distribute billions in dividends and interest to themselves each year.
Added to this, the capitalist ruling class, ‘ which owns all the wealth and property, has its own government in Washington; in every state, county, city, town and hamlet. They own and control this government. They operate it for their protection, for their security and for the protection and security of their property and their profits. Their government in Washington guarantees their profits and protects their property with the police and the army.
 
For Labor Security
What do the workers have in the way of protection and security? We own no property: no land, mines, mills, factories and banks. WE HAVE NO GOVERNMENT OF OUR OWN. All we have is the millions of us and our capacity for doing the jobs which the capitalist employers give us. Since we own no land, mines, mills, factories, railroads and banks, all we can do is work for the capitalists who do own these things. We make no profits. We receive no dividends and interest. We have no reserves and no capital.
The working class does have its unions, however. They are its security and its protection. Labor can have no-other protection and security except the organisation of the whole working class into unions and into an INDEPENDENT POLITICAL PARTY OF THE WORKING CLASS.
The plan which the IEB of the UAW has authorized Leonard to present to the Ford Motor Co. strikes directly at the Ford union and the whole trade union movement. It says to a powerful corporation that the union and the workers are ready to place themselves at the mercy of a fascist-minded employer who has demonstrated a viciousness in his relations with labor unsurpassed by any employer in the country, Tom Girdler included.
The fines to be levied will not come from the union treasury but from the earnings of the individual workers. The UAW bureaucrats see to it that the International treasury, from which their salaries come, is not molested. The fines will not come from the local treasury, and thus the local officers will have their security protected.
 
An Attack on Unionism
The plan is a direct attack on the shop steward and shop committeeman system. What decent and militant union man will be a shop steward or committeeman under such a plan? What can they do? Any action in the interests of their men can result in their being charged with “instigating, fomenting or giving leadership” to a strike. Can any plan have been conceived of greater benefit to the employer? Militant stewards can be and will be fired under this plan. Thereby the workers in the plant have their organization beheaded. Under this plan no steward can fight to have any important grievance settled. Any insistence on settlement of grievances can and will result in the loss of his job.
All workers in the plant will have the threat of a fine constantly hanging over their heads. It is possible under this system for workers to lose from one-half to all of a week’s wages. The hypocrisy of the thing resides in that choice piece of shysterism which proposes that the fines go to the “President’s Infantile Paralysis Fund!” What consolation this will be to workers and their families!
The UAW bureaucrats do not dare take upon themselves the collection of these fines. They turn this pleasant task over to the Ford Company. Along with the checkoff which goes to the International office, the company will withhold the fine money which will go to the Infantile Paralysis Fund, and not to the Ford Motor Company which is presumably so much in need of protection and security.
It Is a Blow at the UAW
This proposal of the UAW traitors has no relation in any way to collective bargaining or to the violation of contractual relations. Nothing is involved that has anything to do essentially with collective bargaining or observance of agreements. There is no issue here of the right of the union leadership to invoke union discipline where necessary, nor is the right of the union leadership to invoke union discipline over strikes involved.
This action of the UAW leadership is not only an attack on the Ford workers today but it is a blow delivered at the GM workers who are now on strike. By this act they not only deliver the Ford workers to Ford but they also deliver the GM workers over to the du Pont family. The unprecedented but excellent GM demands are countermanded by the action taken in connection with Ford. While the GM workers are on strike and demanding to see the corporation’s books the Ford workers are told that if they do not submit sheepishly to the demands and attacks of Ford they will be forced to give a part of their earnings to the “President’s Infantile Paralysis Fund.”
What is behind this treachery from the UAW leadership? FEAR, COWARDICE, AMBITION and STUPIDITY. Fear of the increasing militancy of the membership of the International. The pent-up resentment of the workers during the war years is being let loose today in demands such as labor has never made before.
They fear the employers because they have no weapon to fight with unless they can get and keep the support and confidence of their membership. They fear the government at Washington because they know that this government will not heed their pleas.
These bureaucrats fear one another. One might outdo the other and one may get more publicity than the other in the capitalist press.
 
What to Do
Above all the trade union leadership is afraid of the militant ranks of labor itself. They are haunted by the imminence of mass strike action. Not just the old-fashioned strikes around simple wage demands but strikes demanding the control of profits, prices and perhaps later the control of dividends. This leadership knows in its own stupid way that such demands are not mere trade union demands.
This is the meaning of the Ford “security” plan. This is the meaning of the proposal to arbitrate one day before the GM strike. The UAW plan for Ford is a monstrous proposal. There will be more of these proposals from the trade union leadership. The only way to save the unions for the role which they ought to play is for the militants to assert themselves. The only effective answer to the surrender of the trade union leadership is an offensive against the capitalist employers:
Against GM, Chrysler, Ford, the steel corporations, General Electric, Westinghouse.
Such an offensive can only be carried through effectively if the real militants in the unions band themselves together to push the top leadership forward or to push them out. Such a step must of course be given a correct programmatic base, a correct motivation and must be based on the firm and clear understanding that it it only through the political organisation of labor that the Fords, du Ponts and all the tribe of exploiters can be finally defeated.
 




Ford hasn’t accepted the “security plan" presented by the UAW leadership. The young scoundrel probably feels that if he holds out a while longer, Thomas, Leonard, Reuther and Addes will come forward with something better. Ford reports that the company is considering an "annual wage” scheme. He cannot consider the UAW leaders’ sell-out proposals until he has his “annual wage" plan concocted. What Ford wants to do, of course, is to kill two birds with one stone. He wants to fabricate some complicated annual wage scheme and tie it to the “security plan” presented by the UAW leaders. If the annual wage should turn out later to be less than expected, as it surely will, then Ford will have his workers thoroughly shackled with the aid of the UAW top leaders.
The company “protection plan” presented by Leonard, seems to be headed for the rocks in the union itself. Leonard told the company that the union-would have trouble enough selling the security proposals to the rank and hie even if a substantial wage increase was granted. This statement by Leonard is in itself an admission that the company security' plan is a betrayal of the UAW membership. What Leonard is saying is that even should Ford grant wage increases, the workers in the Ford locals would still be hard to convince that it is their business to protect the Ford Motor Co.
Why should the UAW leadership want to adopt a plan which they believe will be unacceptable to their membership? Why was this plan presented to Ford and made public before it was discussed and acted upon by the membership? The reasons seem clear. The UAW leaders knew that if they went before the membership with this sell-out proposal it would be rejected by the Ford workers. Therefore they presented it to Ford, hoping that he would accept it and that this would give them a club with which to beat back any opposition in the Ford locals.
It seems clear that this Ford proposal was connected with what was going on at GM. Reuther had run way in front of the IEB with his radical GM demands for opening the company’s books and determining the price of automobiles. Instead of presenting the same demands to Ford and Chrysler, Thomas & Co. got scared and decided to throw the Ford workers to the lions. This would balance things: radical with GM, conciliatory with Ford. This would prove that the UAW leadership was not so radical, that they were “reasonable men,” “responsible” trade-union leaders.
Furthermore, by this maneuver, more of the top leadership of the UAW would have an opportunity to shine in the limelight, get their names in the press and bask in nationwide publicity. Reuther, the “radical,” would command the GM front. Leonard would retreat at River Rouge, While Thomas would dash off to negotiate with Henry Kaiser at Willow Run. Addes, of course, would remain in Detroit to hold things together and take charge of the per capita.
 

A Clever Maneuver
R.J. Thomas got a bright idea last week. His research staff informed him that the British Labor Government owned 434,000 shares of GM common stock. Thereupon Thomas dispatched a message to Prime Minister Attlee which informed Attlee that the UAW was confident that the GM management does not reflect the “thinking” of the “vast majority of the owners of the corporation.” Thomas went on to say that “for that reason and because a statement by the Labor Government of Great Britain would be a welcome demonstration of the solidarity that binds together the working people of all nations, We are hopeful that you will be able to make known to the management of General Motors Corporation your belief that profits are, indeed, the concern of the Workers and owners of any corporation.”
It is very difficult to guess what, if anything, was in Thomas’ head when he sent this message to Attlee, in the first place, the “vast majority” of the owners of GM is the du Pont family and the top managers of the corporation. It is difficult to believe, that this management does not reflect the “thinking” of itself and of the du Ponts. Furthermore, just what does Thomas think the British Labor government is? Hasn't he been reading the papers? Don’t his “aids” keep him posted on what is going on in the world? In Java? Indonesia? Or in England?
We are certainly most strongly in favor of international labor solidarity. We should certainly like to see an expression of solidarity with the GM workers come from the British Labor Government. But this seems too much to expect right now. An urgent task before Attlee and his fellow ministers is to express in action a feeling of solidarity with the British Labor Party and the British working class. They haven't done this yet. Also, we should like to see that government express in action a feeling of solidarity with the Indonesians, the Javanese, Indians and Africans. That is, we should like to see the British Labor Government take just one step toward obeying, in action, the mandate which was given them when the British masses decided that a change was necessary and voted the Labor Party ticket.
We say again that we are far more in favor of international labor solidarity than is Thomas – for one good reason, if for no other: we understand it, know what it means and the fundamental steps toward such a consummation. The strongest action that Thomas can take today toward international or national labor solidarity is to have the IEB withdraw its disgraceful Ford proposals and substitute the GM proposals. The next action is to ignore Truman’s “fact-finding” fakery and all other arbitration proposals. Let the IEB decide to arbitrate this dispute by way of the picket line. That’s where it belongs.
 





All-Round Jim Crow
A Negro civilian and a white soldier went into a Negro restaurant in Denver to eat. The proprietor of the restaurant consulted some Negro MP’s present and then came to the table to ask the white soldier if he was a white man. On receiving an affirmative reply the proprietor said: “I can’t serve you in here. It’s Army orders. White soldiers can’t eat in restaurants in this neighborhood and Negro soldiers are not to be served in restaurants downtown.”
The white soldier sat it out hungry while the Negro civilian finished his meal which he had already been served.
The MP’s said that these were their orders from the commanding officer the camp. The only exception to that rule is that the white MP’s in this area may eat in Negro restaurants. I did not learn whether or not Negro MP’s may eat in downtown restaurants. The excuse given for this particularly obnoxious Jim Crow practice by the Army bureaucrats is that there have been fights between Negro and white soldiers in public places.
This, of course, is only one small part of the general practice of Jim Crow in the Army and Navy. Of course it would not occur to Roosevelt, Congress, the Army and Navy that the best way to stop white and Negro soldiers from fighting each other when they meet is to get rid of Jim Crow. If Negro and white soldiers and sailors are in the same organization, eating together, sleeping together, working together and playing together in camp, they will not fight each other when they meet in cities outside the camps.
If the government stops heaping insult and degradation on Negroes in the armed forces, then there will be less tendency for white and Negro soldiers to fight among themselves when they meet. It is the Jim Crow Roosevelt government which is solely responsible for this situation.
*

A Cop Negotiator
While I was in Chicago there was a strike of 500 machinists at the plant of the Goss Printing Press Co. The company charged that the men struck because ten women had been hired to perform an operation which the strikers claimed should be men’s jobs. The union officials say that the strike was not called against the women because of their sex but because the company was paying the women below the top scale for the work. The women were paid $1.25 an hour for work which was below the rate paid men for the same work.
What interested me about this strike was the fact that Capt. George Burns, head of the “police labor detail,” sat in on the negotiations along with a federal labor conciliator. It wasn’t reported just what this cop was there for. I suppose [1] he was representing “law and order” or the “public.” Chicago has an international reputation for “law and order.”
The press did record that Capt. Burns did submit a plan for settlement of the strike. He suggested that the women be kept but that they be given jobs outside of those units claimed by the men. The captain perhaps feels that women should confine their machinist activities to the family washing machine.
There was a time when workers understood that the place for a cop during a labor dispute was pounding the pavement and not in the negotiations going on between the union and the company. That is, if he could find nothing more lucrative, such as collecting graft from dives or shaking down gangsters.
*

Denver and Wallace
I have just read in Denver’s Rocky Mountain News that the Wallace supporters have switched their tactics. They will support the George amendment and submit to the demand of the “foes” of Wallace that the RFC be divorced from the Commerce Department.
Wallace says new and small businesses are “the lifeblood of free enterprise.” His opponents say that Wallace wants to use the Commerce Department to introduce socialism into the United States.
This would certainly be an easy way to get socialism. It might be called socialism without tears. It might even appeal to Norman Thomas and get his full support. Presumably Philip Murray, Hillman and the other CIO Wallace devotees would be for the socialism which Wallace would cause to sprout in the Department of Commerce. This probably has something to do with the decision of the friends of Wallace to agree to take the RFC out of the department. If they can only get Wallace confirmed this will be proof that God’s in His heaven and all’s, right with the world. The 60,000,000 jobs will be guaranteed. The war will end sooner and eternal peace will reign throughout the earth. Price rises will be curbed. The Little Steel formula will go into Henry’s Commerce waste basket. The Smith-Connally Act will be revoked and the National Service Act will be defeated. Wallace is the key to the situation today since Roosevelt has already been elected. That was what Roosevelt had in mind when he refrained from supporting Wallace for Vice-President. He was holding him for the Commerce Department post, the 60,000,000 jobs, little business and 1948.
Labor should understand these things before it is too late. First thing we know, Wallace will get mad and go back to his Iowa pigs and corn. There where will the labor movement be?

Note by ETOL
1. In the printed version “support” but from the context this is obviously a typesetting error.
 




On the train on my way to California, I read an advertisement of the Pennsylvania Railroad in the Chicago Defender. “America’s Leading Railroad” wants to hire some more Negroes. They are short of help. Do they want these Negroes for conductors? No. Do they want them for engineers, firemen, telegraphers, clerks, stewards? No. That’s not what the war’s being fought for. It’s being fought for something nobler, something more sublime: democracy. Negroes don’t enter that door. That entrance is marked “white only.”
No, the Pennsylvania Railroad wants more Negroes for their kitchens and as waiters in their dining cars. To entice Negroes to join up the Pennsylvania tells us about one Negro family in their employ: the Lamberts. This family has served the Pennsylvania “faithfully” for a total of 147 years – IN THE KITCHEN AND DINING CAR. But this is a real success story. For the Lamberts have been promoted. They advanced from dishwasher to cook and waiter during the course of their 147 years of “faithful service.” Only one of them became a waiter, however; the others have remained in the kitchen.
 
Only Menial Jobs
The Pennsylvania ad says: “The company likes the calibre of the family; (I’ll lay odds they do. The slave-owners liked their kitchen help also, so long as they stayed in the kitchen) the family likes the character of the company.” I don’t know about this, I haven’t talked to the Lamberts. But I’ll lay odds again that some of the Lamberts would like to get out of that kitchen.
Why haven’t some of the Lamberts or some other Negroes been promoted to dining car steward, to inspector, or put in charge of the commissary department? Just one reason: they are Negroes. Any job outside the kitchen or carrying a tray is a “white man’s job.” Senator Eastland of Mississippi says that this is what the war is being fought for and evidently the Pennsylvania Railroad agrees: to keep the Negroes in the kitchen.
That’s what the slave-owners thought and many Northerners, too. it took a few slave revolts and a civil war to change some people’s minds.
 




DETROIT – Aside from the snow and standing in line to get one package of some unknown brand of cigarettes, Detroit seems to be concerned mainly with the no-strike pledge referendum, the affair at the plant of the United States Rubber Co. and the appointment of Henry Wallace as Secretary of Commerce.
*

WLB Aids Dalrymple
The latest outrage in the scandalous anti-union move instituted by Sherman Dalrymple, president of the United Rubber Workers, in the U.S. Rubber affair, is the decree of the WLB that the company must check off the $12.50 fine imposed by the stupid and reactionary Dalrymple But also $6.00 which reinstates the men in the union. This is so fantastic as to be unbelievable,
The company refused to pull the cards of the men because, it is obvious, with the rubber “shortage” it was necessary to retain every man at work. This refusal of the company backed the blunderheaded Dalrymple up against the wall. He had no way to get at these men. Then the WLB came to his aid and ordered the company to withhold the money and hand it over to Dalrymple. Since the WLB also is interested in the rubber “shortage” and in doing a favor for friend Dalrymple, this little board of capitalists, stooges (“public” members), and labor captives takes a step to keep the men in good standing in the United Rubber Workers.
The situation is complicated by the fact that some of the men are now members of the Mechanics Educational Society (AFL) and the UAW. This means that three unions have members in this plant, with the contract held by the URW. It also means that the workers there have a three-way fight on their hands: against the company, Dalrymple and the WLB.
The whole matter could have been handled far better and more effectively if in the beginning these men, who were victimized by the unspeakable Dalrymple, had paid the fines under protest and called on the international membership to come to their aid for an all-out and unrelenting struggle against Dalrymple inside the URW. They will get nowhere blundering off into the MESA and the paper AFL union.
It is certainly not too late to begin now to pick up the broken bits and organize throughout the international for Dalrymple’s scalp. At the next convention he should be kicked out without ceremony, and without compromise. Anyone who gives Dalrymple any support whatsoever must be shown that such a position means destroying the union.
There is plenty of time to organize for throwing out Dalrymple and his whole gang. These workers should so quietly and efficiently about the business of organizing this campaign. Every decent and militant worker throughout the country should be drawn in. To defeat Dalrymple means to have more votes at the convention than can be mustered by this reactionary and ignorant bureaucrat. The way to get those votes is to begin now so that the men elected to the convention are committed to a decent, democratic and militant union program. Any man committed to such a program will never support Dalrymple. At the same time workers in the URW committed to this program will remain in the URW and carry on the struggle against Dalrymple.
*

Thomas, No-Strike Pledge
There is some talk in the press reports from New Orleans that R.J. Thomas has or is in the process of changing his position on the no-strike pledge. The Detroit Free Press reported that Thomas made the statement at a press conference that he is strongly in favor of retaining the no-strike pledge today but that he could not be sure today what his position will be at the end of the war with Germany.
Addes remains for the pledge without reservation or without making any distinction between the war against Germany or the war against Japan; Reuther has some queer position of maintaining the pledge for the war industries but not for the non-war industries.
There is really no difference between Thomas, Addes. and Reuther on the no-strike pledge. All three of them are for the maintenance of the pledge and for bowing low before Roosevelt and the capitalist bosses. They are not in full agreement as to how the belly-crawling shall be done but all three of them are openly pledged to Roosevelt’s program of keeping the working class down on its knees.
Reuther’s talk about war industries and non-war industries is pure fakery. All industries are war industries today. War is a national and international phenomenon. The war is an activity of capitalist society as a whole. The whole ruling class – bond-holders, the government, manufacturers of war goods and manufacturers of non-war goods – participate in the war as a class and profit as a class.
The whole working class is affected by the war, that part of it in the war industries and that part in other occupations. Being affected by the war is not determined by such considerations as whether or not one is working on tanks or nursing bottles. Also, one’s attitude cannot be determined by such considerations. In time of war, whether or not one gives a no-strike pledge, supports such a pledge or abides by it, should be determined by what one decides as to the kind of war it is and the effect the pledge has on the welfare of the unions and the working class.
If we take only the effects of the pledge on the welfare of labor, as is already known by the workers out of their own experience, there is enough to win every worker against this pledge and induce every UAW rank and file member to vote against it in the referendum.
Even a worker who is gullible enough to believe the capitalists’ tale about fighting for democracy will not fail to understand that the ruling class and its government has demonstrated in practice that it is not a war for democracy.
As the war proceeds, democracy is more and more curtailed. What is democratic about the National Service Act, in which it is proposed to fine any worker as much as $10,000 if he refuses to remain in or go into a factory to toil and produce profits for an exploiting capitalist employer?
Every time a labor convention reaffirms the no-strike pledge Roosevelt and his government follow through with another and more reactionary proposal smelling of totalitarianism. While labor sleeps and amid the bleatings of Philip Murray, the artful dodging of Reuther, the mush-headed throbbing of Thomas and the Stalinist trickery of Addes, Roosevelt feels his way slyly toward a two-point post-war program for the working class: conscription for a post-war imperialist army and conscription for the factories of the capitalist employers.
 

   The Willow Run bomber plant and its workers have “WON CAMPAIGN RIBBONS” and are “READY FOR HONORABLE DISCHARGE.” “Willow Run’s job is done.” Thus spoke Col. Nelson S. Talbot, Central district air technical service commanding officer. Col. Talbot is an officer of the U.S. Army and a representative of the government of the United States at Washington. He represents the man in the White House, who is head of the Democratic Party. This is the party which millions of workers voted for last November, when labor split its millions of votes between the capitalist Democratic Party and the capitalist Republican Party. What Col. Talbot very brutally admits about the Widow Run plan twill be said about every big war plant in the country: the worker shave won campaign ribbons and are now ready for their honorable discharge— by the shipbuilding companies, the mine operators, the aircraft and automobile manufacturers. The bombs, bullets and tanks are piled up. “Labor has done a magnificent job.”The machine tool industry is ready and equipped for the Third Imperialist World War. The steel industry is ready for a “vacation.”All of the “arsenals of democracy” have produced and produced and produced. “American labor has done the greatest production job in history.” Labor won campaign ribbons during the First World Imperialist War and was discharged when the war was over. In the industrial upsurge of the late twenties labor also won its campaign ribbons and was honorably discharged in 1929, never to be employed again until the“made-work” fury in preparation for the Second World Imperialist War.  Capital Sitting Pretty Now that the shooting is over in Germany and fewer bullets, tanks, planes, bombs and ships are needed for the last phase of the war, the capitalist ruling class and its government at Washington don’t know what to do about jobs for the millions of workers and the hundreds of plants that were constructed for war production. Capitalist industry has put away a nice nest egg for the post-war days. They have over 50 billion dollars in reserves. The captains of industry have feathered their personal nests with their enormous personal salaries, their operations in “black market”meat and their Wall Street stock gambling. All of these billions in profits, dividends, interest and salaries have been made possible because the profits to industry during the war ran as high as 30 percent for manufacturing and financial corporations. It is only the working class that is ready now for “honorable discharge.”  Attack on Unions The first step in this direction by the capitalist exploiters is to launch an attack on the unions. They have discovered what they think is a good scheme. They will do it through the ex-service men. They will do it by turning the Negro workers against the white workers or vice versa. They will do it by creating enmity between men and women workers. One George Romney, an obscure individual, who rose to prominence during the war as “managing director of the Automotive Council for War Production” thinks it can be done by a little vicious and timely weeping over the problem of employment for the ex-service men. Romney attacks the UAW leadership for its opposition to his proposal that ex-service men who have never worked in a plant, be given blanket seniority for all time served in the army, even before they have ever secured a job. That is, according to Romney, a man or woman who left school, a bank, employment in a strike-breaking agency or any other occupation, and who, for instance, has served three years in the armed services, can march up to an organized plant with three years’ plant seniority in his hip pocket, All this before he has been assigned to a job, before he has been inside the plant. If such a proposal should be accepted by the unions they would be on their way to the graveyard. Romney says that the union attitude on the matter of seniority for veterans is a “lockout” All the workers among the veterans ought to realize that it was not the unions which locked them out of the factories but the capitalist ruling class and the capitalist government of this class in Washington. The veterans were locked out when they were drafted into the armed forces, to fight an imperialist war for the capitalist exploiters and marauders. It will do working class veterans no good to lend themselves to any type of scheme proposed by the employers and the government which will in any way weaken the unions. Years after the war is over, when their hero medals have become a mere “hunk of brass, ”when they find themselves in the bread lines, or see their babies gassed to death on a “bloody Thursday” by the army led by some future chief of staff, they will need the union to protect them. The main problem before labor to-day, as always under capitalism, is: JOBS. All the talk about “reconversion” is mere gas unless we have jobs: have them now and have them continuously.The UAW workers in Detroit finally hit the nail on the head when they say to their International leaders: “forget world problems and do something for the rank and file.” They should have said this when Murray and Thomas gave Roosevelt that infamous no-strike pledge, when Murray accepted the infamous Little Steel formula, when the Smith-Connally Act was passed and when the PAC leadership betrayed labor by helping a capitalist party retain control of the government. We know that these automobile workers do not mean by their statement that they are not interested in “world problems, ”especially as they affect labor here and in other parts of the world. What they mean, and they are correct, is that the capitalist government should be allowed to run its imperialist war, to take care of its own imperialist interests, if it can. The Workers Party has a Reconversion Program that labor can fight for and really get somewhere with. But we have to fight for this program. The capitalist employers and their government will never grant it. This program really takes care of the problem of jobs:60 million jobs or a hundred million jobs. Labor, however, cannot win this program if it listens to the promises and the wailings of the labor leaders. To push this Reconversion Program of the Workers Party through, labor will need not only unions far stronger and more militant than our unions are today, but will also need a mass labor party, to take over in Washington; from the White House to Capitol Hill.  Workers’ Party Reconversion Program  The Workers Party believes that “Every worker has the right to a job and a guaranteed annual wage.” Also that “Every unemployed worker has he right to full jobless insurance.” We mean by “full jobless insurance” that single men and women when unemployed shall get not less than $30 a week.  We believe that all w0rkers “thrown into unemployment during the “reconversion period” should be absorbed into industry by a reduction in the work week with no reduction in pay. There is no reason that we should starve just because the capitalists have no work for us.  The demobilized veterans should get two years military base pay. They should have the opportunity to go to school at government expense and their families should have adequate maintenance.  A single worker should have a guaranteed annual wage of not less than $2, 500 a year. A workers family should have a guaranteed annual income of not less than $5, 000. A worker’s family needs this much money for a decent standard of living.  The Workers Party believes that workers should have decent and sanitary homes to live in. Let the government spend 250 billion dollars in five years to build these homes, public works and for rural electrification. We who build the houses should live in them.  Where will the money come from? The Workers Party says that this money should come from those who have it. The war industries should be conscripted. Nationalize the banks, the industrial monopolies and the transportation systems. Then the billions of dollars in profits can be used for the benefit of all the people.  Furthermore, take all the war profits above five per cent on invested capital. This would bring in countless billions of dollars. Those who created this wealth: labor, should have the advantage of it. Cut the salaries of the capitalists to $25, 000 a year. They don’t even deserve that much. Make the capitalist pay for their war by capturing all their accumulated wealth above $50, 000. Even this amount is too much for these exploiters.  Labor should control production. That’s one way of keeping the mines, mills and factories in operation. Workers would run them to produce goods for people to use. We couldn’t possibly have any interest in shutting a plant down because a union was demanding an increase in wages.  The working people will have to have a political party of their own in order to win such a Reconversion Program. That party must be based on the unions and have millions of members. The capitalist employers and the government bureaucrats would tremble in their boots if they saw such a powerful labor party being organized.  If we had such a powerful and militant labor movement organized into a mighty trade unions and a mass political party then we could say to the capitalist employers: If you can’t run the mines, mills and factories, we can and will. And to the bureaucrats at Washington we could say: If you can’t run the country and supply us with food, clothing and shelter; we ca nand will.   




Relief of Hungry: A Political Question
Mr. Roosevelt wants us to tighten our belts so that more food can
go to the hungry people of Europe. At least that’s the reason
he gave for the belt-tightening. He says that we just can’t let
the people of Europe starve.
The working class in the U.S. should certainly be concerned over
the plight of the European and Asiatic workers. But before we pull up
our belts to another hole we ought to have sense enough to
investigate the food situation to discover whether or not it is
necessary for us to reduce our food consumption in order to feed the
workers of Europe and Asia.
Labor doesn’t know how much food is being produced, how much
goes to the military establishment, how much is being sent to
countries overseas, how much is packed away in storage, how much
finds its way into what the capitalists call “the black
market,” nor how much is rotting on farms, in warehouses, in
cold storage and in produce yards.
We don’t know how much the Army and Navy are wasting, nor
just exactly what the meat packers, the butter people and the canners
are doing with their commodities in order to force their government
to grant them permission to boost prices.
All we know is that the bureaucracy in Washington issues orders
which we are forced to obey. We are forced to obey because we are
just little people who have done the work from Pharaoh’s
pyramids to the last tank off the Chrysler production line.
Furthermore, we don’t know where the food goes that is sent
to “feed Europe.” We want to feed the workers of Europe,
Asia and Africa. We don’t want our sacrifices used to stifle
the workers of the world. We don’t want our sacrifices to go to
reestablish the runaway monarchical cowards on their thrones again.
As the United Nations armies proceed with their conquest of
Europe, the kings, queens, and presidents, who ran off and left their
“subjects” to face the lash of the Gestapo, are returning
from their hideouts in London, Washington and Long Island. They bring
up the rear of the conquering armies of the Big Three like so many
scavengers.
The food inquiry now being pursued by Congress is, to be sure, a
political move by anti-Roosevelt hatchet men. But that’s all
right. The working class must take advantage of every rift, every
dispute in the ranks of the ruling class arid use it to our
advantage. We can be sure that if the truth were known, Roosevelt’s
belt-tightening quip has some connection with bureaucratic
skullduggery and collaboration in Washington between the food
monopolists and the government at Washington.
 





Black Market Is Necessary for Profits
It has been my contention for sometime that the use of the
expression “black market,” especially when applied to the
meat situation, was incorrect. What is called the “black
market” is nothing more nor less than the regular activity of
“our system of free enterprise” carried on for
profit-making under the “restrictions'’ laid down by the
OPA. The so-called black, market is a method used by the big
packers, poultry raisers, canners and produce jobbers to raise prices
despite the official price ceilings.
There are five big meat packers in the country. They control not
only the meat packing industry but also to a large extent the raising
of cattle. Altogether there are less than 100 packers of any
consequence. Then where do the little fellows get the meat which
sells at “black market” prices? From these packers of
course, all of whom are members of the American Meat Packers
Association. This is an organization like the Iron and Steel
Institute which controls the production and marketing of steel and
steel products.
The members of the Meat Packers Association may not increase their
profits directly right now from their connivance in “black
market” operations but they do hope by this procedure to defeat
the price control measures of their government to the end that they
may be granted “legal” price increases. They do this by
withholding meat from the market and by conspiring with the
go-between shysters to run meat through “black market” dealers.
And now comes one Arthur Winn, representative of the packers,
to admit that all of this is true. Winn admitted in testimony before
the Senate Banking committee that many packers are violating price
ceilings and are operating in the “black market.” The
packers don’t like the OPA rulings and the price ceilings and
they refuse to abide by them. They refuse to submit financial
statements tothe OPA. One can understand this when it is revealed
that the profits of the meat people have jumped 700 per cent (That’s
one for the capitalist press to write editorials about.)
The packers and others in the food industry are only following in
the footsteps of the airplane manufacturers and other “free
enterprisers.” If their government refuses to give them the
profits which they demand they will refuse to produce, and in the
case of the meat producers, what they do produce they sell through
the “black market,” And nobody stopped them: the
President, Byrnes, “the White House spokesman,” nor OPA
Bowles, nor Congress.
The capitalist manufacturers and bankers are not impressed by
the speeches of Murray and Thomas about the boys dying in Europe
because they don’t get enough supplies from the home front.
They know that the purpose of the dying is to guarantee profits to
U.S. “free enterprise.” They are not fooled about this.
They know that the best patriot is not the youth who dies on the
battlefield but the man who remains at home and keeps the profits of
capitalist industry at an all-time high. If you want to be a real
patriot and go down in history as a man who served his country well
the thing to do is to become a meat packer during war time, boost
your profits 700 per cent, boost the cost of living 43 per cent while
wages go up only half that amount and the boys die on the front by
the hundreds of thousands.
Also the working people should not forget that the meat packers,
the automobile and steel makers, the shipowners, the coal operators
and all of “free enterprise” had a president who approved
their profit boosting schemes, so that they might get their profits
not only in wartime but after the war is over. A National Service Act
which was demanded chains the working class to the 700 per
cent-profit mines, mills and factories.
 





Action Necessary for Guaranteed Annual Wage
“Workers should not be too jubilant over the announcement
that President Roosevelt “orders Byrnes to study annual pay
plan.” An annual pay plan is already in effect: the Little
Steel formula. This annual pay-plan has the working class chained not
only to its already low standard of living but has acted as a plan
which actually lowers that standard of living.
With the high withholding tax, the steady increase in the cost
of living, the scheme of manufacturers to eliminate, low and medium
priced clothing, the reduction in quality of goods while holding the
price line, all of these reduce real wages and thereby lower the
standard, of living. To this must be added the plain and clear
efforts of employers to reduce even the money wages by various
methods of eliminating workers at relatively high hourly rates and
replacing them with workers hired at a lower hourly rate.
We can be certain that any study which Vinson and all his
“experts” produce will be based on the assumption that
the annual wage must be at such level that capitalist “free
enterprise” will be guaranteed a high per cent of profit. This
means that the Roosevelt annual wage will be too low to sustain even
the present standard of living.
 

Standard of Living Level
The problem before the working class today is to raise the
standard of living to a higher level than ever realized before. The
time has come now for labor to quit thinking in terms of holding what
we have. This is the way too many labor leaders think, and it has
been especially true during the war.
Every advance indicated is pushed aside with the assertion, “we
must win the war first.” This despite the fact that the
capitalist employers have always taken the position, “we must
arrange for our profits first.” On this the position of R.J.
Thomas is: “two wrongs don’t make a right.” Thomas
graciously concedes to labor that the capitalists are wrong to push
for profits first but, adds that labor would also be wrong to demand
and act for wage increases.
The Workers Party and Labor Action advocate a
“guaranteed annual wage.” But we don’t stop there,
we say what the wage should be. A guaranteed minimum annual wage for
each worker of $2,500 and $5,000 annual income to all workers’ families.
If doesn’t make sense to talk about or demand an annual wage
unless amounts are specified and the amounts should be high enough to
raise the workers’ standard of living! Workers think too much
in terms of just getting by. That is precisely the size of’ any
annual wage which Roosevelt might supply.
 

How and By Whom
Any demand for an annual wage under capitalism must also be
accompanied with thinking0, by workers, on the question of how an
annual wage can be guaranteed and by whom. We also have to think over
what is the meaning of a guaranteed wage enforced by a capitalist
government. The workers in Hitler’s and Stalin’s slave
factories also have a guaranteed wage. They also have a guarantee
that they will work every day. The Gestapo and the GPU will see to
that.
Any guaranteed wage, that will mean an elevation of our
standard of living can only result from the organized and militant
activity of the working class. Any guaranteed annual wage engineered
by Roosevelt can be taken away by Roosevelt and his capitalist
confederates and would be an annual wage at the lowest possible level.
In the thinking of labor about an annual wage we must also begin
thinking of WORKER’ CONTROL OF PRODUCTION. There are far too
many tricks in capitalist bookkeeping and far too many tricks in
capitalist politics and lawmaking for us to put any confidence
whatsoever in their intentions about an annual wage.
 

What Is Workers’ Control?
If workers have some effective say in control of production we
will have access to the financial, sales and production records. Also
we will have some say about what is produced. We will know production
costs, including “labor cost.” This will eliminate
capitalist employer shenanigans about “high labor cost”
and expose all the accounting mumbo-jumbo in the “system of
free enterprise.” If we know these things we will know
something about selling price and the working class will not be
milked as it is today in the capitalist “open market.”
There is really something very sinister about this Roosevelt
annual wage business. First he bobs up with the National Service Act.
This is a slave code for American labor with savage criminal
penalties for violation. After they get us chained to the factories,
Roosevelt bobs up again with Balm of Gilead: the annual wage. First
the government rounds up labor for the capitalist factories. Then
they say to the capitalist employers: “now that you have labor,
you must make some concessions. Mr. Byrnes will work with you on
this.” I suppose this is what Murray and R.J. Thomas would call
“equality of sacrifice.”
 




Herbert R. Northrup’s first-hand study of the Negro in the labor
movement in the United States [1] should be a textbook for every
union official, for every white and black worker and particularly for
revolutionists who want to see the trade-union movement as it really
is in relation to the Negro worker. This holds especially for the AFL
and the non-affiliated railway unions. These unions are revealed in
all their stark nakedness and hypocrisy in connection with their
anti-Negro position. Mr. Northrup made personal investigations and
has told in this book the results of those investigations. He reports
what the AFL, railway and CIO unions stand for, what they do and how
they act when faced with the problem of the Negro in industry. He
tells what their constitutions say, what is provided for in their
rituals and to what extent the organized labor movement practices
what it preaches in relation to the Negro worker and the Negro
member.
The author has been well placed for acquiring the necessary
information and experience for this study. He has worked for the WLB,
was a consultant to the Fair Employment Practices Committee and is
now connected with the National Labor Relations Board. In his preface
he reports that “the basic material for this book was gathered in
the field during the summers of 1940–1943.”
The book is divided into sections dealing with the building
trades, railroads, tobacco industry, textiles, clothing and
laundries; longshoremen, coal mines, iron and steel, automobiles and
aircraft and shipbuilding. There are explanatory notes on the
material in the various chapters, a bibliography and an introduction
by Prof. Sumner Slichter of Harvard University, where Mr. Northrup
took his doctorate in economics and wrote his thesis on Negro
Labor and Union Policies in the South.
Mr. Northrup not only presents the reader with an abundance of
factual material on the subject with which he is dealing but he has a
point of view which he gives in summary form at the end of the book
in his Concluding Remarks.
 
Union Discrimination Against Negroes
The author warns that care must be exercised in any attempt to
evaluate the “racial policies” of the unions for the reason that
“the attitude of unions toward Negroes ... often varies within the
same organization from region to region ...” He classifies the
unions which exclude Negroes by ritual, the machinists, for example;
unions which exclude Negroes by the constitution, and names six AFL
affiliates and seven non-affiliated railway unions. Then he gives the
unions which exclude Negroes by “tacit consent,” naming six AFL
affiliates and ten unaffiliated organizations. His last category is
unions “which afford Negroes only segregated auxiliary status.”
He finds seven of these in the AFL and two unaffiliated. It is
probably not necessary to say that no CIO international or local
union falls within any of these exclusionist categories.
In connection with Northrup’s catalog of unions which
discriminate against Negroes in one way or another, it is necessary
to bear in mind his own warning about “dynamic elements” which
operate to change the picture. For instance, Northrup gives the
Seafarers International Union as one of the unions excluding Negroes
by “tacit consent.” Today the SIU does not exclude Negroes but I
have been told that this international maintains a separate hiring
hall for Negroes in New York City. Also it should be remarked that
since Mr. Northrup wrote his book the courts of California have
upheld a petition of Negro members asking that the Boilermakers be
ordered to dissolve its auxiliary locals and to admit Negroes to the
regular locals. It is too early to say what the final results will
be, as the Boilermakers have appealed to a higher court.
Northrup contrasts the policies and practices of the AFL with
those of the CIO. He points out that in the first few years of its
existence the leaders of the AFL “apparently” made an effort to
live up to their “expressed policies of racial equality ... These
sentiments, however, were of short duration.” In this statement
Northrup reveals what is brought out throughout the book in those
parts dealing with interpretation: namely, that the author evaluates
the labor movement as just one of the important and significant
social movements in the American scene. The formation of the AFL was
a class in motion but this is not expressed in the book. The coming
of the AFL represented a class in motion, despite the fact that its
leaders failed to recognize this fact and its tremendous importance
for the future of organized labor in the U.S. The fact that the AFL
displaced the Knights of Labor despite the latter organization’s
equalitarian policies, demonstrated that there was objective need for
an organization basing itself on the skilled workers and
excluding some of the elements which were admitted to the Knights.
The AFL leaders did not live up to their “expressed policies of
racial equality” mainly for the reason that they did not recognize
American capitalist society as a class society and therefore did not
understand or agree that class solidarity across racial lines was
imperative for the health and vigor of the labor movement. The AFL
developed a “success” philosophy based on expansion among the
skilled workers.
 
Negroes in the Building Trades Unions
Mr. Northrup begins his consideration of the several groupings in
the labor movement with the building trades. Since the space allotted
is not sufficient to discuss the author’s treatment in detail I can
only give what is of outstanding significance. He points out that
one-half of Negro skilled workers are in the building trades and that
of these, sixty per cent are in the South. The Negro lost ground in
the building trades due to the pressure of the white workers as
unionization proceeded. He goes into the attitude of the plumbers and
electricians in their efforts to bar Negro mechanics by finagling
with city councils to pass ordinances which worked hardships on
Negroes. Also both of these internationals adopted apprenticeship
standards which Negroes could not meet due to the discriminatory
practices of the unions themselves. The carpenters, although having
no formal discriminatory policy against Negroes, have found such
subtle ways of exclusion as confining Negro carpenters to the Negro
section of the community. In the South, the Carpenters’
International has not bothered to intercede in behalf of Negro
carpenters who were denied work on account of race. In this
connection Northrup relates the results of government intervention in
behalf of Negro carpenters in the case of federal public housing as
well as the opposition against equality for Negro mechanics voiced by
members of Congress.
The set-up in the Painters is similar to that of the Carpenters.
They too set up separate Negro locals. This has been done by the
Painters in the North to a greater extent than in the Carpenters. The
Painters also resort to various schemes to keep Negro workmen from
obtaining jobs.
Unlike the Carpenters and the Painters, the Bricklayers’
officers began a campaign “as early as 1870 ... to achieve equal
status for Negroes.” Unlike the Carpenters, the Bricklayers did not
adopt the separate local as a national policy. In his field survey in
1940–41 Northrup found separate Negro locals in only three cities,
all in the South. In this international too, however, the Negro
worker runs into difficulties in getting admitted to certain locals
and in getting his share of the work.
In 1940, 15.2 per cent of the plasterers in the country and 54.5
of those in the South were Negroes. This is accounted for by the ease
with which Negro hod carriers and plasterers’ helpers may graduate
into the higher trade. Negro plasterers have less difficulties over
discriminatory practices than other Negro building craftsmen.
Northrup’s investigations serve to underscore and give the
concrete material to buttress what was generally known: that the
building trades unions of the AFL, all of them in one way or another,
discriminate against the Negro mechanic. These were the unions which
first came under notice and against which the main fire was directed
for the reason that it was these unions which sought jurisdiction in
the field occupied by the overwhelming majority of Negro skilled
workers.
 
Railroad Organizations and the Negro
Northrup next deals with the railroad organizations and here he
tells a sordid story indeed. He says: “The Negro railroad worker is
in an anomalous position. He is denied a voice in the affairs of
nearly all railway labor organizations; yet collective bargaining on
the railroads has received wider acceptance than in almost any other
American industry.” He relates how violence has been used against
Negro railway workers by white union members, how the brotherhoods
have connived with railroad management to bar Negroes and
discriminate against them and how “since 1934” the brotherhoods
“have found federal agencies useful in accomplishing their
purpose.” The Engineers, in their jurisdictional quarrel with the
Firemen, have attempted to use the Negro firemen as pawns in the
game. On the Florida East Coast Railroad “the general chairman of
the Engineers’ Union acted as representative for the Negro firemen
in return for monetary consideration.” Dr. William Leiserson,
chairman of the Railway Mediation Board, wrote to the Firemen and
Engineers suggesting that they withdraw a request for an election
because no matter what bargaining units resulted, the colored
employees would control the results for the particular region for
which the election was requested. James W. Carmalt, a member of the
board, wrote to the Engineers and Firemen that in the “Southeastern
region the Negro question interjects itself in that the B. of L.E.
are (sic) soliciting the votes of Negro firemen ... This
demonstrates the unhealthy condition that has grown in the relation
between the two organizations when the votes of the colored
employees are used to determine white representation.” Northrup
adds: “One cannot avoid receiving the impression that the board
regards collective bargaining in the train and engine services as
strictly a white man’s affair.” It is necessary to emphasize that
the Railway Mediation Board is a federal government board appointed
by the President.
Northrup goes over the whole miserable affair and closes by saying
that discrimination against the Negro railroad workers by the
employers and the unions “is assisted by the policies of government
agencies.”
There is one argument which Northrup makes which needs examination
because here again his point of view appears. He argues against a
suggestion which has been made to the effect that the Amended Railway
Labor Act should be extended to other industries because this Act has
made for industrial peace in the railroad industry. Northrup admits
that peace has been preserved “and due credit should be accorded to
the Railway Labor Act and its administrators for this laudable
accomplishment. But peace on the rails has had its price. One price
... is the acceptance by employers of obsolete made-work, or
‘featherbed’ working rules. Another has been the toleration of
intense discrimination against Negroes.”
We cannot agree to Northrup’s equating what is called
“featherbed” working rules with discrimination against Negroes or
any other group of workers. No matter what its merits or demerits
today, what is called “featherbedding” was devised by the unions
as a protection against unemployment due to technological changes and
covert anti-union acts of the
employers. All unions and the whole working class at some time or
another are confronted with this problem (one-man street cars, for
instance). Historically, made-work rules were an effort on the part
of labor to ward off unemployment due to the ups and downs in the
development of capitalist production and organization. These shifts
and developments affect all of labor. These demands of labor are
directed at and against the employer. Discrimination against Negroes
or any other group in the working class is not an act directed at the
employer but at the worker group discriminated against. This creates
a rift in the working class and operates against the interests of the
labor movement at any and all times. The basic reason that the
Railway Mediation Act should not be extended to cover other
industries is not that it tolerates “made-work” or even that its
administrators have promoted discrimination against Negroes. The
basic reason is that this act, in so far as it establishes government
control over unions, would be detrimental to the unions and to the
working class, including the Negroes. The experience of the unions
with the WLB, which is looked upon as a temporary war body, has
illustrated the danger of the intervention of capitalist government
into union affairs.
In March of this year, the Regional War Labor Board denied a
request of Radio Station WOV in New York City for permission to
reduce the number of musicians hired under contract with the American
Federation of Musicians. WOV charged “featherbedding” on the part
of the union. The regional board said that it had no authority to
“destroy or diminish privileges won by a local union through
collective bargaining.” The question as to what “featherbedding”
actually is in practice always arises. In the case cited, the radio
station planned to reduce the number of musicians from twelve, as
called for in the collective bargaining agreement, to five.
Furthermore, in these days of “government control,”
“feather-bedding” can become a very useful dodge to be used by
employers for contract breaking and by government boards for an
assault on the unions.
 
The Organization of Separate Locals
Northrup deals with a group of unions which are divided between
the CIO and AFL. Here are the Tobacco Workers; Textile, Clothing and
Laundries; Longshoremen and Shipbuilding Workers. In pre-Civil War
days tobacco, was grown and processed by Negro slaves. In the
industry today “whites operate the machines and weigh and pack the
final product ... The racial-occupation segregation pattern is made
practical because the stemming and blending and shredding departments
where the majority of Negroes are employed, have to be housed in
separate buildings, or at least on separate floors.” The jobs the
Negroes have are the least desirable because they work in the heat
and the dust. Furthermore there are wage differentials based on race.
The AFL Tobacco Workers Union forbids discrimination in its
constitution but has organized separate locals in the South. A new
administration elected in 1940 has adopted a policy of mixed unions
“wherever possible” and at the 1940 convention a Negro was
elected to a vice-presidency.
Few Negroes have ever been employed in the cotton textile industry
either North or South. In the South, “legislation demanding the
complete segregation of workers of the two races ... has not only
helped to institutionalize the exclusion of Negroes ... but has
assisted white workers to preempt most of the desirable work
opportunities.” In the South, the CIO Textile Workers Union has
adopted the policy of organizing separate locals for Negroes under
certain conditions. This is the case at a Virginia mill and. at the
Marshall Field Mills in North Carolina. “To the writer’s
knowledge,” says Northrup, “no other CIO affiliate has adopted
the separate Negro local as a union policy.” This means that the
Textile Workers Union “has accepted the racial employment pattern
in the industry.” The author doubts that the union can do otherwise
now because the TWU has only a small portion of the industry under
contract and to “advocate an alteration in the status quo at
this time would insure the Textile Workers Union, or any other
organization, complete defeat in the Southern textile mills.” I do
not believe that there is any warrant for this position. In the first
place, it smacks too much of the philosophy of the Southern
inter-racial committees, that is, it is too tinged with liberal
opportunism. Admitting that the poor whites in Southern textile mills
are an ignorant and very debased group of workers, there is no good
reason for approaching them in any fundamentally different way from
the miners and steel workers, for instance. Also, the way to organize
these backward textile workers and force contracts from the mill
owners is not to hold the very small Negro minority in the foreground
but the very large unorganized white majority already in the mills.
The mill owners at present are not so much concerned with Negroes who
are not present but the white workers who are now employed by the
thousands. They are not organized. The TWU has the task of pushing a
vigorous organization campaign in the South. The road to changing the
attitude of white workers toward Negroes is to get the white workers
organized; let them learn something about trade unionism and they
will at the same time learn the value of a different outlook on the
Negro worker. Any other attitude is to advocate the acceptance of
“the racial employment pattern in the industry.”
In the same chapter Mr. Northrup relates that in Miami, Fla.,
separate locals of laundry workers were established by the Laundry
Workers Union, “but their charters were recently revoked and a new
charter for a mixed local granted instead. In most of the local
organizations Negroes are well” integrated, holding various offices
and being well represented as shop stewards.” It seems that what
the Laundry Workers could do in Miami, the Textile Workers might
attempt in South Carolina.
 
“The Greater Tractability of Negroes”
Northrup says that in longshore work one find emphasis on speed
and “in view of the greater tractability of Negroes in submitting
to continual prodding – a result of their inferior socio-economic
status – it is not difficult to imagine that many employers hire
them even when white workers are available at the same pay.” Here
Mr. Northrup sounds like a “car window” sociologist. He certainly
did not discover this about Negroes generally in the course of his
investigations. What often seems to be tractability on the
part of Negroes is often nothing more than a very astute physical
procedure for reducing physical exertion to the level of the pay
received without getting into conflict with a brutal but stupid
anti-Negro superintendent.
About ninety per cent of the longshoremen at Hampton Roads are
Negroes. Before 1900, the locals were entirely Negro. White workers
refused to join and “the colored longshoremen were finally
persuaded to consent to the issuance of a separate charter for white
men.” I suppose that one of the arguments made by the white men was
that if the situation were reversed and the Negroes wanted a separate
local, the whites would readily consent.
For the coal industry, Northrup holds that increasing
mechanization has injured Negro employment and “if past experience
is any guide, Negroes will suffer disproportionately heavy losses in
jobs ... These post-war adjustments will put the equalitarian
policies of the UMWA to their severest test.”
In the steel industry, Northrup finds that employment has tripled
since 1910 but that there was a decrease in the proportion of Negro
workers in the Thirties. This was due to personnel policies of the
corporations. Most of the Negroes were held in unskilled
classifications and were not therefore in the indispensable class.
The majority of Negroes in the industry remain in the unskilled
class. This is particularly true of the South. Equalitarian policies
have met more obstacles in steel than in coal. “Successful unionism
is newer,” there is a wider wage differential “between the
unskilled and skilled work” and there is more “job segregation”
in the steel industry.
Here again, however, it is necessary to remark that these are
problems for the unions to tackle and solve. There are all manner of
differences in the world in everything. It is true that it is easier
to open “all white” departments in steel than in coal. But all
white departments are just as unnecessary in steel as in coal. There
is nothing about the steel industry which makes some operations more
effectual if done by white workers. This is one of the problems for
the United Steel Workers to solve by effective and militant union
action.
How seniority is applied affects the welfare of Negro workers,
according to Northrup. The prevalence of departmental seniority
“accounts in large measure for the failure of the USA-CIO to open
up some all-white departments to Negroes. On the other hand, in
periods of depressed business ... departmental seniority works to the
advantage of Negroes ... where they are heavily concentrated in a few
departments.”
Northrup makes a queer and unexplained statement when he writes
that “Most companies prefer departmental seniority, for its
operation interferes the least with the established order of things,
and hence has not the adverse effect on the efficiency of
operations which the application of plant seniority does.” (My
emphasis. – D.C.) It is true that any seniority operations
interfere with the “order of things,” but just how does plant
seniority interfere with “efficiency of operations?” Which is
better for the union and the workers?
 
Negroes as Active Union Members
In the automobile industry, Negroes are also predominantly in the
unskilled class. (Of course, there has been some change in all
industries since this book was published.) Northrup found that
generally Negroes had not been dealt with unfairly in layoffs. This
was largely due to the fact that they had acquired seniority in
departments where they were concentrated.
“On the other hand, a majority of Negroes have been
quite unsatisfied with the operation of departmental and occupational
seniority. They regard it as a thinly disguised ruse to keep them
concentrated in the poorer and more undesirable departments and
occupations.”
In the automobile industry, Northrup makes a statement on Negro
participation in union affairs similar to the one he makes about the
United Steel Workers. “UAW-CIO leaders continue to be hindered in
their attempts to secure equality of opportunity for Negroes by the
failure of Negroes in some plants to give the union their full
support.” He mentions the Flint Buick plant, where the union was
successful in getting 500 Negro foundry workers upgraded to
production. “Yet in July 1942 less than fifty per cent of the
Negroes were union members, as compared with ninety per cent of the
white workers.”
It is true that Negroes have been slow in getting into the union
and becoming active. However, it should not be expected that Negroes
will rush into a union merely through the impetus of one event in
which the local has succeeded in getting Negroes upgraded. Whereas
Negro workers have a single experience of the value of the union to
them, white workers in the same plant may have had a hundred such
experiences. It will take a long time to convince Negroes that
getting upgraded through the activity of the union will be a
permanent and regular experience in their working lives. There must
be no attitude that Negroes give thanks for any fight which unions
carry on against discrimination. This sounds too much like “remember
Abraham Lincoln.” What is necessary is the complete integration of
Negroes into the union, equality in the union, a persistent demand
for job equality and the education of Negroes in the principles of
trade unionism. If this is done more and more Negroes will join the
unions and become among the most active members.
Oh the aircraft industry, Northrup points out that “the
responsibility for excluding Negroes from the industry clearly rested
upon the management.” In those cases where the union or the.
international officers acted vigorously against Jim Crow the Negroes
rally to the CIO against the AFL, as was the case in Kansas City,
where the Negroes supported the UAW-CIO against the IAM-AFL.
Mr. Northrup deals with the AFL Metal Trades Department in his
discussion of the shipbuilding unions: with the Boilermakers’ Jim
Crow auxiliaries, whose international removed the Negro exclusion
clause from its ritual in 1937 and resorted to the Negro auxiliary
set-up as a substitute. In a Tampa yard, where one-half of the
employees were Negroes, the Boilermakers and the Machinists did not
establish Negro auxiliaries but “used the closed-shop contract to
secure the dismissal of about 500 Negroes and the demotion of all but
two of the remainder to unskilled jobs.”
On the CIO Shipbuilding Workers, the author deals with the
situation at the Sun Co., where a Jim Crow yard was established in
the midst of three nearly all-white yards. He also discusses the
situation in the yards on the Gulf Coast, where there have been many
difficulties in connection with Negro employment. He concludes as of
the date of the book that “serious attempts have not been made to
utilize Negro labor.” Negroes have had the best opportunities on
the Atlantic Coast in the yards under contract to the CIO
Shipbuilding Workers.
In his Concluding Remarks, Mr. Northrup expresses his point
of view on several complicated and controversial questions. He
observes that there is a tendency for “union racial policies to be
conditioned by their environment.” Unions have the habit of
accepting “the racial employment pattern of an industry.” He
finds that national officers “can and do take a more detached view
of the situation, to the resultant advantage of Negroes.” This is
probably true but in the AFL this “detached view” is usually
filled with a great deal of hocus-pocus and hypocrisy. In the CIO it
is certainly true that the national officers have been outstanding in
their efforts to wipe out discrimination both in the CIO unions and
in industry. But here too there are many things yet to be done.
 
The Question of Government Intervention
An important section deals with Public Policy, the Negro and
Unions. He asks the question: should unions which discriminate be
permitted to limit employment opportunities, to sign closed shop
contracts, to use public labor relations boards, or be designated as
the bargaining agent? Northrup makes a distinction between what he,
following the courts, calls “private institutions such as the
church or the Elks,” and “quasi-public institutions,” in which
category he places the unions. Mr. Northrup writes:
“The claims of unions that they should be permitted to
govern their own affairs, free from government interference of any
sort, is a ‘sheer anachronism,’ out of keeping with their actual
status in our present social organization ... Once unions are
admitted to be quasi-public institutions, it follows that their rules
and practices should be subject to some public scrutiny, and those
found contrary to the public interest should be forbidden.”
It is precisely by the acceptance of this premise that Congress
passed the Smith-Connally Act, that the no-strike pledge was
demanded, that the Little Steel formula was established and that
Roosevelt demanded passage of a National Service Act. The question
must be asked: What is a quasi-public institution? Unions are
institutions of a class, organized for the purpose of protecting the
interests of a class. They are or should be public in their relations
to the class which they represent. Implied in the demand of the
unions that they be free from government interference is the position
that government interference in the affairs of unions is interference
by another and a hostile class. The fact that this notion is usually
not explicit is only demonstrative of the lack of class-consciousness
and political understanding in the labor movement.
It is a tragedy in the labor movement that the unions do not
understand that they can hold to their discriminatory policies only
so long as the employers and the government have no need for the
services of the whole labor force. When, as at present, there is a
war to fight, the class interests of the employers and the government
will result in the intervention of the government by law and
administrative or presidential decree.
Mr. Northrup argues furthers, apropos the closed shop, that “it
seems quite sound, also, that unions which sign closed shop contracts
should also be subject to further regulation.” Also the existence
of “race wage differential” indicates “the need for strong
governmental action.” We agree with and support Mr. Northrup’s
very laudable attitude against the discrimination and Jim Crow. But
we do not agree with the cure which he proposes, namely, government
intervention or control. Even the most ordinary workers have acquired
an education in the meaning of government intervention in the “public
interest” through their experiences with the “public” members
of the WLB.
Negroes may profit materially, for the time being, by virtue of
government action against discriminatory unions but as a section of
the working class they have suffered along with the white workers
from the government and employer restrictions on the functioning of
the unions. The organization of the CIO did more to advance the
interests of Negroes and Negro labor than all the government
intervention in the twentieth century.
 
The Liberal and the “Public”
In advocating government regulation as a cure for racial
discrimination, Mr. Northrup takes the viewpoint of the middle-class
liberal in setting up an entity known as the “public” and then
arguing for action in the “public interest.” This attitude, as we
have remarked, ignores the class organization of capitalist society
and the further fact that unions are basically class institutions
participating in a struggle between classes. As the working class
develops greater class-consciousness and the Negro worker becomes
more firmly integrated thereby into the labor movement, Jim Crow and
discrimination will tend to vanish and the solidarity of labor will
be increased.
Despite his point of view for government regulation, Mr. Northrup
seems to agree with this position. He writes: “The overwhelming
bulk of organized labor ... has everything to gain from continued
improvements in the economic status of Negroes.” Also “it is
difficult to understand how Negroes can improve their lot without the
aid of organized labor. It is therefore obvious that Negro workers
who want unions to continue their fight for equal opportunity must
join and support the unions.”

Footnotes
1. Organized Labor and the Negro, by Herbert R. Northrup;
Harper & Bros.
 





Capitalist Press and the Miners
Labor could learn a lot about how to carry on working class
propaganda by paying attention to the way the ruling class does the
job in its own capitalist, press. Not from the Hearst or McCormick
papers, which are merely the asinine, vicious and puerile babblings
of two old men and their paid street-walkers, but from a paper like
the New York Times. Here is an “impartial”
journal, “independent” and giving “all the news
that’s fit to print.”
In a leading editorial on the UMWA and the coal negotiations
entitled “Believe It or Not,” the Times opens up
as follows:
“If there is a strange spectacle anywhere in the
world to-day, it is the spectacle of the government of the United
States solemnly preparing to poll the coal miners, under its official
auspices, on the question whether they want to cripple the American
Army and the American Navy with a wartime strike.”
And further:
“... here is the government of the United States
moving with all its majesty and the logic of some character out of
Alice in Wonderland, to ask the coal miners whether they would or
would not like to wreck the whole war effort in the event that they
are dissatisfied with the action on their wage demands.”
 

The Times’ Secret
Then the Times lets its readers in on a secret, evidently
known only to the Times. “This fantastic situation is
all in strict accordance with the Smith-Connally Act, the so-called
‘anti-strike law.’” It seems the miners didn’t
know about the Smith-Connally Act. They just filed that strike notice
because they wanted to give the employers an opportunity to change
their minds and the government an opportunity to enter as
“conciliator.”
What is important about this editorial is the fact that the
Times editors know how to prepare propaganda in
the interest of the capitalist class, which the Times
serves. Some workers and labor leaders will read this editorial
and exclaim that “The Times is unfair to
labor,” “The Times has distorted the
dispute between the miners and the coal operators,” “The
Times is more reactionary than Smith and Connally.”
All of which is pure nonsense and beside the point. As
spokesmen for capitalist “free enterprise,” the Times
editors know precisely what they are about. They are not primarily
concerned with the law or the. Smith-Connally Act They are primarily
concerned with strikes, with the stopping, of production, They know
that the chief function of a strike is to halt production.
A halt in production has two features, both of which are very
disagreeable to the capitalist employer and to the capitalist press,
the mouth-piece of the employer. One thorn in the side of the
employers and stockholders is that a halt in production may have an
effect on profits, which may affect the big salaries and dividends.
Also the strike might be won by the union if it is strong enough and
militant enough to confront the employer (and the employer’s
government) face to face for a showdown. In that case, the employer
will be forced to raise wages, which also affects profits, dividends
and the big salaries.
This is really what the Times is talking about. The Times
and the rest of the capitalist press did not adopt this attitude for
the period of the war. This is their permanent attitude in connection
with strikes and even in the matter of labor organization. This was
the attitude of the capitalists as far back as the first quarter of
the nineteenth century, when the workers were hauled into court and
convicted for “conspiring to raise their wages.” And all
they had done in this instance was attempt to form a union.
 

Speaks for Capitalism
The Times is particularly concerned now with strikes
because the ruling class, for which the Times speaks, is
engaged in the Second Imperialist World War. Out of military victory
in the war the capitalist ruling class in the United States expects
to attain world domination for United States capitalism, financial
and commercial.
It is or should be understandable to any worker why any banker,
manufacturer or capitalist journalist, seeing such a prize within
grasp, will writhe in agony and fury when confronted with the
possibility of a strike and the stopping of production. The fact that
a part of Poland and a half dozen little countries are tossed into
the Russian wolf pen, or that “democratic” Britain, will
come out of the war with all her millions of colonial slaves
accounted for, does not destroy the central fact that the capitalist
ruling class and its government at Washington fight the present war
for imperialist domination of the world.
It would never do of course to say this; that is, it would
never do to tell the masses of the people the truth. The capitalist
ruling class is class-conscious; it knows how to carry on the class
struggle, in peacetime and in wartime. With them the politics of war
is basically identical with the politics of peace. Even the use of
armed force, which is the chief characteristic of wartime politics,
is not peculiar to the wartime functioning of the ruling class. This
class never hesitates to use armed force in peace-time to defend its
class interests against the demands of the working-class.
The Times therefore, all the capitalist press and the
government, which Karl Marx called “the executive committee of
the ruling class,” construct their propaganda in such a way as
to further and protect their class interests. What other meaning can
be given to the demand for the no-strike pledge, the Little Steel
wage formula, job-freezing, the Smith-Connally Act and the new
Roosevelt-sponsored totalitarian slave labor bill?
 

For Whom? Against Whom?
Whose interests do these measures serve and protect? Which class?
Which class are they directed at and against? Which class makes
unlimited profits and disburses to itself unlimited cash dividends
while Davis, Vinson, Byrnes and Roosevelt “hold the line”?
Which class raises prices through the black market and other devices
of “free enterprise” while the OPA pats itself on the
back? Bill Green, Johnny Green, Phil Murray and R.J. Thomas should
answer these questions for the membership which pays their salaries.
The Times says that the government is preparing to ask
the miners whether or not they want to cripple the Army and Navy. Or
whether or not not they would like to wreck the whole war effort.
Unfair? Biased? Perhaps, but that is beside the point. The point is
WHO is “unfair” and for what purpose? Who, which class is
ignoring the miners’ side and to what end? The Times
does a little tear-jerking too in this editorial. “And so we
are treated to the spectacle of the same august government passing
out rations on Iwo Jima with one hand and strike votes with the
other.”
This is good capitalist propaganda. It has been a complete success
up to now. That’s what the Times, is published for.
That’s how it makes its profits. It is a factory producing
capitalist propaganda. It pays dividends, too. Every daily paper in,
the U.S. does the same thing. (The Daily Worker is different
only in that it doesn’t pay dividends, unless they carry
lend-lease to Russia on their books as dividends.)
 

Need a Labor Press
Of course the capitalist press ignores the miners’ side. But
they don’t ignore the coal operators’ side, the
automobile manufacturers’ side and the steel corporations’
side. The capitalist press defends the class which supports it with
“earnings” filched through the unpaid toil of the working class.
The CIO News, the American Federationist of the AFL,
the papers of the railway brotherhoods, and the publications of the
CIO internationals should be giving the miners’ side and
defending their interests.
Labor must have its own daily papers to print its own side. The
capitalist press distorts and lies. We do not need to distort and we
will not lie. We can and must tell the truth. The imperialists must
lie. They must lie about the war, they must lie about their profits,
they must lie about the miners and all the other unions that stand up
and fight. Churchill and
Roosevelt must lie about Yalta, Stalin must lie about his slave
dungeons, his deportations, his anti-union depredations and his murders.
The whole propaganda of imperialism is a mass of distortions,
trickery and lies. The imperialist governments are staffed with
distorters and liars who go under the name of “diplomats.”
The capitalist press is staffed by liars and distorters who go under
the name of editors, reporters, correspondents.
One problem of the working class today is to have our own
working class press to tell the working class truth, to spread
working class propaganda, to fight for labor and not for Roosevelt.
There should be no whimpering over the “distortions” and
the “unfairness” of the capitalists, their press and
their government.
 





The Meaning of Labor Political Action
The Midwest Labor World (United Retail, Wholesale & Department Store Employees, CIO) for November 22 carried an editorial entitled Political Action Not Enough. The editorial was a comment on an article by Frank Marquart which had appeared in another paper. The editorial begins with the statement:
“Political action is necessary, but it cannot be a substitute for the daily struggle between management and labor.”
Then follow some quotations from the Marquart article.
“Workers are told that since labor must deal with the WLB and other government agencies, their hope lies in political action ... There is a feeling ... that the growing emphasis on the political fields tends to replace rather than reinforce labor’s struggle in the industrial field.”
Marquart comments on the fact that stewards have difficulty in getting grievances settled but “meanwhile the guy at the machine wants to know what’s happened to his grievance. He thinks his committee-man has gone back on him and begins to wonder what the hell he is paying dues for.”
Marquart, in the article quoted, says that he is for political action.
“Actually I go further than most union members on this score, for I’m in favor of a third party ... but the people in our union who have gone ga-ga over political action seem to think it’s the cure-all for everything that ails us ... Labor needs two arms – one political and the other economic. It will be just too bad for us if, while building up our political arm, we allow our economic arm to wither.”
The weakness of the Midwest Labor World’s editorial and with Marquart’s editorial is that they do not get to this heart of the question, as demonstrated by the concrete situation in capitalist society today and the experience of the labor movement in the recent PAC political campaign.
At present the struggle between management and labor is a political struggle. It is a struggle between two classes, the working class and the ruling class, the class of wage earners and the class of capitalist profit-snatchers. The capitalist class has called on its government at Washington to give special attention to and guarantees for the protection of the interests of the capitalist class during this period of the Second Imperialist World War and for the immediate post-war days. This is demonstrated conclusively in the oppressive and semi-totalitarian anti-labor laws and decrees of the government and the extra-legal measures of the employers.
The fact that the government has intervened with its various boards, laws and decrees has also a direct relationship to the work of union representatives in the “daily struggle between management and labor.” Labor faces the government, and all acts of government are political acts. Labor cannot respond effectively with pure and simple trade union organization or activity. Political action is the “cure-all” for the ills of labor. That is, class political organization and action is the way out for labor and the only way out. Furthermore, there. is not or should not be any separation between working class economic action and working class political action. This is a myth which the capitalist ruling class seeks to spread among the workers.
There is no contradiction between the demand for a strong union to carry on “the economic struggle” and the demand for a workers’ political party to carry on “the political struggle.” There is really only one struggle: the struggle of labor as a class against the capitalists as a class. And this is a political struggle: the struggle of the working class to displace the present ruling class and reorganize society for the benefit of the majority of the people.
For this, a political party is needed. Such a party must be based on the unions. They must do the job. Of course, the unions must be strong and militant. They have a job to do in the mines, mills, fields and factories. But the national Labor Party based on the unions will also do a job in the mines, mills, fields and factories. It would protect and elevate the standards of labor from its place as the government of the country. It could do this because the government then would be the same people who today attempt to carry on the “daily struggle between management and labor.” The difference would be that these men and women of labor would carry on from the vantage point of government authority and power.
Perhaps the Midwest Labor World and Brother Marquart are fed up with the kind of political activity they observed in the case of the PAC during the last election campaign. That is, perhaps they are in disagreement with those who hold that “labor won the election” and elected a pro-labor President.
The weakness of the PAC campaign was that it was not working class politics which labor was called upon to practice. For the PAC or any other political “arm” of labor to continue this sort of politics, of course would “allow our economic arm to wither.” Our economic arm cannot possibly develop the necessary strength if it is used by our “political arm” for the purpose of supporting capitalist political parties and for electing capitalist politicians to office.
If Brother Marquart and the editors of Midwest Labor World are for a “third party,” meaning by that a Labor Party, an independent, mass party of the working class, then they should stand up and wage an uncompromising battle for such a party. The militants in the labor movement have this duty and this responsibility today as never before. We invite them to join. the Workers Party, where they would be associated with a group of workers who do fight for a mass independent Labor Party of the working class in the United States. That is not all we fight for. We fight for a revolutionary party and for socialism. We fight for a workers’ government and against imperialist war. We fight for peace, freedom and plenty.
 




The recent exchange of diplomatic notes between Green and Murray on the unity situation in the labor movement only serves to illustrate how far apart the AFL and the CIQ are on this question of merging the two big organizations.
Green says he and the AFL want complete organic unity. Murray is for a “broad” united front on important issues: The upshot of the whole matter is that nothing happens and the two organizations go their own separate way as they have gone for the past eight years.
Aside from the fact that there are real and important differences between the CIO and AFL, it is also a fact that one of the factors operating against merger is the bureaucratic interests of the top leadership of the two organizations. These two big labor bureaucracies, with their salaries staffs, power and prestige, are not anxious to risk even partial liquidation or loss of prestige.
To this must be added the fear in the CIO that merger between the two organizations might provide the opportunity for the return of John L. Lewis to a dominant position.
Since there is reason to believe that the UMWA will be back in the AFL, a merger between the AFL and the CIO would find Lewis right in the middle of the unified organization. With his ability and aggressiveness it would be extremely difficult to keep Lewis out of the leadership. In fact, in case of the retirement of Bill Green the miners’ president would probably, in time, become the president of the united organization.
In an editorial the UMWA District 50 News states that both the AFL and the CIO are subservient to “the Roosevelt Administration on all matters of major policy.” This, of course, is true and would remain true throughout the war unless there was some real opposition from the membership which is not in sight at present.
The News’ editorial goes on to say that “it is this domination of the two labor groups by political forces outside of labor that has kept them divided.” While this is partly responsible for the continuation of the split, there are other reasons. We have already mentioned one above. But there is also the continued contradiction between the craft union set-up of the AFL and the needs of the overwhelming mass of workers. These differences certainly have not been reconciled, as is clear not only from the orientation of the two organizations, but also from the many disputes which have already taken place and still take place today.
The labor movement will continue to be “dominated by political forces outside of labor” so long as labor has no working class political program and organization of its own.
The trade union movement will not and cannot be neutral in the matter of politics. Politics will not and cannot be kept out of the unions. The unions will go for capitalist politics or for labor politics. Furthermore, labor politics does not consist in the simple exercise of merely opposing the “Roosevelt Administration,” as was the case with the UMWA when Lewis, the Journal and the News supported Dewey in the last election.
The labor movement will be dominated by political forces outside the labor movement until labor actually organizes politically on an independent basis and program inside and through the labor movement.
 





Philip Murray Embraces the “Free” Russian Unions
in Stalinist Paper
Philip Murray, of the CIO, has recently had published an article on international labor unity in the Russian publication War and the Working Class. It is a very queer article and only reveals again Murray’s stupidity and naivete. He is going to attend a conference, to be held in London this month, to discuss the formation of an international organization of labor. The conference will be composed of representatives of the British Trade Union Congress, the CIO and Russia. What we have to say about this conference revolves primarily around the question of Russia and the Russian representatives.
What will the Russians at the conference be representing? Surely not free trade unions. As a matter of record, there are no trade unions in Russia. There are organizations of workers in Russia, but there are also organizations composed of workers in Germany. There are no organizations of workers in Germany. There are no organizations of workers in Russia which are called in England or the United States trade unions. There are no organizations in Russia such as existed, for example, in the days immediately preceding the October Revolution. There is certainly nothing in Russia today in any way comparable to the free unions which existed after the October Revolution, in the days of the Bolshevik Party of Lenin, Trotsky and the other great leaders of the revolution.
What is known in Russia today as trade unions are groups of workers herded into Stalinized, totalitarian organizations, just as the German workers are herded into Hitlerized, totalitarian organizations. The Russian workers’ organizations are controlled and dominated by the GPU, just as the German workers’ organizations are controlled and dominated by the Gestapo. There is nothing in Russia in any way similar to the British Trade Union Congress or the AFL and CIO in the United States.
When Murray gets to London to this conference he will not sit down with democratically chosen representatives of the Russian workers but with Russian Stalinist politicians, who will be present, not in the interest of the Russian workers or of world labor, but solely in the interest of the Stalinist totalitarian bureaucracy. Murray, so to speak, will sit down with the GPU dressed in “overalls.”
Murray’s thinking about “free” unions in Russia takes its point of departure from his obsession with the war and the temporary and fortuitous block between England, Russia and the U.S. formed for the purpose of inflicting a military defeat on Germany. In Murray’s childlike mind he reasons that since England, Russia and the United States are united in war, therefore the labor movements of the three countries should be united.
Certainly the workers of England, Russia and the U.S. should be united. But there is no way at present to unite with the Russia workers. Today Murray can travel freely around the U.S. or England and talk to the workers and their free organizations, but neither he nor anyone else, except the GPU and the Stalinist bureaucrats, can travel around Russia and talk to the workers.
The German workers should be united with the rest of world labor. They aren’t and they can’t be, right now. But Murray is not concerned with any procedure to bring this to pass. He believes that the “German people” should be compelled to “make restitution for their crimes.” Does he demand that the Russian people make restitution for the crimes of Stalin and the totalitarian Stalinist bureaucracy? He does not, and we are happy that he does not. But why, then, does he not apply the same logic to the German workers?
Murray wants the “German people” to “make restitution for their crimes” while he prepares to go to London and sit at the table with Stalin’s GPU and the personal stooges who will represent Stalin at this conference.
This is Philip Murray’s conception of how to get an international organization of labor to carry on in the interests of the world working class after the close of the present war!
 





How Progressives Get Licked
We have just learned that Joe Hanley, president of Local 108 of the Farm Equipment Workers in Chicago, has been defeated for re-election by a Communist Party slate. Thus another militant trade union leader goes down to defeat before the reactionary forces in the labor movement. What is particularly bad about the Hanley defeat is that he was defeated not by just ordinary trade union conservatives, but by the most venomous, poisonous and reactionary people in the whole trade union movement. This is the difference between the defeat of Bass of Goodrich Local in Akron and the defeat of Hanley.
After all, as a rule, pure and simple trade union conservatives believe in the preservation of the union as an organization for the maintenance of workers’ rights and improved working conditions. This goes for the bureaucracy at the top, but the Stalinists are not of this stripe. They go into a union to rule it in the interests of the Stalinist bureaucratic clique.
At present this means to fasten the union to the no-strike pledge, to put in the incentive, piecework pay, to kill all militancy in the union, to frame workers who demand militant action, to drag the union through the mire of capitalist politics: in a word, they go in to wreck the union and to deliver it over to the employer and the government.
 
An Old Story by Now
We don’t know all the details, but here again we have the same old story: a militant leader who failed to understand that not only militant trade union organization is necessary, but also the political education of the workers; Labor, whether in the Farm Equipment Union or in any other union, cannot stand against the political machine of the Stalinists or the capitalist political machines unless it is politically educated to understand the nature of the issues with which labor is confronted.
The Workers Party and Labor Action have been pounding away at this question for some months now. Many militant workers are beginning to understand. Some of them join the Workers Party, where they can have the association of other militant workers who face the same problems. Here they can acquire the necessary political education and learn how to associate themselves for the most efficient action as workers and on the foundation of a genuine and militant working class program.
*

A Prostitute Plying His Trade
Roy Hudson, writing in the Daily Worker for December 24, charges that “hypocrisy” is “proven” against the leaders of the fight against the no-strike pledge. The fight is a “conspiracy,” organized by “disrupters, headed by Reuther, the Trotskyites and other pro-Lewis forces.” According to Hudson, Avery refuses to abide by a decision of the WLB and the “disrupters” refuse to abide by the no-strike pledge. That is the “hypocrisy” and that is the “conspiracy.”
This stinks too much to fool anybody; Even if we admit that the UAW membership approved the no-strike pledge, surely that same membership has the right later to disapprove. The leaders of the movement to rescind the pledge resort to the most democratic method: let every member of the UAW cast a secret ballot and express his opinion. Of course, this is precisely what the Stalinists are against: the opportunity for a trade union membership to have the opportunity to express its opinion.
The Stalinists are against fair and honest voting in elections. They don’t like this method of giving every member a chance to vote and protecting his right to vote as he sees fit. They believe in and practise methods which prevent a membership from expressing its real opinion. These people believe in stealing elections or in organizing voting so that it will be as difficult as possible for the membership to vote. Then they can rush in their stooges and win the vote or the election by an “overwhelming majority of “the honest workers.”
The only disruption in the no-strike pledge referendum is the disruption of the plans and methods of the Stalinists. Any honest and democratic procedure is a disruption of their plans. Any honest and decent procedure for the membership of a union to express its opinion is a “conspiracy” to the Communist Party.
 
Avery Is Aided by American Communists
Sewell Ayery refuses to abide by the decision of the WLB because it is his, that is, the capitalists’ WLB. He refuses because he wants to do everything possible to harass the unions. He believes that he can get away with it. He is fighting for his class interests as a capitalist. Despite their raucous tirades against Avery, the Stalinists fight at his side and arm in arm with him.
The workers refuse to abide by the no-strike pledge because they have discovered that the pledge is only an aid to Avery and the other capitalists. The leaders of the movement to rescind the no-strike pledge want the membership of the UAW to express its opinion, in the most democratic mariner. The Moscow bureaucrats advocate that labor lie on its back and permit the Averys to walk on its face. This is what they call “winning the war.”
What does Hudson mean by “pro-Lewis” forces? Is Walter Reuther pro-Lewis? When, where and how does he demonstrate this? Does Hudson take every worker in the land for a plain fool? Not only is Reuther not pro-Lewis, and Hudson knows this, but Reuther is not even a leader in the agitation against the no-strike pledge. On this point he is closer to the Stalinists than he is on the question of supporting the war. Whom are the Stalinists trying to push Reuther off on?
 
Capitalists Gain from No-Strike Pledge
The Workers Party and Labor Action are not pro-Lewis. We supported the UMWA last year during the strikes. We supported Lewis in the matter of the miners’ fight for life. Thousands of workers in the CIO and the AFL supported him also. We will support Lewis again if and when he leads his Union in any militant action for the redress of their grievances. If Philip Murray should dry his eyes and lead his steel workers in a struggle for that seventeen-cents-an-hour increase we would support him also. Labor Action would support him in big bold type, just as we did Lewis and the UMWA in 1943.
Hudson closes his article with the call for retaining the no-strike pledge. He calls that a “victory” which can be won if “no quarter is given to the enemy.” To keep the no-strike pledge would be a victory: a victory for the Stalinists; which is only another way of saying a Victory for the Averys, the NAM, Ford, Chrysler, the duPonts, the WLB and all the capitalist employers.
 




The FEPC has recently directed the United States Cartridge Co. in St. Louis to reinstate two Negro workers who were laid off by the company in accordance with its “seniority plan. “ An interesting feature of the cartridge company’s “plan “ was that a separate seniority set-up is maintained for Negroes. This plan is based on the company’s Jim Crow policy in the hiring of Negroes and their segregation policy in the placing of Negroes in the plant. This is not a genuine departmental seniority system, but out-and-out practice of Jim Crow.
In defense of the layoff of the two Negro workers, the company claimed that its separate seniority plan for Negroes sometimes gave Negro workers the advantage over white workers. While this might happen sometimes and in the case of some Negro workers, such results are not the function and aim of union seniority procedure. Seniority is not for the purpose of giving advantage to any racial or national group over another but to give the union an instrument with which to protect itself against disruptive attacks from employers. In this way the union protects all its members irrespective of their race or nationality.
In its directive the FEPC makes the statement that its function is to protect all workers from discrimination: “white as well as ... colored employees. “ In the concrete situation which exists in the United States this sounds like nonsense. It is true that white workers are discriminated against but the discrimination against white workers is not identical with nor even similar to the discrimination suffered by Negro workers. Discrimination against white workers is usually in connection with union activity or for political belief or for personal reasons.
Discrimination against the Negro workers takes place prior to union activity and without concern with his or her political beliefs. Usually it is discrimination against Negroes as Negroes. The only white workers who suffer this type of discrimination are those discriminated against as members of white racial minorities: Jews, Italians, Slavs, etc.
*
When the UAW convention voted that the international apparatus was not to be used in any partisan way in the matter of the referendum on the no-strike pledge, one might have assumed that such injunction would apply also to the official organ of the CIO, the CIO News. But we know now that this is not the case.
In the January 8 number of the national edition of the CIO News, seven pages of a total of twelve are devoted to propaganda for the retention of the no-strike pledge. On the front page FDR Hails UAW No-Strike Pledge, GIs Meet Bloody Death in Germany; Army Needs 100% Backing at Home. At the bottom of the page is the picture of a dead soldier. The editorial page carries an editorial on the no-strike pledge: Let’s Meet the Challenge and the column by Stalinist Len De Caux calling for the retention of the pledge. The back page carries on from page one. There is a four-page insert: Our Pledge to the Nation, Don’t Let GIs Down and a quotation from Murray’s speech at the CIO, convention beginning with the sentence: “The no-strike pledge is a sacred obligation ... “
This number of the CIO News is certainly a support of the no-strike pledge of the most lurid sort. Most of the material is irrelevant and dishonest in connection with the issue. There is no discussion of the fact that the workers have grievances. From reading the CIO News, one would think that all those workers who are opposed to the pledge are a group of irresponsible, wild men and not the loyal and militant trade unionists who know that labor has been gypped, mulcted and threatened by the government and the employers since labor was sold down the river by its leadership.
 





Reply to a Letter on Russia from a Reader
Labor Action has received a letter from a new subscriber in Detroit commenting on democracy and workers’ rights as experienced in the land of Stalin by two of his brothers who went there in 1936. Our new subscriber writes that his brothers found “state slavery” in Russia for over eighty-per cent of the people. As our correspondent puts it: the “Russian producing class did not have the opportunity to enjoy the wealth of Russia when my brothers were there. Only high-ranking politicians or a lousy police officer ... were entitled to enjoy the wealth such as better housing or to own an automobile.”
 
No Socialism in Russia
All of this has been said before many times and in various ways by Labor Action and the Workers Party. A large part of the writings of Leon Trotsky was concerned with this aspect of the “victory of socialism” under Stalin, his GPU and his whole bureaucratic clique.
Reduced to their simplest terms, however, all these articles and books on this subject mean exactly what these two workers discovered out of their own experience and the simple description of these experiences by their brother. They did not experience the practice of democracy of, for and by the working class. If this is not present, then certainly there is no socialism.
The writer of the letter emphasizes, with some penetration, that this condition existed even in peacetime. That is, there was no workers’ democracy even in a period when Russia was not confronted by attack from external imperialist enemies. It is necessary to mention that this was the period during which Stalin and his GPU instituted the monstrous frame-up trials of the Old Bolsheviks, organized the betrayal of the Spanish Revolution and initiated the hunt which ended in the murder of Trotsky by one of Stalin’s GPU agents.
Furthermore, the writer points out that it is a queer sort of socialism under which a hew class develops and consumes the wealth by virtue of its bureaucratic position, while the working class is virtually enslaved.
The writer of the letter also contrasts, the political status of the masses in Russia with that of the working class in the United States. He says:
“For instance, we here in the United States still are having a form of government ... which is called for the people and by the people. But in Russia, since the year of 1934, it is just the opposite way.”
 
A Long History
This tendency of which the writer of the letter speaks began long before 1934. It began, before the expulsion of Trotsky and the “Trotskyites” from the Communist Pasty in 1928. By 1934 Stalin had betrayed and wrecked the Chinese Revolution and made the deal with Chiang Kai-shek which resulted in the butchery of countless thousands of the best revolutionary workers in China.
Before 1934 Stalin had led and dragged the Communist parties of the world through all the twists and turns which landed these parties where they are today: to the most brazen support of the ruling class and imperialist war; to sapping the energies and the fighting spirit of the trades unions; and acting in every way to dampen the class struggle and deliver the working class bound hand and foot to the capitalist ruling class. What the writer of the letter is saying in the above quotation is that the political structure in Russia, being totalitarian is more reactionary than the political structure in the U.S., which is the political organization of capitalist democracy. Capitalist democracy, of course, is also reactionary in relation to workers’ democracy or socialism. The political regime of the Stalinist bureaucracy in Russia is politically of the same stripe as the Hitlerite Nazi regime in Germany. Both are totalitarian, oppressive, destructive to the organizations of the working class and the complete negation of freedom.
The chief symbol of both regimes is the secret police, the Gestapo and the GPU. In both countries the role of the secret police is to protect the reactionary, anti-working class bureaucracy. Every worker understands this in the case of the Gestapo, but is likely to become muddled when he thinks about the GPU. The GPU, as it history under Stalin demonstrates, is just as reactionary and anti-working class as the Gestapo.
In Germany the Nazi bureaucracy rests on capitalism and its function was and is to prolong the life of German capitalism. In Russia the
Stalinist bureaucracy is a new class which has arisen on the collectivized property, which of course is not capitalist property. The Workers Party characterizes Russia as bureaucratic collectivist state. It is not a capitalist nor a fascist state. The Stalin regime is a new class basing itself on the collectivized property. The complete position of the Workers Party is contained in The New International during the year 1941.
 
Capitalist “Democracy”
The claim made by the ruling class and its defenders that the government of the U.S. is of, by and for the people is as much of a myth as the claim of Stalin and his defenders that there is socialism in Russia. The government of the U.S. is a government of the capitalist ruling class. This class rules because it has social power.
Its social power results from its ownership of the materials of production: land, natural resources, raw materials, tools, machines, trans port, communications and money capital. This makes the ruling class a dictatorship. Its dictatorship is masked by the political parliamentary structure, which gives the impression that because of universal suffrage (millionaire and pauper alike have one vote) all the people are equal, and that the government is a non-class government.
We do have our trade unions and political parties; they have not been suppressed yet. In Germany there are no trade unions. In their place are the slave labor front and the concentration camp. In Russia there are no trade unions. There are organizations composed of workers which go by the name of trade unions. But they are in fact a labor front. Also the labor camps of Russia are no different from the concentration camps of Hitler.
While we in the United States are still free to have our trade unions and political parties, it would be foolish to maintain that this must always be so. There is nothing peculiar about the U.S. which guarantees continued “prosperity” for capitalist society. Workers who rest serene in such beliefs may wake up some morning in a native American concentration camp. The time to do something about concentration camps is now, while the workers’ organizations are alive, powerful and active.
 




I have been trying to follow the transactions of the World Trade Union Conference, meeting in London, but this is extremely difficult when one is located in Los Angeles. There are no newspapers here that make any pretense at an adequate coverage of national and international events. The daily rubbish that comes in the Chandler Times and the Hearst Examiner stinks as much as the oil refineries in the environs of LA. Manchester Boddy’s News makes an effort to be a newspaper but it is really little more than a purveyor of local items. Boddy’s personal editorials and the “boiler plate” coming from Drew Pearson and other national columnists.
 
IFTU and Fascism
At any rate, it seems that the London Conference, composed of the British Trade Union Congress, the CIO and Stalin’s GPU, has been giving attention to the problem of what to do with Germany after the armies of Russia and the United Nation’s have pitched their tents in Berlin. I don’t know yet what the CIO proposal is aside from the declaration of the last CIO convention that the “German people must be made to make restitution for the crimes they have visited on humanity.”
Carey, in his speech to the Conference, said that the CIO is in accord with the views of Citrine that “strong measures must be taken to assure the complete destruction of every vestige of fascism and of Japanese imperialism.” Carey did not say who was to destroy “fascism” and “Japanese imperialism.” Presumably, Churchill, Stalin and Roosevelt. We all can agree that these three “statesmen” will aim at the destruction of Japanese imperialism. That is, we can agree that such is their present aim. No one should be surprised, however, should any one of the three and the imperialists they represent, come to the conclusion at some later date that a little “Japanese imperialism” in China, for instance, might not be so bad. American scrap dealers, for example, some day might find themselves with a surplus of scrap iron which the Japanese might be willing to take off. their hands at a good stiff price.
It is also true that Great Britain will have no moral scruples against destroying Japanese imperialism. England has a perfect record at destroying not only rival imperialisms, but national independence of big and small nations and any and all political, economic and social aspirations of colonial peoples.
 
U.S. and Japan
The United States, too, can be counted on to carry on a holy crusade against “Japanese imperialism.” Aren’t the Japanese in possession of the tin, rubber and oil of the Netherlands East Indies? England can be counted on to render complete assistance in this task of destroying “Japanese imperialism.” England will do this as long as “Japanese imperialism” is a threat to British imperialism. If, at some later date, imperialist Japan should become useful to the British imperialist ruling class (as in 1932), then we may expect Great Britain to join hands with the Japanese.
There is therefore no guarantee at all that the Big Three imperialist nations, England, Russia and the United States, will maintain the present love feast. Any one of them will stab the others in the back at the moment dictated by “manifest destiny,” “dollar diplomacy,” “national interests,” etc. For where oil, coal, iron, wheat or markets are, “there is the fatherland.”
The destruction of “every vestige of fascism” is quite another matter. Who is to do this? The British imperialist ruling class? Our own imperialist ruling class? The imperialist Stalinist gangsters and murderers? The Big Three? Is that what Churchill’s tanks were doing in Greece when they ran down the Greek workers? Hitler’s tanks also ran down the Greek workers.
Does the Roosevelt government consider it is destroying “every vestige of fascism” when it proposes a National Service Act which will chain the workers to the private profit “free enterprise” factories of duPont, Morgan, Stettinius and Rockefeller? Hitler organized a labor front, too, which chained the German workers to the private profit capitalist factories of Krupp and Goering. Goering is in the Hitler government, but so are Stettinius and Rockefeller in the Roosevelt government.
Will Stalin say that he is destroying “every vestige of fascism” when he sends his bloody GPU to rule over the Romanians, Hungarians, Poles, Estonians and Lithuanians? Or when he transports hundreds of thousands of Polish workers to Russia and keeps them at forced labor? Or when he proposes that hundreds of thousands of German workers be sent into Russia to rebuild, the country after the war? We presume that some of the Stalinist-renovated Junkers German generals, now held in “protective custody” by Stalin, will be made slave-drivers over these deported German workers in the Russian labor camps.
 
Something to Think About
These are things for workers in the U.S. to think about. This is something for Murray, Carey, Hillman and every labor leader to think over. They act as though the world and all its problems were only a vast taffy-pulling contest. They talk about wiping out “every vestige of fascism” by defeating Germany, just as though fascism were a. private monopoly of Hitler, invented by him and never dreamed of by any capitalist in any other country in the world. To these labor leaders, fascism has no relationship to capitalism, to capitalist economic crises, to unemployment or to any of the manifold ills which bear down on society today all over the world.
Murray has called for the the revival of the PAC clubs and committees. Just ordinary militant workers might consider demanding a discussion on these important questions in the meetings of the national PAC, in every local union and in every local PAC committee.
 

   The hearings of the Senate Banking and Currency Committee on the Wagner-Murray “Full Employment Bill” have called out all of the top labor leaders as well as the representatives of the big employer groups. Probably the most direct and pertinent testimony was presented by John L. Lewis of the UMWA. As is his custom, Lewis really only nibbled at the root of the problem. Lewis told the committee that Congress should and must regulate the hours of work if there is to be full employment in the midst of immense technological development and a “glutted market.” The problem of unemployment “is indubitably associated with the question of the number of hours and number of days that we operate our production and fabricating plants ...” Should capitalist enterprise go ahead with production on the basis of its increased capacity “the warehouses and shelves will become full and the market will be glutted, because buying power on the part of the population and their ability to consume the products that they buy will not keep pace with the constant increase of productivity. Inconsequence we will be faced with a reaction.” There is something wrong in the statement quoted above. It incorrect to say that with a great increase in the tempo of capitalist production and with an accompanying lower wage the “population”will not be able to buy, but what does Lewis mean when he says that the “population will not be able to consume the products that they buy” because of the “constant increase of productivity.”   “Glutted Market”? Does he mean that the orgy of capitalist production will go on so blindly that the people who do buy will have so much on hand that they will not be able to consume their supplies? His use of the expression “glutted market” would give this impression. This is fantastic, and of course not in line with Lewis’ main argument about the reduction of hours. The main problem in connection with increased production is not whether people will be oversupplied but whether or not they will be supplied at all. Whether or not they are supplied at all depends on the level of wages. If wages are low and there is mass unemployment, production will not go on for long. The rate of production will not increase, .but the rate of unemployment will. This condition cannot be correctly be described as a “glutted market” but rather a condition of no market. Bursting warehouses and bursting banks –that is “glutted” warehouses and banks – do not produce a market. In practice this is determined by full employment, the level of wages and the standard of living. Lewis calls on the Federal Government to provide for a “reasonable minimum standard of living” through the “adjustment and shortening of the hours of labor ...” This is very vague. Capitalism has its own notions about what is a “reasonable minimum standard of living.” Right now this seems to flutter somewhere between 50 and 75 cents an hour. Lewis wants Congress to fix the minimum wages only. The rest is to be taken care of through collective bargaining, But to leave it this way will get us into difficulties.   Hours and Pay Lewis is convinced that hours must be reduced. The employers are willing to reduce hours. With a demand for the reduction of hours must go a demand for no reduction in wages. The workers organizations must first describe what the minimum wage should be in order to maintain a genuinely decent standard of living. They should demand that hours be reduced so as to keep the “population” in a job without any reduction in wages or standard of living. To have any meaning this must be done concretely as it has been done by the Workers Party in its Reconversion Program. There the Workers Party calls for “Absorption of all workers thrown into unemployment during reconversion by reduction of the work-week with no reduction in the weekly take-home pay.” “A job for every worker with a guaranteed minimum annual wage of $2, 500 per year ... A guaranteed annual income to all workers’ families ...” Of course this money must come from somewhere. It it cannot come from industry directly, then the government should conscript the war industries, nationalize the banks, big industrial monopolies, transportation systems and place a100 per cent tax on war profits above 5 per cent on invested capital. These procedures, of course, cannot be left to the present Congress or any capitalist Congress. Production would necessarily have to bender the control of the workers’ committees. The whole working class would need its own labor party as the government to run the country. None of this program can be left to free enterprise. Neither Lewis nor any of the labor leaders have any program that answers the real needs of the “population, ” Lewis wants to “maintain free enterprise in America.” This is the sore spot and the source of the real bottleneck. “Free enterprise” doesn’t go for full employment, for short hours, high wages. That isn’t the capitalist conception of freedom. The capitalist conception of freedom and “free enterprise”is high salaries to its corporation officers, high interest and dividend payments; social, political and economic power for the capitalist class and no more to the working class than is necessary to maintain that working force needed in capitalist production at a certain period and under certain conditions. To look at capitalism, including the capitalist government at Washington in any other way, is to give oneself a big dose of opium.   A Good Point Lewis made an attack on the clause in the bill providing for the payment of “locally prevailing wages, ” This was correct. This clause in the hill only underscores the fact that what this bill really aims at is not a high standard of living for everybody but a minimum standard of living for everybody. It is a“full employment bill, ” but not a high standard of living bill. Lewis said that this clause should be stricken out and “wages fixed through collective bargaining” substituted. In connection with this clause he mentioned specifically the low wages in the South and particularly the “vicious economic exploitation of the Negro race.” It is correct to insist on collective bargaining in connection with wages, hours and conditions of work. Collective bargaining, however, if it is to produce anything, worthwhile is not something to fight for “in principle’ only. This is particularly important today when the capitalist employers are hell bent forsaking the unions weak and impotent. In fact capitalist society has reached the stage in its degeneration where collective bargaining, if carried on vigorously by organized labor, becomes a millstone around the neck of capitalist profits. When Lewis mentions the low standard of living in the South, the vicious economic exploitation which goes on there and the demand that wages be settled by collective bargaining, he poses the question of the trade union organization of the South. Before we can have collective bargaining in the South, the workers there must reorganized. They are not today. The millions of agricultural peons and the unskilled urban workers are not organized. The CIO talked about“organizing the South” before the war but did virtually nothing. Lewis can do a far better job for the working class by sending District 50 organizers there than he can by talking before the Senate Committee on Banking and Finance.   



(Continued from August issue)
White workers have an abundance of evidence at hand in their past
experience with the capitalist employers to teach them that what we
say here is true. White workers acquiesced in the barring of Negroes
from skilled and semi-skilled occupations for decades. Some of them
went so far as to write in their union constitutions that Negroes
could not be members. They participated in pogroms against Negro
workers. They collaborated with anti-Negro employers and used their
closed shop agreements to keep Negroes off the job. They engaged in
strikes against the hiring or the upgrading of Negroes. But when the
Second Imperialist World War rolled around with unprecedented demand
for increased production, the capitalists and their government did
not hesitate to raze the job barriers against Negroes and induct
hundreds of thousands of them into “white” jobs. The Negro lost
his inferiority, at least to a considerable degree. The protestations
of white workers availed them nothing. The FEPC appeared. There were
presidential decrees against the barring of Negroes. Capitalist
employers discovered that Negroes were as good workmen as white men.
They even expressed disagreement when white women objected to working
with Negro women.
The contention that “Negroes are savages” did not seem to be a
matter of any importance. The lathes, punch presses and welding
apparatus did not seem to be concerned with whether or not the
“hands” that operated them were black or white. The owners of the
machines also did not bother about the niceties of social theory and
practice. For the time being at least these were things for the
erudition of a backwoods Bilbo, the gentlemen of the professorial
chair, the editorial office and the street corner. When a big war is
on, there are capitalist profits to be made and gold is neither black
nor white. Fifteen per cent on one’s investment or an annual salary
of $100,000 wrung out of the sweat and blood of a black worker will
buy just as many mansions, cocktails, and chorus girls as the same
amount from the labor of a white worker. Capitalist profit really
knows no color line. The African native toiling in the Transvaal gold
fields, concentration camps, the Nicaraguan peon writhing under the
lash of the slave drivers of the United Fruit Company, the Chinese
coolie sweating out profits for the British imperialists, the Indian
laborer bowed under the weight of the whole British ruling class, the
Negro sharecropper of the South eking out his inhuman existence on
sow belly and corn meal, the Mexican peon enriching the Associated
“Farmers” of California, stand no lower in the estimation of the
capitalist masters than the “aristocracy of labor” in the most
highly skilled of the AFL craft unions.
The white worker who does not understand these things is in fact a
very naive individual. He believes everything that he is told. He is
a glutton for error, myth, ignorance and superstition. He sees the
employers and the government crack down on his Negro exclusionist
policies during the war and his only reaction is: “Just wait until
the war is over and we’ll get rid of the niggers.” How does he
know he will, and what does he mean by “get rid of?” White
workers have never understood that the preferment which has been
theirs all these decades was neither basically a matter of the
capitalist employers being pro-white labor or anti-Negro labor but
what best serves the interest of capitalism at a certain time or in a
certain locality. The ruling class always seeks to divide and rule.
The atomization of the working class has not been promoted by the
ruling class in the relations between black and white workers but
also between skilled and unskilled, male and female, children and
adults, natives and “foreigners,” Jew and Gentile, northerner and
southerner, urban and rural.
We have said that these phenomena in the ranks of the white
workers are the result of the impact of capitalist society on the
working class: the penetration of the working class by ideas which
should be cast out as alien and inimical to the welfare of the
proletariat as a class. A united and class conscious ruling class
parades before the working class with slogans and ideas which if
accepted by the workers can only lead to strife, disruption and
disintegration of the working class front. The fact that the economic
problem facing the white worker is the same problem faced by the
Negro does not impress itself on the white worker. He has a feeling
that because he is white, he is entitled to more and better. The
capitalist employers, knowing full well that the root of the problem
is capitalism itself and the search for capitalist profits, seek
always to keep the white worker disoriented and safe in the tow path
of race and race superiority.
The root problem is the job problem. Under capitalism there are
not, will not and cannot be enough jobs for all the people. Those who
work can never hope to receive adequate wages or a high enough
standard of living. Capitalist profits and a high standard of living
for the masses are incommensurable. White workers act as though they
believed that if there were no Negroes in the U.S., they would have
no economic difficulties. If this is true then Bilbo and the Negro
chauvinists have the solution white workers are looking for more
jim-crow, complete separation or giving the Negroes a country of
their own. It is extremely difficult, however, to grasp how a white
worker can accept such nonsense. To believe this is to believe that
12 or so million Negro workers are the main obstacle to the economic
welfare of 40 to 50 millions of white workers. And not only this but
the 50 millions Belong to the superior race and the 12 millions are
cursed with the badge of inferiority.
It is a most sorrowful predicament that the white workers have
permitted themselves to be pushed into. Fifty millions of them have
developed the conception that they can enhance or sustain their
present economic, social and political position by keeping Negroes
common laborers, by segregating them into Jim Crow departments, by
disenfranchisement, by forcing them to live in Negro ghettoes, by mob
violence, terrorism and lynching. This is the way the white worker
attacks the problem of capitalist exploitation, of profit grabbing
and imperialist war. If there are no Negroes around the capitalists
will agree among themselves not to have any more depressions. If
there were no Negroes involved, the capitalists and the government
would reconvert to peace-time production at a faster tempo, they
would never attack seniority and no white worker would ever be fired
and rehired at a lower rate Of pay. Any employer who violated the
sacredness of this arrangement would be branded by the National
Association of Manufacturers, as a betrayer of the white race. If
such events occurred in the South, that would be betrayal of the
South and an insult to southern white womanhood.
 
The Roots of Negro Aggressiveness
And thus the white worker attempts to rise on the backs of the
Negro toilers. He attempts to solve the problems of capitalist
created scarcity by demanding only a meagre portion for his children
and starvation of the child of the black worker. He demands a cheap
pair of shoes for his wife and is satisfied if the wife of the Negro
worker goes barefoot. He confines his efforts to getting some kind of
shelter for himself and drives the black worker into the unspeakable
cabins of the cotton fields and the vermin infested hovels of the big
cities. This is what the white worker has learned in capitalist
society. This is what he has imbibed from the capitalist press, the
capitalist school, the capitalist pulpit and the capitalist
government. This is the halter which the ruling class has drawn
around the neck of the white working class, the blinders which this
class has placed over its own eyes.
Quite often white workers resent aggressiveness on the part of
Negroes. I have heard them say that Negroes “push too hard” for
their rights. Negroes are too “uppity.” “They should take
things a little easy.” Here these white workers are only producing
an echo. That is what he reads in the capitalist press. That is what
he hears from white “friends of the Negro,” and white enemies of
the Negro. That is the kind of advice the Negro gets from certain
white liberals, especially the southern white “liberals.” The
white worker should stop and ask himself: what or whom is the Negro
pushing against? What are the roots of this aggressiveness? Does the
Negro push too much against the employer? If so, this is good. The
white workers themselves need a few practical lessons in this type of
pushing. If the Negro worker gives them this lesson, we say “well
and good.” That is a much needed contribution that militant Negro
workers can make to the labor movement.
Do the Negro workers push too hard against the officers of a local
which collaborates with the employer in discrimination against
Negroes? We will support wholeheartedly this type of pushing also and
every white worker who is against discrimination should do likewise.
And without hesitation or qualification. Do Negroes demand in a most
aggressive manner, their democratic rights in all phases of national
life? The Workers Party supports this type of pushing also and every
white worker should go arm in arm with the Negroes in this demand.
Are Negroes angry in the United States today? Do they at times
give vent to their anger in foolish ways? Do they at times react in
an incorrect manner toward white workers? To be sure they do, but who
are the white workers to rise in such righteous indignation against
them? How did the Negroes get into this condition? Is the white
working class ready to pretend that it has made no contribution to
this situation?It can be only a pretense because the Negro worker has
had many sad experiences with the white working class during the past
decades since his emancipation. The Negro has been oppressed and
exploited by the white ruling class and maltreated and oppressed by
the white working class. In his political and social immaturity he
has not always understood how to make the proper distinction between
the “boss” and the white worker. The Negro worker and the white
worker both have been victims of the same capitalist poison
propaganda. White workers should therefore ask themselves whom and
what Negroes “push” against. Do they push against the union and
when? Do they push against the employer and when?
Here too the white worker is thinking in terms of race and not of
class. It is race against race. The militant and aggressive Negro in
the factory is not a worker with a grievance against the company or
the local, or the international. He becomes a Negro who “wants to
be as good as a white man. The white worker develops a grievance
against the Negroes and at times expresses this resentment by
collaborating with the company.
Do Negro workers who come North for example, try to move into
“white neighborhoods” after they have accumulated a few dollars
and become accustomed to a higher standard of living? To be sure they
do. Is this one other mark of inferiority? Does the white worker
expect the Negro to act in any different way from the white worker.
The white worker from Mississippi or Arkansas, who has come North to
escape the horrors and misery of “Tobacco Road,” to escape the
low wages and the meagre standard of living of the South, begins to
fix himself up as soon as he has made a few days’ pay. The Negro
who has left the South or the slums of the North, does likewise. He
moves into a “white neighborhood.” Why? Because he has only one
aim in life: to live beside a white man? The white worker who thinks
this is really too stupid to be entitled to opinion on any question
whatsoever. The Negro goes to the “white neighborhood” because
here he finds the most modern houses, the best paved streets, the
most up-to-date school buildings, fewer brothels, whiskey shops,
factories and dumps.
Instead of the white working class welcoming this move by the
Negro, quite often a mob is organized to drive Negroes back to the
slums and shanty-towns from which they came. What are the white
workers protecting when they act in this manner? Whose property?
Their own property? Nonsense; they own no property. Even those white
workers, particularly in small communities, who have a little home of
their own, discover every so often that they do not own anything; not
even the house on which they pay taxes to the capitalist state. The
white working class renters who object to Negro neighbors are victims
of the propaganda of the big property owners and real estate
operators who say that “Negroes depress property values,” Why
should white workers be interested in maintaining “property
values?” It is not their property. They, like other wage-earners,
own no property. The property is owned by the banks, landlords,
insurance companies: that is, by the capitalist exploiters of all the
workers; black and white. If Negroes depress property values, that in
itself is a good reason for any white worker to welcome the arrival
of Negroes.
Do Negroes want to eat in “white” restaurants? Of course they
do. They want to eat where other people eat and where it is most
convenient to eat. Why do white workers object? The proprietor says
that if he serves Negroes he will lose his trade. Why will he lose
his trade? Because white workers will not eat with Negroes or rent a
room in a hotel if the proprietor accommodates Negroes? But we ask
any white worker: “What interest can you have in refusing to eat in
a restaurant which serves Negroes or live in a hotel which rents a
room to a Negro?” Assuming that there is a loss if Negroes are
served or accommodated, is it the white worker who suffers the loss?
How many white workers own hotels, restaurants, theatres, railroads
or bus lines? In what way to white workers profit by the exclusion of
Negroes? Does the hotel keeper reduce their room rent, the cafe owner
the prices of the meal, the railroad the cost of the ticket or the
landlord the amount of the rent? If none of this, then what? A
feeling of racial superiority? This is very poor material to use as a
foundation for economic security, for the building of the unions, for
the struggle against the employers, or for the organization of
working class political action.
 
The Bogey of Social Equality
The white worker has one stock argument against Negro equality
which is likely to be pulled out at the drop of the hat. That is his
obsession with what he calls “social equality.” “How would you
like for your sister to marry a Negro?” It is expected that this
question will floor any white worker who has been advocating that
Negroes should have the right to a job, to live in a decent house, to
eat in a “white” restaurant or ride on a train like other people.
“How would you feel if you looked up and saw your girl friend
dancing with a Negro?” For fear that the “girl friend” might
forget herself and dance with one of the Negro members of the union,
such a worker takes the position that Negro members should not be
allowed to attend union social affairs.
Years ago I heard a southern congressman say in the House that he
went into the Washington Union Station and there was no place “for
my wife and daughter to set. Every place they went they would have to
set by a darky.” The white union member who talks about “social
equality” in the way which is prevalent among these workers is
taking the identical attitude as this congressman. If Negroes just
must use the trains then let them have a separate waiting room and a
separate coach. If Negroes insist on joining “our unions” then
let them have their own department, their own washrooms and their own
social affairs.
This attitude on the part of white workers is reactionary In more
ways than one. It assumes that men should control the lives of women
and dictate to their wives, sisters and sweet- hearts, who their
associates should be. This is a medieval conception of the place of
women in society. They are given an inferior status and told by the
men how they should live their lives. Also such an attitude on the
part of white workers assumes that the main determinant in social
behavior should be, or is, sex and the relations between the sexes. A
white worker who exhibits such beliefs reveals that he accepts all
the anti-Negro propaganda that is spread through the country by the
purveyors of hate and working class disruption. This “social
equality” obsession of the white workers gives the impression that
his main concern in life is to keep Negro men away from “our
women.” All of this orients white labor away from what should be
their main concern: the united struggle of the working class black
and white, male and female, against the capitalist employers and
exploiters. Their attention gets centered on maintaining artificial
divisions within the working class, which strips labor of its
striking power, makes it the prey of every demagogue and hate-monger.
The most important aspect of this question of “social equality”
for the working class, however, is the fact that the white worker
thinks that he has social equality. He doesn’t know that the Negro
worker has just as much social equality in the fundamental sense as
the white worker. The essence of social equality is not merely nor
primarily the right or the opportunity to mingle socially with those
of other racial groups. The white worker does not achieve social
equality in capitalist society just because he excludes Negroes from
association with him. Social equality is the question of which class
one belongs to: ruling class or working class. In a capitalist
society if one belongs to the working class, then one does not and
cannot have or achieve social equality in that society. Only those
can be socially equal who share in the distribution of social power.
Social power, therefore, social equality is based on economic power.
Economic power means the owner ship of the means of producing wealth:
the mines, mills, factories and the banks.
The white worker deludes himself even if he believes that he has
political equality. Many workers think thus because they have one
vote the same as the millionaire. Rockefeller has only one vote the
same as the lowliest wage-earner. But political power too, can be
understood only by looking at capitalist society or capitalist
democracy (the United States) as a society divided by class lines:
ruling class on one side and the working class on the other. The
ruling class rules politically as a class because this class owns the
wealth and the means of producing wealth. It protects its political
power, it dominates the government and the country by virtue of the
fact that it has social power.
If the white worker, the white trade unionist, would look at this
question through his own eyes, that is, through his own experience he
would get the point clearly. He wants to bar the Negro worker from
his dance but this white worker doesn’t think the matter through.
This white worker is himself barred from his employer’s dance or
other social affairs of his employer. He is barred from his
employer’s club, from his home and from the whole social, economic
and political life of his employer. The two belong to two different
and antagonistic classes in capitalist society. The employer has
social equality. He can go wherever his desires or inclinations lead
him. He may marry in his own class or in the working class. He may
eat in the most expensive cafe or in the humblest and cheapest. He
may join the swankiest club or the cellar hangout of the very dregs
of society. For his social life he may stay in his class or leave his
class., The white worker cannot do these things. He is forced to
remain with his class. He has no economic power, no social power,
therefore he cannot have social equality in a capitalist society.
The natural ally therefore for the white worker, socially,
politically and industrially is the Negro worker. They are in the
same boat together: members of the same class. The work- ing class
cannot cross the class line; either in its social life, its economic
life or its political life. Both are propertyless wage-earners. There
is political, social and economic equality between them. The white
worker is socially equal to the Negro worker and vice versa.
This is one of the stark and crude facts of capitalist society. No
amount of nonsense about superior and inferior races; no catch
questions about the marriage of one’s sister to a Negro worker can
destroy the fact that this Negro worker, as a worker, is socially,
politically and economically equal to the white worker; to his
sister, his wife or his mother. It is capitalist society with its
class lines and its exploitation which makes this so. It is the fact
that both are wage-earners which establishes this basic fact.
The new program urgently needed for the labor movement must take
this fact into account. The white working class must place in its
program and in all workers’ organizations: Social, Political and
Economic Equality for the Negro.
 

   Labor Day has come and gone again. As is the custom, the working class was regaled with wind and gas from labor leaders, government officials, “friends of labor” and preachers in their Labor Day sermons. Bill Green made a pilgrimage to Pennsauken, N.J., to speak at the ceremonies honoring Peter McGuire, the “father of Labor Day.’’ Along with Sam Gompers, McGuire was one of the founders of the AFL. He was an official of the Carpenters international and led the fight for a day to be set aside “as a tribute to labor and the working man.” He led a big demonstration in New York City in1822 for the establishment of Labor Day. Congress enacted a law in1894 and made Labor Day a national holiday. It is customary each Labor Day for the labor leaders and others to extol the virtues of labor, of the working class and of “the laboring classes” in general. Labor is again told how important the working class is in the scheme of things and bow thankful everyone is that there is a working class. “Labor is honorable.” “Honest toil is commendable.” “Work promotes thrift and good morals.” “Idle hands are the devil’s workshop.” The capitalist ruling class has always been terribly worried over “idleness” among the workers. This was true from the earliest days. Their main argument against reducing the working day from “sunrise to sunset” was their solicitude about what the workers would do with their “free time.” If the workers toiled only ten hours there would be fourteen hours left. This would be bad for the working people. Fourteen hours in which to take strong drink, steal, gamble, idle away one’s time fishing, be atone’s wife, and engage in all kinds of immoralities. The fact that some workers might want to read or sleep could not be accepted as a reason for the shorter day. The ruling class was convinced that workers would not sleep, and even if they did this was a form of idleness also. And as for reading, this was bad also.   Decrying Idleness This concern of the ruling class with idleness is not just a joke. An Associated Press dispatch from Detroit reads that the UAW is demanding “$25 a week for twenty-six weeks of idleness.”The UAW of course is demanding no such thing. The UAW is not interested in workers being “idle.” The unions are demanding that workers have jobs. It is the capitalist government at Washington and the capitalist employers who are the organizers and promoters of “idleness, ” now that the profit-making imperialist war is over. Labor and the unions are only saying that they want jobs at high wages, short hours and better working conditions. If the federal government and the employers cannot or will not supply the jobs, then let them pay unemployment insurance. The capitalist ruling class is very touchy about this word“idleness, ” but only when it relates to the working class. They really don’t object to millions of workers being“idle” so long as it doesn’t cost the ruling class anything. If the workers pay for their own “idleness, ”that’s a step in the right direction. That is what is known as“labor coming of age, ” “labor taking its responsibilities seriously.” But not only must labor pay for its own “idle, ” it must also pay for the idleness of the capitalist employers. Labor is expected to do this even when it is unemployed.   Listen to the Wind Stripped of the drivel, nonsense and pap, this is about all the Labor Day speeches mean. Under-Secretary Patterson congratulates every worker for his “contribution toward victory.” They“deserve our highest commendation.” Gen. Arnold is convinced that “the workers who stayed at their jobs ... are entitled to the gratitude of the entire nation.” Gen. Devers thanks “the workers who forged the tools of victory ... including the atomic bomb.” Secretary Scwellenbach said that “the wage earners of America ... stand today on the threshold of a tomorrow which they can and will fashion.” But how should labor fashion its tomorrow according to the new Secretary of Labor? “The rights of labor have been established ...” but “with the establishment of rights labor must be ready to express in greater and greater measure its responsibility to the common good which grants their rights’’ That great friend of labor Mr. Vinson asks for “intelligence and energy to wage the peace and the reconversion ...” Then we can have “an era of high wages, employment and a good standard of living for each and every worker.” Phil Murray has discovered that reconversion is under way but there are bad signs. “There are many tragic signs that selfish privilege and governmental inertia are obstructing the fulfillment of this promise.” Bill Green thinks that Labor Day 1945 is a good time to begin putting “our economic house in order.” Bill is still for “a higher standard of living and security against depression and want.”   Preachers Join In The preachers got in on the Labor Day festivities also. The Rev. William Kernan of Scarsdale, N.Y., had high praise for labor and for labor unions. He also believes that Henry Kaiser and Eric Johnston are “great friends of labor.” These men “clearly realize the validity of the labor movement.” The Rev. Bernard Iddings Bell of Providence, R.I., doesn’t believe that labor is beginning to sprout wings. To the Rev. Bell labor is “as selfish, as covetous, as sub-human as ever the economic master classes have been ... We have found labor seeking to dethrone the old despoiling classes chiefly that its own despoiling forces may control and plunder.” At any rate we are pleased to know that the Rev. Bell admits that some despoiling and plundering has been going on. We wonder though if the good Episcopal rector knows that some of the despoilers and plunderers were right there under his nose, in Trinity Church at the head of Wall Street, when he uttered those words. And also, what does he think of the fact that it is these plunderers who pay his salary? All of these things took place on Labor Day 1945. They were going on right at the time three million workers are “idle” and many millions more face “idleness” because and only because capitalism right now has no use for them. The imperialist war of the Anglo-American capitalists has been won. The billions in profits are tucked away. The living, the maimed and the dead have been duly decorated, praised, extolled, and now may be respectfully forgotten. All they need, do is 2rait together, with the discharged “soldiers from the factories” for another Labor Day.   



The present article in this series is addressed primarily to the
white workers in the organized labor movement: CIO, AFL and the
railway brotherhoods. The demand contained in the subtitle is urged
upon the white workers. The main body of the working class does not
and cannot have genuine social equality in capitalist society. That
is, the white workers themselves do not have social equality, in the
fundamental sense. We will have more to say on this point later.
The white worker has a degree of political and economic equality
in the sense that white workers are not denied the right to vote by
direct legal act any place in the country, nor are they denied
employment on the basis of their color. It is only the Negro who
faces Jim Crow socially, politically and in a special and unique
manner. It is the purpose of this article to discuss the attitudes of
white and Negro workers toward each other, to discover the source of
clearly apparent antagonisms and to suggest the working-class means
for the resolution of this conflict within the working class.
We realize the difficulties and complexities inherent in any
attempt at a frank discussion of this problem as it exists in the
United States. But the only way to approach the question is in the
frankest and most vigorous manner. This method of approach is
indicated for the reason that the working class is rent asunder by
hatreds. It is the rock upon which the working class dashes about and
remains divided and disunited. It is an apple of discord thrown into
the ranks of labor to keep labor divided in the interest of ruling
class peace-of-mind and domination. Workers on both sides, so to
speak, have very strong opinions and attitudes on the question of
their relation one with the other.
Oftentimes these attitudes are extremely irrational and are held
to without rhyme or reason. The leader of a strike in Philadelphia,
called to protest the employment of Negroes on the street railway,
gives as his reason for opposition to working with Negroes that:
“Negroes carry bed bugs. We sit on wooden benches in the car house
and wood breeds bedbugs.” The question of admitting Negroes to a
machinist’s local of the AFL is under discussion in a meeting of
the local. A member takes the floor to object to the admission of
Negroes working in the plant because, “I hate the black s―bs.”
A very militant white worker is against Negroes because “they are
savages.” A young white worker who was defending the rights of
Negroes was reproached with the question: “You must want your
sister to marry a nigger.” A white worker rises in the UAW
convention to object to the resolution demanding equality for Negroes
because “I would not want my wife and daughter to mix with Negroes
at our convention.” The management of a plant decides under
pressure from the union to upgrade Negroes. A member of the 7-man
negotiating committee begins circulating a petition in his department
against the admission of upgraded Negroes to that department. Members
of a railway union organize a reign of terror against Negro firemen.
In numerous instances where the announcement has been made that
Negroes would be promoted to skilled jobs there have been strikes.
In a steel mill, two Negroes are promoted to a department where
Negroes have not worked before. Two white workers, one a union
member, begin the circulation of a petition against them. They give
as their reason for not wanting to work with Negroes that “Negroes
smell bad.” The superintendent added to the ludicrousness of the
situation by telling these two workers that he got very close to the
two Negro workers while they were in his office and “I didn’t
smell anything.” Right at the time that Hitler was crushing the
Poles in Poland, Polish workers in a northern city were raising
furious objection to a plan of the Federal Housing Authority to erect
a project to be occupied by Negroes in an area where the Poles lived.
Hundreds of instances of this kind could be given but these are
enough to illustrate the situation concretely. It is interesting to
compare these statements and attitudes of white workers with
statements and attitudes of certain white people outside the working
class. Senator Bilbo, of Mississippi, announces in the Senate that
“all history and biology prove that the white race has been the
leader of civilization for the past 6,000 years.” Senator Eastland
of the same state tells the world that the “white boys in the
Pacific are fighting for white supremacy.” A judge in the
Scottsboro case announced that “no white woman would voluntarily
give herself to a Negro.”
 
Workers Imitate Employers
The point which we are making is that the white workers as a rule
take the same attitude toward Negroes and Negro workers as that
assumed by the white bourgeoisie: the industrialists, financiers,
Republican and Democratic Party leaders and government functionaries.
Negroes assume similar attitudes: A Negro waiter on a dining car
intones that it is not Negroes whose writing is difficult to read but
“it’s these white folks who come in here who can’t write.” A
Negro worker expresses the opinion that “hunkies can live cheaper
than we can because all they eat is black bread and onions.” A
Negro soldier is convinced that “the Japanese are savages.” Negro
workers have stated that “the foreigners take our jobs.” “If I
had a black chicken and a white chicken came around I would kill the
white chicken,” “a white man is a white man and the white man in
the union is no different from a white man anywhere else.”
White workers block up against Negro candidates for office in the
unions and “plug” for a white candidate, purely on racial
grounds. The unions under the leadership of the white workers permit
the company to discriminate against and Jim Crow Negro workers. AFL
unions bar Negroes from membership and hold Negroes out of employment
under closed shop agreements. In all sections of the labor movement
locals or groups of white members object to Negroes attending social
affairs given by the union on the ground that they are against
“social equality.” All of these are common practices and
attitudes found everywhere, to one degree or other, in the trades
unions. It is necessary to unearth the roots and the source of these
attitudes on the part of white workers. The attitude of Negro workers
is essentially a defense set-up against the anti-Negro practices of
white trade unionists.
The labor movement and the white workers act in this reactionary
manner under the impact of capitalist society. It is a demonstration
of the fact that no institution is immune from the
all-prevailing miasma of a putrid social order whose devotees profit
materially from this fratricidal strife in the labor movement and the
working class. Workers enter the factory and the union out of the
capitalist world, enveloped in all the prejudices, hatreds,
puerilities, psychological distortions and social fabrications of
bourgeoisie society. The workers, white and black, live in a
capitalist social order encompassed about with every tangible and
concrete device necessary for the maintenance of the class supremacy
of the bourgeoisie and the breeding of internecine conflict among the proletarians.
From the standpoint of propaganda, the subtlest means used to keep
white and black workers embroiled in bitterness and hatred is the
doctrine of the superiority of the white race and the inferiority of
the Negro. This propaganda and agitation seep through the whole
national scene and enter every nook and cranny of human
relationships. For the country at large this is well understood. What
is difficult for Negroes to understand is why such attitudes are
prevalent in the labor movement. It is the purpose of this article to
give an exposition of the reasons for this phenomenon.
We say that the base for hatred between black and white workers is
laid when it is established in the mind of the white proletarian or
other white toiler that the Negro is inferior. The white worker
quoted does not want Negroes in his union because they are “savages”
and of course it is well understood that savages are an inferior
breed. They are “dirty,” “diseased,” “ignorant,” give off
an “offensive odor,” etc., etc. It is not that the Negro worker
is literally a savage, rather he is only one step removed from the
savage state. He is therefore not a person one sits beside, works
with, eats with or dances with. “Negroes don’t make good union
men,” they are “scabs,” “difficult to organize,” “won’t
pay their dues.”
The white worker has these notions drilled into him day and day
out; year and year out. Not always in the crude and semi-illiterate
manner of a Bilbo but far more effectively by distortions of
bourgeois historians, journalists, publicists and the mumb-jumbo
written by sociologists and political scientists in the name of
science and scientific method. These bourgeois scholars, academic
sorcerers, with their ill-founded generalizations, really plant the
seed which flowers into the ignorant but articulate and vicious
demagogues who infest the Congress, state legislatures, newspaper
offices and other public institutions. One can prove this to oneself
by consulting some of the school histories, especially those sections
dealing with slavery and the Negro today. Also many of the
sociological treatises have been responsible for a great deal of
rubbish about race which with some people passes for science. For
instance, in their discussions of “miscegenation” it is always a
white man and a Negro woman. Reading these “investigations” one
would never get the idea that “miscegenation” takes place the
other way round. One of the judges in the Scottsboro Case concluded
that these Negro boys must be guilty of rape because “no white
woman would willingly give herself to a Negro.” This judge of
course knew that this was a lie, but there are simple-minded white
folk who could be made to believe it.
The white worker also receives a daily training in the concept of
superior and inferior races from federal, state and municipal
governments. He learns that Negroes are Jim Crowed by the government,
that the federal government does not enforce the 14th and 15th
amendments, that Negroes and white people are always placed into
separate units in the Army, that the Navy has a tradition that
Negroes are neither to serve nor be transported on battleships.
For decades the white worker has been taught through the practices
of capitalist employers that Negro workers are confined to the
menial, dirty, heavy, the lowest paying and most undesirable jobs.
The white worker has become accustomed to seeing Negroes pushing the
trucks, sweeping the floor, running the elevator, slaving at the coke
oven or in the foundry. He is not accustomed to seeing Negroes in the
company office, in the engineering or drafting departments or as part
of the sales force. It is understood that Negro women can be only
domestics, cotton pickers or scrubwomen. These practices in
conjunction with the writing, speeches and lectures of the
publicists, politicians and teachers, thoroughly indoctrinate the
white worker with the idea of white superiority and Negro
inferiority. Consequently when the white worker enters the factory he
carries the ideas, notions and prejudices with him which he has
acquired in capitalist society. On this, as well as other questions,
he thinks as the leaders of capitalist society want him to think. His
social theories as well as his economic ideas are not his own but
those of the capitalist ruling class.
Such a white worker, and this type is the overwhelming majority,
therefore thinks of the factory as a white factory, the union becomes
a white man’s organization, because they both exist in a “white
man’s country,” with a white man’s government, a white man’s
army fighting a white man’s war, white business enterprises, white
amusement places and restaurants, big league ball clubs, YMCA’s and
churches. He often resents Negroes being employed in “his plant,”
opposes his promotion to a “white man’s job,” his running for
office in a white man’s union, or his attending a dance given by
this white man’s union. Being white is alone enough in the thinking
of the white worker to make him superior to the Negro.
This quality of whiteness with the attendant propaganda, tradition
and pseudo-science produces a queer mental state in the white worker.
The doctrine of the superiority of the white race and the inferiority
of the Negro creates for the white worker, a feeling of oneness with
the ruling class: with the employers, financiers and big government
officials. This thing called the white race is a mystical entity, a
hallowed group, a pure strain whose purity and thousand-year-old
achievements must be kept inviolate and isolated from contamination
by contact, as equals, with “inferior” races. The indoctrination
of the white worker with ideas of Negro racial inferiority and white
supremacy creates a harmony-of-interests attitude on the part of the
white worker toward his employer, his congresssman and even toward
the policeman on his block. On the question of Negroes the white
proletarian closes ranks with every section of the white population
except that small minority of white people who reject the race
superiority myth and the resultant practices. This minority become
“nigger lovers,” and a serious threat to “white supremacy.”
The white worker can eat with the general manager of the plant, he
can get a room in the same hotel as Ford or Truman, he can ride in
the same car with Col. McCormick of the Chicago Tribune. Or so
he believes, and the real situation in this connection is a subject
unexplored and totally misunderstood by the average white worker.
His acceptance of this hocus-pocus about race and race superiority
envelops the white worker in a cloud of ignorance, superstition,
anti-labor practices and class collaboration. The whole set-up of
capitalist exploitation and the class organization of capitalist
society becomes obscured. By their blind adherence to the notion of
white superiority and Negro inferiority, the white proletarians
stultify the class struggle and defeat the purpose for which the
trade-union movement exists. In the mass production industries where
the majority of them receive the same pay as the Negroes,they solace
themselves on the propaganda, put over by the ruling class, that
although they receive the same pay as the “inferior” Negroes,
they belong to a superior race, to the race that maintains “white
supremacy.” They belong to the race which owns the biggest bank in
the world, the tallest building on earth, which operates the richest
university in the world, which operates extra-fare luxurious trains,
which owns the most palatial dwellings: these white workers belong to
a race which pays itself billions in dividends and interest every
year, to a race which gorges itself on the finest food brought from
every corner of the earth. The white proletarian accepts this
situation as part of his pay. Although his pay envelope may contain
the same amount as the Negro on the next machine, this white worker
nevertheless permits himself to be drugged with the propaganda of a
superior and an inferior race.
The Negro worker along with other Negroes is given a status in
society, similar to the status of the serf in feudal society. The
Negro is assigned a place and is expected to “know his place.” By
his actions, the white worker divides capitalist society into two
groups: Negroes and white people. The “white” group includes all
white people: the employing ruling class, the middle class and the
white working class. The Negro group includes all Negroes: the Negro
banker and businessman, the professional group and the black worker.
Workers acquire such reactions mainly for the reason that the
working class has not yet developed the habit, in its thinking, of
inquiring into the source, the history and the roots of any body of
opinion which is disseminated in society. Concepts, notions and
propaganda are accepted uncritically and without any thought as to
what effect such doctrines may have on the working class as a whole.
For instance, workers and others use the term “race” as though
they really knew what they were talking about. (The pamphlet, Races
of Mankind, should do yeoman service in dispelling these
illusions and this ignorance.) They do not know that no reputable and
competent biologist, anthropologist or sociologist would dare come
out today with the statement that there are superior and inferior
races. Anthropologists definitely discount and reject the notion of
race as ordinarily understood. There are no pure races. They are all
mixed. This can be demonstrated to anyone in the U.S. except to the
most obtuse or to those who profit from the propagation of this myth
in some material or social way. This doctrine is often spread around
by those who know that it is not true. The South is the hot-bed of
this nonsense and it is very significant that in this section, where
the greatest amount of mixing has gone on, we find the most
pronounced talk about the purity of the white race. It is interesting
that genealogical organizations, whose business it is to trace one’s
ancestry, do not do a very extensive business in the South. Many
Southerners, when they find it necessary or expedient to account for
some seeming “impurity” in their lineage, are in the habit of
discovering that they are descended from some Indian chief or
princess. (Pocahontas is a very popular ancestor for white Virginians.)
Suppose, however, the scientists, whose business it is to be
acquainted with such things as race and “racial characteristics,”
were of the opinion that there are superior and inferior races. What
would this mean? What would they be talking about? Of what
significance would such theories or discoveries have for the working
class? That is, what social, economic or political importance would
such a theory have for wage earners? How could white workers use such
a theory to improve their material status, their political and
economic position in capitalist society? Would employers be inclined
to raise the wages of the white workers because these workers were of
a group which was “superior” to the group which Negro workers
belonged to? Will lay-offs during “reconversion” be determined by
considerations of racial superiority or inferiority? If this is the
case, is it not true that during the last depression, the only people
on the relief rolls would have been Negroes and other non-white
workers? Furthermore, one would suppose that employers would never
object to collective bargaining agreements except where Negroes are
to be covered by the contract. Also, one would think that the federal
government which also is a practitioner of race superiority and
Jim-Crow, would only deny maintenance of membership after strikes in
cases where the strikers were members of the “inferior” race. In
the case of military conscription, one should draw the inference that
only members of the inferior race would have to be drafted since
their very inferiority would mean that they had no proper. notions
about patriotism, the defense of civilization and of “our noble
institutions.” We can add another inference. That is, we should
expect our Jim-Crow federal government to do more than merely
segregate Negroes in separate regiments. We should expect them to
keep the members of the superior race at home and let the inferiors
go to the jungles of Burma, the reptile-infested fastnesses of the
Pacific and brave the vicissitudes of German prison camps. It might
be replied that these are deeds for men of heroic mold, pastimes for
the brave, the chivalrous and the noble.
Some white workers will be inclined to say that what we say here
is merely ludicrous and fantastic. Perhaps so, but what makes it
ludicrous and fantastic? Only the brute fact that many white workers
act toward the Negro workers as though these things were true and
actual. If white workers do not believe the “ludicrous” ideas
which we express above, they will have to express such disbelief in
action. They must base their changed actions on their discovery of
the facts of life as it is in capitalist society: a social order
based on the ownership of the means of production by a class and the
use of the productive forces for the extraction of private profit.
They will have to divest themselves of quack notions about race
and begin thinking in terms of working class and ruling class. They
will have to throw off all ideas of superior and inferior races and
begin to understand that in capitalist society, the attempt to divide
mankind into races can have no value for the working class, which as
a whole is exploited and oppressed by the capitalist ruling class all
over the world. On the basis of this fundamental idea it will become
clear that what is important for the working class is not what race
or nationality one belongs to but rather which class is he a part of.
(To be concluded)
 




Up to the time that this edition of Labor Action went to press the CIO had not yet replied to the communication of the AFL calling for organic unity between the two great trade union federations. There can be no doubt that the leadership of the CIO is giving very careful consideration to this proposal of the AFL leadership. They SHOULD give this proposal the most careful consideration, for it is the most important and significant development in the field of inter-union relations since the formation of the CIO eleven years ago.
It is the opinion of the Workers Party, and has been now for several years, that the AFL and the CIO should unite. The Workers Party has expressed this view in Labor Action again and again. We have given all the reasons why the two federations should merge into one. During the war we said that merger was necessary in the interest of the whole working class and for the purpose of defeating the efforts of the employers and the government to regiment the labor movement, to beat down wages and depress labor’s standard of living.
 
Industrial Unionism
What the Workers Party has been saying is substantially what the AFL says in its letter to the CIO. There is one aspect of the position of the AFL, however, which renders the proposal suspect. It seems to be the position of the AFL that the only alternative to organic unity at the present time is the internecine strife which now embroils the two organizations. The AFL communication rejects the proposal of the CIO for concrete and practical immediate collaboration between the two unions. On this point the AFL letter says: “The holding of periodical meetings such as you suggest in your letter ... for the purpose of dealing with attacks upon organized labor means that cooperation may be followed for a day while division and discord continue. We cannot present a united front by pretending to be united today, and being divided tomorrow.”
In the concrete situation such a position is the sheerest nonsense and can only contribute to the continuation of “division and discord.”
The AFL position seems to be “all or nothing.” This is the real way to get nothing. How can the AFL ignore the fact that even if committees from the two organizations come together for negotiating a merger, in the end the committees might find it expedient to recommend a period of practical collaboration? The negotiators will be compelled to face certain brute facts. One fact they will be compelled to face is that there IS “discord and division.” They have to face the fact that the two organizations, nationally and locally, from international to international, from local to local, have been at each others’ throats. They will have to face the all-important consideration that the AFL is a dyed-in-the-wool craft organization and that the CIO is based on and firmly committed to the principle of industrial unionism. It is this fact which above all is at the bottom of the main strike between the two organizations.
While this difference in organization conception is of the utmost importance, we do not believe that this is a valid reason for the organizations to remain separated. But, on the other hand, we do not believe that the CIO should abandon, even in the slightest degree, its industrial union set-up. There should be no compromise with the AFL on this question. There is no valid reason for a compromise. In the present stage of technology, industrial structure and capitalist production, it is the CIO and not the AFL which is the basic organization and the organization with its base in the decisive section of the working class. Any compromise with this, any step away from industrial unionism, would be a reactionary step and should not be countenanced.
While all the above considerations may indicate the necessity for the period of collaboration, there is yet another consideration. It is imperative right now that labor present a united front against the capitalist employers and their government at Washington. The Republicans are preparing to hack away at organized labor, to attempt to stifle the unions and harass the working class. Any and all steps are necessary to defeat these efforts of the most reactionary section of the ruling class. If this can be accomplished, even in the slightest degree (and it can!) through joint action, short of merger, or preparatory to merger, such joint action should be arranged and carried through.
The workers in the AFL should not permit themselves to be deluded by any forthcoming bombast from Green, Lewis, Tobin, Hutcheson or Woll. Their records are not good in the matter of proper working class relations between the two organizations. These craft union workers too should begin to understand what the real situation is in connection with craft unionism. It is not on the upgrade. This is not the 80’s of the last century. Industrial unionism has arrived and it has arrived because there is a need for this type of trade union organization.
Not only is the industrial union structure indicated for the mass production workers, but should the industrial unions function in consonance with their structure, they can play the leading role in the trade union field in the struggle against the capitalist ruling class and its government. This factor will become increasingly clearer to craft union members with further developments of technology, mass production techniques and the further demands of monopoly capitalism for lowered production costs and the stabilization of profits. Members of the carpenters’ union, for instance, will understand this., better when they are actually faced with pre-fabricated houses manufactured in mass production plants by semi-skilled and unskilled labor.
The workers in the CIO should not allow any bureaucratic interests of their leadership to stand in the way of their decision for the unification of the two organizations. There is a tendency for labor bureaucrats to maintain and perpetuate themselves. Labor leaders learn these things from the capitalist ruling class and from the political organizations of the ruling class. The record of Murray and of the other CIO leaders is not so good either. While they have stood steadfastly for industrial unionism, they have not supplied the consistent militant leadership which was demanded of them. Neither have they conducted certain indicated organization drives, on time and with the necessary vigor.
When all of this is said, and it is important, the Workers Party resumes its advocacy of the merger of the AFL arid CIO. The gains which the working class has made through industrial unionism should not be sacrificed. Further gains which can be made through industrial unionism should not be ignored. The Southern organizing drive should be prosecuted to the utmost and completed.
In our opinion, the CIO should reply to the AFL expressing its desire for the merger of the two organizations. Joint meetings should take place between committees representing the two unions. Pending the complete joining of forces, however, it is imperative that the two federations collaborate with each other in the most friendly and practical way, in a united front against the common enemy.
 




This article will deal with what is called “civil rights” in the United States; specifically with the question of civil rights for Negroes as posed in the report of the President’s Committee on Civil Rights and President Truman’s, recent message to Congress on civil rights. These are important and significant documents not only for what they say and recommend but primarily because they come from the head of the federal government. We also have to remember that Mr. Truman is the head of the Democratic Party. It is necessary to emphasize again, too, that the Democratic Party, like the Republican Party, is a party of the capitalist ruling class and the pronouncements of these parties are therefore not always irrelevant to an understanding of what the capitalist ruling class in the U.S. is thinking today on the question of civil rights for Negroes.
It is necessary to record some of the happenings in the field of civil rights for Negroes. First, there is the report of the President’s Committee on Civil Rights. Then there is President Truman’s message to Congress. Third, there are various and sundry decisions of the Supreme Court. Next, there are the civil rights activities and plans of the Army and Navy Departments. This is on the side of the government. In order to complete the picture and to integrate civil rights trends property it will be necessary to discuss what is taking place in the states and in the ranks of “private enterprise.”
 
A Revealing Report
An examination of the report of the Committee on Civil Rights reveals that this committee, after due investigation and deliberation, has come to the conclusion that not only should full constitutional equality be accorded the Negro in practice, but also that the spirit of the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution should be invoked in dealing with the so-called Negro problem. This report recommends the elimination of Jim Crow, segregation and discrimination throughout the nation. The report tears away the hocus-pocus about “equal but separate accommodation not being discriminatory.” The report destroys the nonsense and sophistry put forward by advocates of Jim Crowism, which attempts to distinguish between segregation and discrimination. This particular piece of Jim Crow has become the last trench ardently held by the defenders of Jim Crow everywhere. The argument runs that if Negro travelers are given a coach identically like the white coach and each group is compelled to ride in its own coach, then no discrimination has been practiced, only segregation. If the Negro school system is just like the white school system (same curriculum, identical buildings and equipment, salaries, etc.), that is segregation, but it is not discrimination.
This, of course, is the reasoning of the social philosophy of the Supreme Court at present. You must treat them all alike, says the Supreme Court to the state of Oklahoma. If the state has law instruction for white people, like instruction must be provided for black people. In the Oklahoma case the court went so far as to tell the state that it must supply law instruction for Negroes by the opening of the school year or not operate a law school for white people.
Since there were only about two weeks between this decision and the scheduled date of the opening of school, Oklahoma was hard pressed. In order to comply, however, with the letter of the decision, the state decided to open a law school for Negroes somewhere in the state capitol building. Texas has already planned some such makeshift. Not to be caught in the meshes of Supreme Court logic, Arkansas has decided to admit Negroes to the graduate school of its university but they will be placed in separate classes. There will be segregation but no discrimination.
On this “separate but equal” procedure the Civil Rights Report says:
“In the committee’s opinion this is one of the outstanding myths of American history, for it is almost always true that while indeed separated, these facilities are far from equal ... If reason and history were not enough to substantiate the argument against segregation, recent experiences further strengthen it. For these experiences demonstrate that segregation is an obstacle to establishing harmonious relationships among groups. They prove that where the artificial barriers which divide people and groups from one another are broken, tension and conflict begin to be replaced by cooperative effort and an environment in which civil rights can thrive.”
It is not the function of the committee, of course, to point out that this conclusion has been known for several decades at least and also that there are individuals, groups and institutions in the nation who do not want the “artificial barriers” removed so that “conflict” can be replaced by “cooperative effort.” Three such institutions are the federal government and the Republican and Democratic Parties.
Because we are concerned with the motivations behind the Civil Rights Report we quote one pregnant passage:
“One of the principal economic problems facing us and the rest of the world is achieving maximum production and continued prosperity. The loss of a huge, potential market for goods is a direct result of the economic discrimination which is practiced against many of our minority groups ... Discrimination depresses the wages and income of minority groups. As a result, their purchasing power is curtailed and markets are reduced. Reduced markets result in reduced production.”
The report then quotes a statement by Eric Johnston:
“Intolerance is a species of boycott and any business or job boycott is a cancer in the economic body of the nation. I repeat, intolerance is destructive; prejudice produces no wealth; discrimination is a fool’s economy.”
We will discuss later what we believe to be at the bottom of these new and radical civil rights proposals. We believe that the quotations above are the real key to the situation, however, we say right now that it would be foolish to come to the conclusion that these economic considerations are the SOLE motivation. Such an analysis would be entirely inadequate and therefore incorrect. The committee was concerned with the international situation, and how the U.S. looks to Europe, Asia and Africa.
“Our foreign policy is designed to make the U.S. an enormous positive influence for peace and progress throughout the world. We have tried to let nothing, not even extreme political differences between ourselves and foreign nations, stand in the way of this goal. But our domestic civil rights shortcomings are a serious obstacle ... We cannot escape the fact that our civil rights has been an issue in world politics ... The United States is not so strong, the final triumph of the democratic ideal is not so inevitable that we can ignore what the world thinks of us or our record.”
The Civil Rights Committee was made up of Negroes and white people. It was not, however, one of those flim-flam goodwill outfits. The committee did not discuss and then agree to come back and discuss some more because it was not possible to agree on anything else. There was a report made containing recommendations, practical and concrete recommendations. The committee did not take a “gradualist’’ position on the question of civil rights but said: “We believe that the time for action is now.”
There are six major recommendations, each subdivided into numerous sections. These recommendations have to do with the procedure for making Jim Crow, segregation and discrimination, because of race, creed or color, illegal. This is to apply to political, economic and civil rights. If the recommendations of the committee were enacted into law by the federal government and the state governments, the Negro in the U.S. would, for the first time, have complete civic, political and economic equality legally. We are not here dealing with the question as to whether or not this is possible in the U.S. “under capitalism,” or probable. We are only dealing in these articles with the various civil rights activities taking place.
Aside from the content of the recommendations, the outstanding feature is that the committee does not propose to wait for the working of some long-time educational procedure. The committee recommends that the legislative and judicial branches of the federal and state governments deal with this question by the enactment of laws which establish civil liberties and provide penalties for tneir violation or abridgement. The committee makes no distinction between the North and the South, except to emphasize that it is the South, which is the chief offender and the section whose offenses make federal action imperative. The committee rejects the old sophistry about “states’ rights.” There are no platitudes on the “decent” or the “right-thinking” white people of the South. The committee knows what it is talking about and decided to say in a forthright manner what it is talking about. The insistence of the committee on statutory action and legal action in cases where the statutes are violated is interesting. We have been exhorted, lectured and preached to for decades that such procedure is exactly what should not be done. This argument always ignored the fact that it was only in the case of the Negro’s civil rights that the discovery was made that statutory and legal procedure “would do more harm than good.” No one objected to laws against murder, only against laws to penalize those who murdered Negroes by lynching. The South is not against Negroes voting, but against their voting in primaries of the Democratic Party. In Mississippi, for the present, this party would not object to Negroes participating in the Republican primaries or in their own primaries. Mississippi and South Carolina Negroes are [not] discriminated against by the Democratic Party in these states – they are only segregated.
 
Truman’s Message
The civil rights message of President Truman follows the lines of the Report of the Committee on Civil Rights. In relation to Negroes, the message makes the following recommendations to the Congress:
(1) Establishing a permanent Commission on Civil Rights, a Joint Congressional Committee on Civil Rights, and a Civil Rights Division in the Department of Justice. If the Civil Rights Commission should do nothing more than continue the exposure of the facts in connection with the violation of civil rights in the manner of the President’s committee, it will serve a useful purpose. The joint Congressional committee should include in its membership such scoundrels and demagogues as Rankin, Ellender and Maybank. Also such “liberals” and “friends of labor” as Pepper and Lister Hill. When the Senate Labor Committee was in session voting to report the FEPC bill out, Hill voted against and Pepper was absent. The Southern demagogues and ignoramuses, as well as the Northern arch-reactionaries, should be compelled to face the music and have their bombast spread in the record, where it can have the widest possible distribution.
(2) Strengthening existing civil rights statutes. This is imperative in order that the courts cannot resort to the usual practices of reading into statutes the personal social viewpoint of the judges or reading out of the statutes, provisions opposed by the judges, which are only implied but not expressly stated in the statute. This is what happened to the federal civil rights law of 1875 and also to numerous state civil rights acts. For example, the Superior Court of Pennsylvania, in giving its interpretation of an early civil rights law, that a theater proprietor was not violating the then existing statute if he confined Negro patrons to the gallery of his theater. He was a violator of the act only if he excluded Negroes altogether! The court said that the law did not specify that Negroes should be given any and all accommodations.
 
”The Law, Sir ...”
This, of course, is the reasoning behind the position of the Supreme Court when it decided that a public carrier must provide Negroes with “equal accommodations” but not the same accommodations as provided for white patrons. Or that a state must provide Negroes with “equal” educational opportunities but not necessarily with the same educational opportunities.
This kind of legalistic nonsense only gives light to the jibe of Dr. Johnson, whom I believe it was who said, “the law, Sir, is an ass.” It also underscores the profound observation of Mr. Dooley that “the Supreme Court follows the election returns.” That is to say that this type of legal reasoning reveals the “law” as the handmaiden of the political and sociological viewpoint of the judges.
(3) Providing federal protection against lynching. Here of course is the capstone of the civil liberties struggle. In order to eliminate lynching, all other violations of civil liberties and democratic rights must be eliminated and suppressed. Lynching is only the most extreme form of Jim Crow and discrimination, the application of Jim Crow doctrines by the use of force. The way to deter Negroes from coming to the polls to vote is to charge some Negro with “rape” or with “striking a white man” and then whip up a lynching bee a few weeks before the day of voting. In order to avoid “trouble,” Negroes will be expected to remain away from the polls until “normal” conditions are restored in the community.
(4) Protecting more adequately the right to vote. Before the “right to vote” is protected in the South, this right must be established. The Supreme Court has been more forthright on the issue of suffrage than on any other civil rights question. Its forthrightness of course applies only to elections where federal officers are to be selected. There are many reasons for this. Voting is considered a fundamental right of the citizen. In what part of a train or car a citizen sits or eats is, in the opinion of the court, not so fundamental. The Constitution is fairly clear on the voting issue but somewhat foggy on eating and traveling rights. It would be interesting to speculate on what would be the position of the Supreme Court should South Carolina, for example, decide to admit Negroes to the suffrage but require them to use separate booths for casting their ballots.
 
For an FEPC
The fifth and sixth recommendations deal with the establishment of an FEPC and the prohibition of discrimination in interstate transportation. The whole South is opposed to both of these recommendations. A large section of Northern employers is also opposed to “fair employment practice.” It is not only in connection with Negroes that this recommendation is opposed. It is in relation to Negroes that the objection is mainly directed, but in the South particularly the employers would be hampered in their opposition to unionization under such an act.
One other point in connection with any FEPC law is that unions are included in the prohibition against “unfair practices.” This is a complex and difficult problem. The unions themselves, particularly the AFL unions, are largely responsible for a situation which makes it possible to include the organizations of labor in a law about discrimination against Negroes. The only effective answer of course is to say to the union, “put your own house in order.”
(Continued next week: The Reaction of the Dixie Wolf Pack
to the Civil Rights Report and the Civil Rights Message)
 




While it is true that every union in the country is faced with,great difficulties in connection with the operations of the Taft-Hartley Act, the United Electrical, Radio & Machine Workers of America (UE) membership has two problems in connection with the act. One is the Taft-Hartley Act itself, with all its anti-labor provisions and implications. The other is the “Communist Party” (Stalinist party) leadership of the UE. The UE is one of the internationals which has refused to sign the political party affidavit called for in the Taft-Hartley law. In this affidavit, officers of unions must say under path: “I am not a member of the Communist Party or affiliated with such party.”
It is well known that the UE is under the leadership and domination of the Stalinists. The top officers of the UE are either members of the CP, Stalinist sympathizers and fellow travelers, or stooges of the Stalinists. This means that this large international in the electrical industry is controlled, managed and dominated by the Stalinists. The president of the UE, Fitzgerald, is only a wooden Charlie McCarthy sitting on the lap of his Stalinist masters, who work his mouth in accord with the political line of the CP.
Why are the Stalinists in. the United States holding out on the signing of the above quoted affidavit? Is it because they haves principles against signing such affidavits? Is it because they are opposed to the interference of the capitalist government in the affairs of the unions and other workers’ organizations? Is it because they believe that the affidavit is “unconstitutional” and a violation of fundamental political rights and immunities of American citizens? No! The Stalinists do not oppose signing for any of these correct reasons.
 
Stalinist Line Swings
They demonstrated during the imperialist Second World War that they have no such principles and no such scruples. They supported that war after June 22, 1941, and called it a “sacred war” after that date. They were against the war before June 22, 1941. but after that date they began bellowing for move war and for the U.S. to get into it immediately. They wanted a “second front,” full production of war equipment, less production of consumer goods, full support to the government, the War Labor Board, to the “progressive capitalists,” “incentive pay” (piecework wages), and no strikes. They insisted on every union signing and abiding by the no-strike pledge. Because the Workers Party opposed the war and called it an imperialist war, the Stalinist party labelled the WP “German agents” and “Japanese spies.” They demanded that the government take action to deny newsprint to the WP for the publishing of Labor Action.
Now they have made a swing. They call it going back to “Marx ism-Leninism.” They talk about the evils of “American imperialism.” They are for strikes again. They are against the Marshall Plan and American “imperialism in Greece.” They are behind Henry Wallace and want to make him President of the United States. And the top three officers of the UE, Fitzgerald, Matles and Emspak, have been touring the locals of the UE presenting the Stalinist political line on Wallace and the Marshall Plan.
If the Stalinists are not against signing the affidavits for reasons of principle, then why are they? Well for one reason, there is really such a thing as being a member of the “Communist Party.” More important, however, is the fact that the Stalinists now have a new line. Conflict is going on between the U.S. and Russia. When the line changes in Moscow, it changes in the “Communist Parties” of every country in the world. The Russian Stalinist bureaucrats are against the Marshall Plan, against Truman and against the U.S. now. Refusal to sign the affidavits is part and parcel of their opposition to the “Truman government.” At the moment, if that moment should come, there is a change in the relations between Russia and the U.S., the Stalinists will go for the Marshall Plan, dump Henry Wallace, support Truman for re-election and begin yelling for more production and fewer strikes.
That is the way the Stalinists drag the workers around; that is, all the workers who are backward enough or stupid enough to follow them. That is what they are doing right now in the UE. They are disrupting that international and betraying its members by taking the position they do against the signing of this affidavit. The union is in difficulty at Remington-Rand. The International Association of Machinists, supported by the Westinghouse Co., is endangering the Westinghouse Local. This is true in Pittsburgh, Beaver and Meadville, Pa. One local in New York City has voted to get out of the UE. The UE will face other difficulties as time passes. It will have difficulties getting contracts renewed and in getting bargaining rights for UE members.
All the answer the Stalinists give is that “we will strike if we do not get bargaining rights from the companies.” What they will more likely do is attempt to make some kind of backdoor, shady, “sweetheart” deal with the electrical manufacturers. That’s the kind of “principles” these disrupters and betrayers have.
Workers in the UE should not confuse the attitude of their leadership on the affidavits with that of the printers or the steel workers, who also have not signed. Whatever the motives of the printers and the steel workers, they are not the same as those of the Stalinists. The Stalinists are acting solely in support of the present political line of Stalin and the Stalinist bureaucracy. They have no interest whatsoever in the fundamental and primary welfare of the trade union movement and the working class. Therefore they place the UE in very grave danger.
 
On the Affidavits
The Workers Party has already expressed its position on the Tart-Hartley act and on the affidavit. We are against the act and are opposed to the affidavit. We believe that the organized labor movement should have refused to sign this affidavit. At first the big AFL and CIO unions did refuse to sign. Then they began one by one to vote for the signing of the affidavit. The Workers Party believes that they were incorrect. We believe that by an organized and militant struggle against the whole Taft-Hartley law it could have been rendered ineffectual and useless. The unions did not take this course.
It is the position of the WP that after so many of the big unions have signed, it was pointless for the remaining unions to jeopardize their bargaining position and their memberships by refusing to sign. Furthermore, we do not believe that this affidavit is the most dastardly section of the Taft-Hartley law. We believe that the section dealing with political contributions is far more damaging to the welfare of the unions and of labor. There are other sections of the law which are far more detrimental to the progress of the labor movement than this anti-“Communist Party” affidavit.
We are doubly concerned about the situation in the UE, when we know that this international is under the strangling influence of the “Communist Party.” We know these scoundrels, these purveyors of anti-labor politics and all manner of Stalinist filth. We believe that the membership of the UE should take steps at once to protect their international from disruption and from being weakened by a leadership only bent on doing the will of their master in the Kremlin. The UE membersliip should take steps to protect their international from inroads by the AFL’s machinists’ and electricians’ unions.
 
Oppose Union Wreckers
While we fight against the Stalinists and Stalinism; we oppose them for the reasons the Workers Party has stated again and again. The “Communist Party” is a reactionary outfit. It is a party led by an aggregation of totalitarian gangsters.
The Workers Party opposes the “Communist Party” because it is not a communist party and not a socialist party. It is an anti-working class party, a police party serving the interests of a police state. The Workers Party is also in opposition to such organizations as the Association of Catholic Trade Unionists (ACTU) on this question. the anti-Stalinist position of the ACTU is a reactionary position. This organization is against socialism and against the struggle of the working class for socialism. The ACTU would be just as strongly opposed to real socialism and a real socialist party as it is against the phony brand of socialism paraded by the Stalinists. The ACTU and the Stalinists both are enemies of the struggle of labor to free itself from the toils of capitalist oppression.
 




The “Solid South” is in revolt. The rebel yell is being heard again all the way from the Capitol in Washington to the canebrake of Louisiana, the swamps of Mississippi and the homeland of “evil poker playing” old John Nance Garner. The spirit of old John Calhoun is limping through Dixie calling on the faithful to remain true to “Southern ideals,” “Southern democracy,” “Southern white womanhood” and the “purity of the white race.” Of course when a Southerner talks
about the “purity of the white race” he means the white race in the South, since that is the only section on earth today, since the passing of Hitler and Goebbels, where the white race is pure. It is well known, at least in the South, that all mulattos, quadroons and octoroons are confined to the North and were sired by Northern white men. There may have been a dozen or so mulattos produced in the South by some stray and unprincipled white Southern male who was seduced by a Negro woman, but that is the exception. One thing is certain: in these rare cases of mulatto offspring, it was always a “no account” white man and a Negro woman, never a black man and a white woman unless there was “rape”; for “no white woman would willingly submit to a Negro.”
The cause of the present Dixie “revolt” is the report of the President’s Committee on Civil Rights and the Truman message to Congress on civil rights. The new rebel offensive is in opposition to the recommendations of President Truman that an FEPC be established, that an anti-lynching bill be passed, that Negroes be permitted to travel like other human beings and that they be permitted to vote in the South. This has stirred the Dixie wolf pack to talk about seceding from the Democratic Party and establishing their own pure white Southern party. This will guarantee freedom to the mob, Jim Crow to 10 million Negroes, disfranchisement through the poll-tax to millions of poor white workers, low wages to all Southern labor and ignorance to millions of Southern children. But the reward will be great. The “white race” will be “pure,” “Southern ideals” will be victorious and there will be no damned “social equality.”
As is their custom when aroused, the leaders of the Dixie lynchers are garrulous, bombastic and demagogic. It must be added also that they are somewhat ignorant or illiterate. Cox of Georgia bellowed from the House floor that Truman’s program sounds “like the platform of the Communist Party.” Bell of Mississippi warned Democratic Party leaders not to “brush off the secession threats of the Southern wing.” Also: “We’re not going to stand idly by and watch the South mongrelized.” Dorn of South Carolina is for any action “necessary to preserve the purposes of Southern democracy.” Rankin said the Truman program is “damnable, communistic, unconstitutional, anti-America, anti-Southern legislation.” Hobbs of Alabama said the program would only promote lynching. The desire for an anti-lynching bill “grows out of an overweening desire to keep the South a conquered province.” Hobbs is sure that Negroes “get more than justice” in Southern courts. Not only that but, said Hobbs, “We love our Negroes.” Gossett of Texas is incensed because this situation has developed because “our archaic election system has placed control of the two major parties in the hands of minorities in New York and Chicago. Both parties get down on their bellies, crawl in the dirt and kiss the feet of the minorities:” What Klan-minded Gossett means by “minorities” is “niggers,” “kikes,” “wops” and “comMUNists,” that is, those groups which do not come within “the purposes of Southern democracy.” It is necessary to make an important addition to Gossett’s minorities: “the Southern white toilers.” We shall demonstrate now that they too are not encompassed by “Southern democracy.” The Civil Rights Report and the message demand, however, that they shall be embraced by the Constitution, and “democracy.”
 
Millions Disfranchised by Southern Democrats
We will now expose one reason why the leaders of the rebel pack are against the abolition of the poll-tax arid all other Dixie restrictioris on the right to vote. Senator Ellender of Louisiana was elected to the Senate by the votes of only 85,488 people despite the fact that the population of Louisiana is 2,363,880. There were no Republican votes. In Iowa, with a population of 2,538,268, the Democrat who was defeated got 259,194 votes. Williams from Mississippi is from a district with 470,781 population. Williams was elected by only 10,345 voters. In Michigan, in a comparable district, the Democrat who was defeated received 54,928 votes.
Gossett, who was quoted above, is from a Texas district of 279,924 population. He was elected by only 17,718 voters. Whitten of Mississippi has 27,701 people in his district but only 6,491 voted and he got all of that number. Dorn of South Carolina comes from a district with 304,379 population. Dorn was elected in 1946 with only 3,530 citizens voting and he got 3,527 Votes.
Mendel of South Carolina made an interesting remark. He said: “the only Americans who have no spokesman in this nation are the white people.” We don’t know what people Mr. Rivers from South Carolina represents. At any rate he represents a district with a population of 289,482. But in 1946 only 5,380 people in his district voted and he got 5,354 of those votes. Winstead of Mississippi said that the entire message “is built on the premise that we mistreat Negroes in the South and that the civil rights of Negroes are not protected. This I deny. We understand the Negro. If anything, Southern officers are more lenient on the Negro who violates the law.” Mr. Winstead represents a district with 261,466 people. The vote in his district in the last election was 7,122 and Mr. Winstead got 7,122 votes.
No one should underestimate what this means, this fact that the overwhelming majority of the people of the deep South do not or cannot vote. This applies to white people as well as to Negroes. The common white man and woman of the deep South does not vote. The demand for the abolition of the poll-tax is a demand for the right of poor whites and Negroes to vote. The Southern demagogues understand this thoroughly. As the representatives of Southern agrarian interests and Northern finance capitalism, and in order to preserve their own bureaucratic interests, these Southern politicians oppose the extension of civil liberties to the millions of common people of the South. When they speak they sound stupid, ignorant, illiterate and vicious. They are all of this and worse. But they know what they are talking about, in their own stupid, backward and brazen way. Perhaps the majority of Southern congressmen and political leaders are descendants not of the old slaveholding aristocracy, but of the poverty-stricken white non-slaveholding group. This group was not only excluded from the slave economy and, therefore from political influence, but also from social and civic life during the slave regime. The present Southern politicos are descendants of and the beneficiaries of the resurgence of the “poor whites” during and following the Reconstruction debacle. This bureaucracy is the spiritual and ideological heir of Ben Tillman, Cole Blease, Tom Vardaman and their kind. They sense today that they are about to be drawn into another “irreconcilable conflict,” a conflict which was symbolized by Arnall on one side and Talmadge on the other; a conflict between the capitalist plantation writhing in the grip of Northern insurance companies and the Southern factory of Northern industrial capitalism. The big majority of the Southern politicos speak for the plantation oligarchy and the non-industrial interests of the South. Where they represent Northern industrial capitalism, such representation is in very crude form; they do not become an integral part of Northern capitalism in any significant way.
 
“Poor Whites” Will Learn in Time
This is due in part to their passionate desire to maintain their political supremacy as a group. They are late arrivals on the scene of political leadership. They have distinct, bureaucratic interests somewhat similar to the bureaucratic interests of the minor bureaucracy which flowered in Washington under the New
Deal. They want to hold on. This group of Southern political leaders is not qualified or competent to assume the leadership of an industrialized South. Any significant transformation of the South, industrially, socially or politically, demands a new political leadership. Not only this but a complete change in the thinking of the population. This is precisely what the Ellenders, Eastlands, Gossetts, Dorns and the rest of them fear. They do not want civil liberties for the masses of the South, black or white. They do not want any wide exercise of the franchise by the common people, black or white. They couch their objection in the weirdest and most irrational language, but they know what they are talking about. They know what they want. They know they cannot trust the masses to support them. Civil rights means the opportunity for the masses to make demands for better schools, health facilities and higher wages. It means the chance to vote for those who advocate and fight for such a program.
The Southern politicos, however, are astoundingly ignorant and stupid men. Their attempts to hide or obscure their real aims and ideas are stupid. They don’t want the South “mongrelized.” How long do the East-lands think the poor white Southerner will be content to remain unmongrelized if he has to do it on an empty stomach, harassed by hookworm and wracked by malaria? How long does Dorn of South Carolina think the “poor whites” will be satisfied with the promise of a “Southern democracy” which provides him with a leaking shanty to live in, a ramshackle building for his children to be “educated” in, a dilapidated guitar for his entertainment, sow belly and grits for his daily diet and a mud road to pull his way through when he goes to visit relatives or friends on the next plantation? How much longer does Rankin believe it will be before his constituents will welcome some “anti-Southern” legislation like the civil rights recommendations? How long will the poor whites of the South consent to grovel in the dirt and dung for the benefits of “white supremacy” served to them by Rankin? How long will the Negroes of the South be content to be loved by the Hobbses while they hang from the tree, burn at the stake, die from malnutrition and grope their way through the darkness and savagery which is “Southern democracy”?
When will these intellectually primitive blatherskites begin to understand, if ever, the meaning of their own expression about the South being a “conquered province.” According to their demagogic utterances, it it the anti-lynching bill which will keep the South in bondage to the North. How? They should explain these things, not to the Negroes but to the white masses of the South.
The South is in bondage to the North, but to Northern finance capitalism. How do the Southern purveyors of bombast, ignorance and drivel plan to remedy this? How do they plan to raise the per capita income of Mississippi which was $528 in 1944 and South Carolina which was $634 to that, say, of Missouri which was low at $991? We are of the opinion that eventually the “poor whites” of the South will become more interested in this question than in “mongrelization.”
 
Genuine “Revolt” – or Only a Rebel Yell?
What is this new “revolt” of the South? In our opinion it is merely another rebel yelll. Will they withdraw from the Democratic Party and set up their own Dixie brand if the civil rights recommendations stand? We do not believe so. They are stupid, but not that stupid. What would they gain? Outside the Democratic Party this group will be in the same fix with a Democratic administration in Washington as the national Democratic Party is under a Republican administration. That is, they would lose all of their patronage. They would lose whatever value they have today to Northern industrial capitalism. The Republicans would move into the South and attempt to revive the party there. The present Southern political bureaucrats would find. themselves on the outside in a “conquered province.”
This arrogant bureaucracy, for the first time, is between the hammer and the anvil, I will discuss the basic foundations of its dilemma, next week. Right now it is only necessary to say that this is an election year. Whereas the Democratic Party needs Southern votes to defeat Wallace and the Republicans, the Republicans need the votes of the “minorities” in the North to defeat Truman and Wallace. Taft doesn’t like the FEPC and the anti-lynching bill any more than Rankin does. But there are some votes in Ohio, Indiana, Illinois and Pennsylvania which he must try to keep Truman from getting. Truman doesn’t want to lose the Mississippi vote but he must get Negro votes in those four states and keep them away from Taft and Wallace. Also Truman and the Democratic leaders know that no matter what Rankin & Co. say, the majority of the white voters in the South will vote the Democratic ticket in November.
Next week I will return to the Civil Rights Report itself and the message to discuss what is the meaning of this sudden burst of demands for civil rights, particularly for Negroes.
 




From Slavery to Freedom
by John Hope Franklin
Knopf, N.Y. 1947, $5.00
Franklin, a young Negro scholar who is professor of history at Howard University, is concerned primarily with the history of the Negro in the United States; but he has included chapters on the African background, on the Caribbean and Latin American, and on Canadian Negroes. The subject matter is therefore wide-ranging: from slavery and the slave trade, through the abolition movement and the Civil War, to the New Deal and wars of our day. What relation existed between the theoretical notions of the Founding Fathers and the fact of slavery? What was the relation between American slavery and the Industrial Revolution? How did the slave feel about his servitude?
The latter part of the book describes the struggle of the Negro for democratic rights, including a significant discussion of The Negro and American Imperialism. Dr. Franklin deals with the Booker Washington movement and the DuBois opposition, the Harlem Renaissance and The Negro and World Problems. The three chapters on Africa – Early Negro States of Africa, The African Way of Life, and A Cradle of Civilization – will illuminate those who believe that African Negroes had nothing to do but ramble along the coast to be picked up by slave traders.
In a brief discussion of that troublesome question, The Transplantation of African Culture, Dr. Franklin disagrees with both extreme positions: that nothing in Negro life today goes back to African backgrounds (Renter and Woodson) and that there remains a distinct, very marked element of the African background (Herskovits). In Franklin’s opinion there unquestionably is some survival (he mentions the words yam, goober, canoe, banjo as well as certain folktale elements and religious cult practices) but he adds that these manifestations are certainly not prominent in the U.S,: “The survival of varying degrees of African culture in America ... merely points up the fact that he came out of an experience that was sufficiently entrenched to make possible the persistence of some customs and traditions.” This will not satisfy either Woodson or Herskovits, who, in the opinion of this reviewer, are something less than scientific and somewhat romantic in their approach.
There is space only for a few details about this excellent book. Dr. Franklin writes with proper restraint and caution but as a rule does not sacrifice clarity nor fail to take strides. For instance, he emphasizes that Negroes opposed all colonization schemes, that the free Negroes resisted deportation, and that “the great majority of Negroes who went to Africa were from the slaveholding states.” He understands that “Negroes on the lower social and economic levels were inclined to regard” the NAACP and the Commission on Interracial Cooperation “as the agencies of upper-class Negroes and liberal whites who failed to join hands with them in their efforts to rise.” Many went to the Garvey movement but “’Negro Zionism’ was doomed to failure. Regardless of how dissatisfied Negroes were with conditions in the United States they were unwilling in the twenties, as their forebears had been a century earlier, to undertake the uncertain task of redeeming Africa.”
On Booker Washington he writes: “The particular type of industrial education which Washington emphasized ... was outmoded at the time he enunciated it ... He did not seem to grasp fully the effect of the Industrial Revolution ... many of the occupations which Washington was urging Negroes to enter were disappearing almost altogether.” Franklin deals also with the Negro and the Populist Party in the South – far from adequately, but this subject is usually ignored completely by Negro authors.
There is some careless writing in the book. On the Haitian events of 1915 we read (page 348): “As for the part of the United States, it is enough to say that the long period of disorder, debt, and political deterioration led to the occupation by the United States Marines in 1915 ...” There is ample evidence to demonstrate that this was not the real reason for the occupation of this sovereign and independent republic by U.S. imperialism. On the Knights of Labor in 1886 he writes: “This organization was losing ground, however, because of the infiltration of radical foreign elements and the Haymarket Square riots in 1886.” (Page 394) But the Knights began to lose out because they were not suited to the times and could not counter the rival AFL then emerging with its doctrine of wage consciousness. Like Booker Washington they did not understand the Industrial Revolution. It was not therefore the “unequivocal stand” of the Knights “on the race question” which prevented “the expansion of the organization.”
There are other examples of defects in the book. There is insufficient emphasis on the importance of the Negro’s trend into the trade-union movement, particularly during the past twelve years and particularly into the CIO, with the consequent tremendous social, political and economic significance for the Negroes as a group.
But the outstanding feature of Dr. Franklin’s book, aside from its general excellence as a source of much needed information, is its sound scholarship. He is not one of those writers about and for Negroes who apparently think that all they need is good intentions, a pro-Negro attitude, and a good polemical or apologetical style. From Slavery to Freedom is the result of genuine historical research; it is not a mere recording of “the progress the Negro has made since emancipation.” He has done what no other contemporary Negro historian has done, with the exception of DuBois in parts of Black Reconstruction: he has recognized that the history of the Negro is part and parcel of the total history of the country, an integral part of the political, social and economic growth of the nation. His book should be read by everyone who thinks he knows something about the Negro.
 







We have received several contributions which disagree in varying degree with articles that have appeared in Labor Action on the Czechoslovak events. Because these events are of tremendous importance to the labor movement, and have stimulated a wide discussion on the problem of Stalinism, we have decided to open the columns of Labor Action to discussion. The article that begins below, and two others, will be printed in their entirety, inasmuch as they arrived before we set any limit on size. Further contributions will have to limit themselves to 1,000 words! Shorter articles are preferred. The New International is also throwing its columns open for discussion of this issue. Space requirements will not be as exacting in the NI. Insofar as it is practical to do so, we will try to devote a half page per issue to this and the Palestine discussion which also continues for the time being. Additional discussion articles will appear from time to time in the Workers Party bulletin, which can be ordered direct from the Workers Party. The letter column of LA is, of course, always open for discussion of any issue. In the letter column, however, the editors reserve the right to condense material to fit the space requirements of the paper. Articles contributed to the discussion column will not be altered in any way. If they exceed 1,000 words, they will simply be rejected. – The Editors



*
(The following article was written three weeks before the Italianelections. It is being printed without changes or additions.)
I am writing this piece to discuss points of view expressed in Labor Action recently by Comrades Judd and Howe. The Judd article was his World Politics column for March 1, 1948. Comrade Howe’s article appeared in Labor Action for March 8 under the title, Observations on the Events in Czechoslovakia. It is my opinion that whereas there is a difference in the approach and point of view of Comrades Judd and Howe, both of them at bottom hold fundamentally similar positions. Furthermore, I believe that their analyses of the Czechoslovakian events are woefully inadequate, invalid in part, and more the product of a feeling of alarm than of sober and painstaking reflection. I believe the central theme of the Howe article to be totally inadmissible and must be rejected unceremoniously by the Workers Party. My purpose in writing this article is to validate these contentions and this position.
I will begin with the Judd article in Labor Action for March 1. Comrade Judd writes:
“The Stalinist road to state power is marked by the use of blackmail, threats, violence and coercion in every shape and form possible. Kidnapping and jailing of opposition leaders, bribery of Social-Democratic leaders ... police violence against opponents meetings ... Behind all this hovers the menacing shape of the Russian armed forces, able to invade and overwhelm the nation at will.
“But all these are techniques ... and as such are subordinate to factors far more important for socialists to grasp. These weapons alone could never put Stalinism in power in Czechoslovakia or, for that matter, anywhere else. Together with their use, Stalinism must (a) mobilize the working class of the country and (b) offer a political and social program that will actually mobilize the workers.”
What is Judd saying here? He is saying that Stalinism must depend on the working class if it is to have organizational and administrative success in a country. Not only must Stalinism get the support of the working class but it must have a “political and social program” which workers can support, or which workers think they ought to support. Judd says further:
“The greatest threat in the nature of Stalinism lies in its capacity (based upon organic need) to mobilize the working masses, in the name of a social program (nationalization) which appears to be revolutionary and progressive.”
That is, according to Judd, the political and social program utilized by the Stalinists to win the support of the masses is nationalization, the taking of the capitalists’ property and making it state property. Further on Judd writes:
“Capitalism, the bourgeoisie, capitalist parties cannot fight Stalinism successfully. Stalinism will defeat its opponents except where American imperialism is the counterfactor, in every case because the capitalist parties are politically and socially bankrupt and cannot halt the Stalinist mobilization of the people.”
The implication here is that the Stalinist parties are not bankrupt; they have a political and social program(nationalization) which gives them an appeal to the working class which the capitalist parties do not and cannot have.
 
The Decisive Point
Comrade Judd’s article bristles with difficulties. What does he mean by the “organic need” of Stalinism to mobilize the masses? And if Stalinism has this organic need and if Stalinism must present a political and social program to attract the masses and if Stalinist “techniques” are not sufficient, and if that political and social program is presented to workers in a way which wins their acceptance and support, then we are forced to accept one of several alternative conclusions: (1) We can accept Comrade Howe’s conclusions that the workers “... also support them (the Stalinists) because their conception of what socialism is has been debased and corrupted as a result of the cataclysmic declines and the barbaric experiences of recent history”; (2) that the Stalinists, to some degree bring real benefits to the workers of a country and improve their conditions;(3) the workers, say, of Czechoslovakia, are merely stupid and don’t recognize totalitarianism when they see it. Or they are not only stupid but so backward that they can be taken in by the Stalinist fraud about the “new democracies,” and “workers action committees” taking power in the name of the Czechoslovakian people. This isn’t all. If the Stalinists are successful in making their social program appear “revolutionary and progressive” we have to ask, how is this possible? If the Stalinists are able to make their reactionary program appear revolutionary and progressive to such relatively advanced workers as the Czech proletariat, how will genuine anti-Stalinist revolutionaries distinguish themselves from the Stalinists? If the Workers Party should be in such a situation how would we convince the workers that we were genuine, and the Stalinists totalitarian frauds who would cut their throats on the morrow? Isn’t it more likely that these workers would cut our throats today?
This is a decisive point. If the Stalinists are able to give real benefits to the workers before and after their “nationalization” then how can Stalinism be exposed to the mass of workers as an evil to be shunned? Are workers, as a group, expected to have made the Trotskyist analysis of Stalinism and be prepared to reject the Stalinist benefits because of their understanding of “socialism in one country,” the Moscow trials frameup, and all the various political zig-zags of Stalinism over the past 20 years?
I want to repeat, that in order to support the thesis that the workers of Czechoslovakia supported the Stalinist coup voluntarily, the proponents of this view must hold that previous to the coup the Stalinists had gained the support of the workers by answering their needs, or that these workers had become so thoroughly degraded that they could no longer distinguish between what is evil for them and what is good. This is not all; we have to know just at what point the Stalinists cease to do good by the workers and at what point the workers begin to understand this. This is a legitimate question because it is Judd’s contention that although the Stalinists use terrorist tactics in the seizure of power, this is not really the way they take power. They can only take power if they mobilize the masses around a political and social program which “appears” progressive. Let’s get the whole picture before us. Before the seizure of complete power the Stalinist already had virtual control of Czechoslovakia. Industry was already 75 per cent nationalized. The Stalinists had already been using “blackmail,” “threats,” “violence,” “coercion,” “kidnapping,” “bribery,” and “jailing.” This was one advantage they had. But added to this they had another advantage: in the midst of the use of the above-mentioned “techniques” the Stalinists were successful in presenting a social and political program to the workers which “appeared” not only “progressive” but “revolutionary.” Consequently the proletariat took to the streets voluntarily, under the Stalinist banner, in their own action committees and workers militia. They took over the factories and cast a menacing, and what they thought was a “progressive” glance in the direction of Benes. The remaining 25 percent of capitalist enterprise was nationalized, or at least the proletariat thought it was being nationalized. Simultaneous with all of this, according to the screaming and hysterical lead article in Labor Action for March 8, the Stalinists were also moving “rapidly to build their totalitarian state. Once they had decomposed and disintegrated the feeble resistance of the capitalist parties and the Social Democrats ... there was nothing to halt the Stalinist machine. All factories, newspapers, radios, means of communications, etc., are now firmly in the hands of the totalitarians. Elections have been postponed and will take place only when the results are entirely guaranteed.”
Again I have to ask some questions. Are we to understand that where the article above quoted says “totalitarians” the reference is to the action committees? Is the writer of the article saying that the workers continued to support the Stalinists after the coup and as the Stalinists “moved rapidly to build their totalitarian state?” My last question is; if the workers were voluntarily supporting the Stalinists, why is it necessary for the Stalinists to postpone the elections until the “results are entirely guaranteed?” There is another sentence in this article which reads:
“At the same time, he (Gottwald) is taking any possible control of the factories out of the workers’ hands by sending his government administrators (all members of the Communist Party) to assume control over each of the seized factories.”
What happened from one day to the next? Why does Gottwald find it necessary to send “his administrators” to take control of the factories, when the workers are voluntarily supporting Gottwald? And who are these people sent by Gottwald to take factories away from workers’ committees? Why is the writer of the article so considerate and gentle as to give them the innocuous title of “administrator?”
 
Implicit Conclusions
In his Labor Action column for March 1, Comrade Judd says:
“Capitalism, the bourgeoisie, capitalist parties cannot fight Stalinism successfully ... because the capitalist parties are politically and socially bankrupt and cannot halt the Stalinist mobilization of the people.”
Judd obscures the real issue by the way he formulates this sentence. He talks about “capitalism,” “bourgeoisie,” “capitalist parties,” without making clear what the real nature of the conflict is. The conflict is between bourgeois democracy and bureaucratic-collectivist totalitarianism. This is the correct formulation unless Judd is saying that the U.S. is no longer a bourgeois-democratic country, or that bureaucratic collectivism and bourgeois democracy are “equally reactionary.” Judd’s argument is that if Stalinism is defeated it will be defeated by American imperialism and not by any political superiority which bourgeois democracy may have over bureaucratic collectivism. I take it that he means by “American imperialism,” American armed force of the Marshall Plan. It is Judd’s position therefore that workers will reject bourgeois democracy because it is capitalism but will accept bureaucratic collectivism because it is anti-capitalist. Or to put it another way, the Czech proletariat was advanced enough to be against Czech capitalism but not advanced enough to know that Stalinist anti-capitalism is totalitarianism. They are advanced enough to reject bourgeois democracy but not advanced enough to reject Stalinism.
Implicit in Judd’s article is the belief that the whole world politically, today, outside the Marxist movement, is one solid “reactionary mass.” Therefore no appreciable distinction can be made between fascism, Stalinism and bourgeois democracy. According to this one must say that Europe is entering the century of de Gaullism or the century of Stalinism.
(Concluded Next Week)
 




The miners are returning to work once more. By the time this is in print virtually all of them will be back in the pits digging coal for Big Steel, Little Steel, GM, the railroads, home consumption and for ERP export. They are back at work with their pensions of $100 dollars a month. This victory cost the coal diggers several weeks wages and $1,400,000 out of the union treasury. Within a period of two years the UMWA has paid $2,100,000 in fines into the U.S. Treasury.
We do not believe that two million dollars or five million dollars are too much to pay to win a struggle. We do not believe that the loss of several weeks wages is too high a price to pay to win a struggle against the capitalist bosses and their government. That is, we believe that such sacrifices are correct and necessary if they really push the labor movement and the working class ahead;if such sacrifices represent manifestations of conscious class struggle and are therefore examples of the heightening and intensification of the class struggle.
We are discussing this question as of 1948: months after the passage of the Taft-Hartley Act, years after the Great Depression, nearly three years after the close of the Second Imperialist World War; at a time when preparations are being made for the Third Imperialist World War, even before the debris of the Second World War has been cleared away, and before the maimed and butchered have recovered from their wounds. We are discussing this question at the time when the capitalist exploiters and ravagers of our country are reaching out for more and more profits, higher prices and lower wages. We are not discussing this question therefore in general but in a specific and concrete setting.
Aside from the above, what is the nature of the scene in which the working class, including the miners,carries on its struggle for wages, pensions, better working conditions and security? It is a situation in which the capitalist ruling class finds it necessary to keep the country constantly alerted for war. There must be a huge air force, larger and larger stockpiles of war materials, universal military training, the peacetime draft. This from the side of the Government, whose business it is to maintain vigilance for the protection of the country’s national and international interests and security. This means, of course, standing guard over the class interests of the capitalist ruling class.
The capitalist ruling class seeks through its government at Washington to maintain “law and order,” capitalist law and order. They seek a “government of laws” “and not of men.” They are determined to keep the working class and the trade unions within the framework which capitalism and the capitalist ruling class has prescribed for labor and organizations of labor. They must do this because, only in this way, can our capitalist masters maintain their class domination.
The capitalist ruling class in the U.S. today seeks to combat Russia, to establish economic dominion over all the earth and its people, and to raise profits to increasingly higher levels. They seek the aid and intervention of their government in accomplishing these purposes. They approach the Executive, the Congress and the Judiciary. They seek new decrees, new laws and new convictions. They resort to trickery, bribery, intimidation and boycott. They will not hold back from frame-up and physical violence, either private or by their government. These are the reasons for their Taft-Hartley law, their plans for the complete and permanent militarization of the country and its inhabitants and their agreed upon formulas for slight wage increases or no wage increases.
 
Political Struggle
This is the situation which con-fronts the working class, the unions and the masses. A greedy, grasping,degenerate, reactionary, destructive ruling class, half afraid, senile, but determined to have its profits and maintain its rule; a ruling class bearing misery and degradation, but insistent on ruling and taking its dividends.
It is in the midst of this political,economic and social setting that the coal miners have had two strikes recently. We have said before and we repeat: the miners do not grasp and understand the nature of today’s political setting. They do not understand that their struggle and the struggle of all labor is or should become a political struggle. To put it very bluntly this means that the fight of labor today should become a struggle for political power. To put it very bluntly this means to carry on a struggle for a government of our own; a class government of the toilers and the masses.
To continue the explanation, this means for labor, the working class to assume the leadership of the nation. This question must be faced squarely and objectively. Are the miners willing to go on being dragged by Democratic Truman into Goldsborough’s court and fleeced of a million dollars? Perhaps some workers think that things would be different under a Republican Taft, Dewey, Stassen, Vandenberg or Martin. Then they wouldn’t be dragged into court. Or if they were it would be into the court of some “friendly” judge. If one is guided by the cloudy and reactionary politics of Lewis this kind of mythology might be accepted and believed.
 
Three Courses
Lewis, of course, does not understand these things and he never will.
The ranks of the miners and all other workers, however, must begin to understand. We put it very brutally, in the case of the miners. There are three courses and only three courses for the UMWA: (1) adopt a no-strike policy or a partial no-strike policy; (2) continue as heretofore, have an injunction slapped on, be convicted for violating the injunction, receive a million dollar fine; after this go back to the mines with no gains or relatively small gains; (3) take the course which we have outlined above: the way of political organization and working class political action, assume the leadership of the nation, establish a workers’ state and a workers’ government, begin a real struggle to transform capitalist society into a socialist society.
These are the choices before the miners and there are no other. These are the choices before the entire working class and there are no others. Murray thinks he can escape by announcing that, although U.S. Steel has said “no wage increases,” the steelworkers will abide by their two-year no-strike agreement. When Lewis is faced with this kind of situation he merely notifies the miners that no agreement has been reached and they stay away from the pits.
It is nonsense, however, to talk about the miners being the militant spearhead of labor, basing oneself merely on the fact that the miners strike oftener than other unions. It is not sufficient to call Lewis the ablest labor leader in the country, belabor Murray for class collaboration, conservatism and what not, and let it go at that. The steelworkers and the miners are in the same ditch. The militant, progressive and far better educated and trained automobile workers are in that same ditch.
In fact, there is no “spearhead” in the trade union movement today. There cannot be so long as no union and no labor leader steps out in front with the call for political organization and independent working class political action. It is time for the shelving of all romanticizing and word-mongering in this connection. It will not do the miners or any other workers any good. The miners get enough of word-mongering from their own phrase-laden leader. We remember that when Lewis appealed to the Supreme Court after his last bout with Goldsborough, he announced pontifically to the miners that this is a “constitutional court ... it has been and we believe will always remain the protector of constitutional liberties ...” This protector of liberties decreed that he should give the U.S. Treasury $10,000 and his union $700,000.
We say very frankly, that labor cannot emerge from the present-day wilderness by bombast, the paying of fines, by the simple procedure of strikes, by mere refusal to strike, by Truman vetoing a Taft-Hartley bill, by drafting Eisenhower or by the Olympian statesmanship of the Honorable Joe Martin.
 
New Outlook Needed
We are making no demands here for “labor to throw out the present leadership” and elect another leadership. We are not telling “the workers” what they “must” do. We are not interested in increasing the volume of gas in the universe nor the sum total of verbiage. We are trying to the extent that we are able to explain to workers and particularly to the miners that the times have changed. We tried before to explain to the miners that they cannot use their old slogan,“we do not work without a contract” in the same way as in past years. That slogan can no longer be upheld and supported by the economic strike alone. The UMWA discovered this last year when the union was fined and sent back to the pits. That slogan can be properly advanced in the future only by a workers’ organization which is ready and prepared to engage in a conscious and planned political struggle. A union, however, which understands this, will also understand that an orderly retreat for reenforcements or for the organization of an offensive, is to be preferred to a rout and a scattering of the forces.
The strategic need of the labor movement today is not so much to elect new individuals to office but to have a new program, a new outlook and a new goal. We can envisage the possibility of the labor movement getting a worse leadership than the one it has now if the emphasis is placed on getting new individuals into the offices. We can think of no one in the UMWA who would make a better president than Lewis. We could only prefer Reuther to Murray as president of the CIO because Reuther advocates a program of a more advanced sort than Murray. But even here we have to say that in the long run there may be no ground for a choice between Reuther and Murray, because while it is true that Reuther has a program and Murray doesn’t, Reuther is not very aggressive and steadfast in the advocacy of his program.
All of the above is an attempt to elucidate what we meant when we said at the beginning that the sacrifice of wages, the union treasury, and any other sacrifice, is not too much provided we are farther ahead after the sacrifice has been made. We are not for the martyrdom of the working class but for its victory over oppression, exploitation and capitalism. Labor does not need to look for sacrifices to make; there are enough sacrifices forced on us.
Before the miners are faced with the next conflict with the coal operators, which is sure to come, they should think things through. The little judge is still in Washington waiting for them to be hauled before him again. He knows they have more millions in their treasury. The coal operators know this too. They and the little judge are friends.
We are for the miners going to Washington. We are for their going into Goldsborough’s court. But we want to see a coal digger sitting in the big chair in the high place. We want to hear a steelworker, or sharecropper perhaps, representing the government. We want to see this jury of 12 class conscious toilers. We hope to be there to hear the little judge tell this jury why he took $1,400,000 from the miners in 1948.
 

    [Black Policemen] Atlanta, Georgia, has eight brand new Negro cops right out of a Georgia “police training school.” These eight cops are walking the sidewalks in the Negro section around Auburn Ave. It is reported that five of the new cops have had college training; whatever that means in Georgia. It is not easy to understand why anybody, White or black, would go to college in order to qualify as a cop in Georgia. There is something very interesting about these new Negro cops. They will be permitted to club and beat up Negroes only. Its the same old story: if a Negro is to have the right to club anybody, it must be another Negro. These Negro cops have instructions not to arrest any white person. Chief of Police Herbert Jenkins said: “My instructions were specific to Negro officers. When they see a white man who should be arrested they are to call the police station and a squad car with white officers will be sent to make the arrest.” I don’t know how this scheme will work and I don’t care whether or not it works. I am busy trying to get the answer to a puzzle. I am trying to guess what kind of Negroes these eight cops are. What kind of men are they, if they are men. Have they ever heard of just ordinary plain manhood independence? Do they know the difference between being a man and being a mere walking lump? I take it that these eight will make a very fine record in the Negro section of Atlanta. Atlanta Negroes are going to have some real police “protection.” They will be served by ignorant white cops and eight of “their own people.”   Southern Morals Mississippi having taken care of “white supremacy” and the “purity of white womanhood” now turns its attention to the “moral character” of its citizens. This would be considered a very laudable enterprise if it were as innocent as it sounds. There area lot of people in Mississippi who need their moral characters changed. But this is something else. If the voters adopt a constitutional amendment just submitted by the legislature, only persons of “good moral character” will be permitted to vote in Mississippi. This has nothing to do with Negroes, mind you. Or any recent decisions of the Supreme Court. Not at all. The state legislators merely discovered that too many people were voting who have bad morals and no character. They plan to put a stop to this. If the referendum carries only God-fearing, upright, law-abiding, sober and clean-thinking Mississippians will be permitted to vote. This of course will reduce the numbers of voters, but that’s all right. At least there will be one state in the union with clean, honest and moral voting, voting of character. Now its possible to get elected to Congress from Mississippi with two or three thousand votes. After the “good moral character” purge, it will be possible to get elected with two or three hundred votes. And of course all of them will be white votes; since no Mississippi Negro will be successful in convincing the election officials that he lives with his own wife, that he works, that he doesn’t steal and that he isn’t an infidel or a comMUNist. South Carolina’s professional politicians and officeholders are doing a lot of drinking, spitting and cussing these days. The federal courts have decided that a state political party is not a private club and that a primary of that party is not a barbecue to which the party can invite a few select guests and exclude all who have not been invited. They are trying to devise some scheme to keep the Negroes in the fields and away from the polls on election days. Being rather stupid these politicos have not been able to find an answer.   Dixie Dismay When the Louisiana legislature convenes during the summer it is expected to pass a law requiring that only those will be permitted to vote, who have a “grammar school education.” I take it that those who run for office must be registered voters and therefore people with a grammar school education. Louisiana may get into difficulties if such a law is passed. There will be a demand for more schools and more teachers, white and black. Another problem may arise. If thousands of present illiterates and semi-illiterates acquire a grammar school education, that means they will be able to read and write. If they know how to read and write, they can then understand better how to vote in their own interests. That will not be good for the present demagogues who rule the roost. No matter how they try southern “gentlemen” of various stripes are not having much success in keeping Negroes and more poor whites from the exercise of suffrage and other elementary democratic rights. Dixie’s political leadership of today is on the road to the scrap heap.   



(Continued from Last Week)
Comrade Howe’s article is a little difficult to deal with. He begins with the observation that “The hearts of all socialists were ... sick with sorrow and apprehension last week.” He suffered a “sense of oppression” and a “feeling of discouragement.” Comrade Howe finds the world preparing for war like a patient who has had such large doses of pain and horror that they seem normal to him. Howe finds the world rushing headlong to its doom. However I am not much impressed or moved by Comrade Howe’s “sorrow,” his “oppression” or his “feeling of discouragement.” I don’t believe that sorrow, oppression and discouragement are very helpful qualities in the struggle against Stalinism or capitalism. Furthermore, sorrowing socialists are not a very sturdy breed. Socialists feeling “discouragement” will not be of much service in the struggle against Stalinism or capitalism. Socialists, that is revolutionary socialists, REAL communists must be made of sterner stuff. It is in times of proletarian setback that revolutionary socialists do not become “sick with sorrow and apprehension ...”
It is in times such as we are passing through today, when “the socialist movement is in an even weaker condition,” than it was ten years ago that revolutionists must not join the petty-bourgeoisie in a frantic flight to the wailing wall. The first paragraph of Comrade Howe’s article could properly appear in a column by Norman Thomas or in a Nation editorial by Freda Kirchwey.
Comrade Howe is correct when he writes: “Only fools and scoundrels can keep talking about European politics as if all is well, as if the working class is reaching the peak of its road. The truth is otherwise.” Howe goes off the other end and there isn’t much difference between those who attempt to talk up a revolution and those who gulp up the victory of Stalinism everywhere. For instance Comrade Howe is for “honest pessimism.” This is the only “basis for useful discussion.” What is “honest pessimism” and what would be dishonest pessimism? I take it that Comrade Howe is addressing himself to Marxists and militant thinkers in his article and not to old ladies, or to disillusioned youth who have been nourished on the theory of the drive “to be a complete man.” If his piece is addressed to Marxists, he will have to tell us what Marxian pessimism is. He will also have to tell us in what way his “honest pessimism” is superior to or more effective than the ‘official optimism’ of the Fourth International.
 
Heart of the Position
Howe’s discussion of the differences between Nazism and Stalinism is standard Party position and was settled in its main outlines in 1941 when the Party rejected the position that Russia was a fascist state. On the question of Stalinist barbarism, the Trotskyist movement said back in 1935 that nowhere were revolutionists so brutally treated as in the “Soviet Union.” At its 1941 convention the Workers Patty also rejected the position that Stalinism and bourgeois democracy “are equally reactionary.”
Along with Judd and others Howe takes the position that the Stalinists will not seize power without the support of the working class. This of course, if true, makes Stalinist totalitarianism qualitatively different from Nazi totalitarianism. This makes of Stalinist rule, at least at the beginning, a sort of benevolent totalitarianism. From this point Comrade Howe gets to the heart of his position with the question: “Why did the Czech workers help the totalitarian bandits seize the government?” He replies:
“I think the answer is that the support by the Czech workers of the Stalinists is based on a unique mixture of reactionary and revolutionary motivations ... The workers support the Stalinists because they want socialism – that is certainly true; but they also support them because their conception of what socialism is has been debased and corrupted as a result of the cataclysmic declines and the barbaric experiences of recent history. In other words the ‘revolutionary’ kernel of their reasons for supporting Stalinism is encased in a reactionary shell.”
This is very bad but Howe hasn’t finished with this theme. The whole period since the 1920s has been one of “terrifying experiences.” These experiences have tended to destroy first “the initiative of the workers and, second, their conception of what the aim of their struggle was ... the working class and with it all humanity has become an object of manipulation by totalitarian parties.” It isn’t so easy to get hold of all of this but we must try.
It is clear that Howe has surrendered or has been completely oppressed by the totalitarian wave of the future. He bows before inexorable fate. True he calls for. Socialism and holds that “it is still possible for men to act,” but the perspective is “dark, very dark.” Aside from the manipulation of “all humanity” by totalitarians; the atom bombs are poised to wipe out all humanity. I say again, revolutionists must be made of sterner stuff. No matter how dark the future, it is the business of all humanity who call themselves Marxian revolutionaries to face the facts resolutely and without fear and trembling; without “sorrow” and “pessimism,” and wailing. Is a Marxist revolutionist merely one who “accepts” Marxism? Or better, one who accepts Marxism in the bright days of spring but seeks other consolations during the dark days of the winter? I say again that it is exactly now that the Marxist is the invaluable and the indispensable man. But he must be a dry-eyed man, one who stands firm and a beacon light to a working class traduced and misled by Stalinism.
It Is clear from the above that I do not accept the analysis and the conclusions of Judd and Howe. I think that both of them have misunderstood and misinterpreted what transpired in Czechoslovakia. These positions expressed in Labor Action are another example of the danger of inadequate and superficial analysis. It is made worse when the analyses are made in the grip of fear and trembling.
The contention is made that there is “something new” in the situation. The something new is the support of the Stalinists by the workers in the seizure of power. I have already pointed out some of the flaws in this argument above. I want now to discuss the event in a more positive way. The workers are not at the high level nor the low level argued by Howe. They do not “want socialism” nor are they against capitalism in any way except the most elementary. This means that they are primarily concerned with more immediate necessities such as goods and services. This is certainly true of the workers of devastated, war-ravaged and poverty-stricken Europe. If this is not true and one makes the claim that the Czech workers want socialism and are against capitalism on any higher level of political thinking, then it will be very difficult to maintain the Howe thesis that the Czech workers do not know the difference between Stalinism and socialism. In another way the position of Judd is a refutation of the Howe thesis. Where Judd says that the Stalinist program appears progressive and revolutionary to the workers he is in support of Howe: they don’t know the difference. But Judd has them smart enough and politically developed enough to know that one should reject bourgeois democracy as a bankrupt social order, in favor of a revolutionary program and socialism. The dilemma in Czechoslovakia it seems was that while the workers’ were highly political on one day, they were stupid and backward on the day following.
 
Already Had Command
Now what is the probable answer to what transpired in Czechoslovakia? I believe it is the following. First, far more weight must be given to what Judd calls “techniques” than he or Howe does. The Stalinists already had command in the country before the so-called seizure of power. Stalinist seizure of power is in no essential different from a Hitler seizure of power. There is no need to inject some really mystical ideological element into the situation as Judd does. There is certainly no need for Howe’s metaphysics or his lachrymose retreat. There was the Stalinist party, the Stalinist-led action committees, militia and the Stalinist-led unions. The coup had been well-prepared in advance and the workers had been bribed by benefits or intimidated and terrorized. Even those workers who dissented could have no effect; they could easily be silenced. The Czech workers had no assistance, no guidance and no protection of any sort. Comrade Howe should try to think this through. He is here in the U.S., and yet mere reading of what the Stalinists were doing several thousand miles away, filled him with sorrow and trembling. What would he have done if he had been in Prague where the Czech workers were?
Furthermore, it must be emphasized again that industry was already 75 per cent nationalized before the seizure of power. This is a good place to discuss Stalinist nationalization and the workers’ response. It is the contention that the workers supported the Stalinists because of nationalization. Let us assume that this is true. It does not follow from this that they confuse Stalinism with socialism. All that one can say is that there is confusion over what nationalization is and what is its relation to socialism. But one can make this charge against others: the Socialist Workers Party, for instance and the Fourth International. It can be said correctly that the Czech workers, along with others, think on a rather primitive and instinctive level. They have heard that capitalism is the main enemy, therefore any group which is against capitalism is to be preferred to capitalist parties. Furthermore, if it is correct to expropriate the capitalist class and to support the taking of the property by the state, then it is correct to support that group which advocates such actions. This is not confusing Stalinism with socialism, or accepting Stalinism as socialism. More correctly put, it is the result of the failure of the anti-Stalinist Marxist revolutionists to reach the working class with sound Marxian propaganda and education. There has been far too much pure and simple and merely vituperative anti-Stalinism hurled at the working class, which to many workers must have appeared as so much yelping at the heels of those who have been “successful.”
The Howe position is an example of this. The Czech workers supported the Stalinists. They supported the Stalinists because workers today do not know the difference between Stalinism and socialism. It is as simple as that. There is no hint that the workers perhaps do not have a complete understanding of this new anti-capitalist phenomenon which is Stalinism. What is going on is an illustration of the fact that the mass of workers understand neither Stalinism, capitalism nor socialism. This holds for the workers of the United States and of Czechoslovakia. It’s about time that all of us who claim to be Marxists and working class politicians understand this; stop our whining and snapping; and descend from our pedagogical ivory towers to the proletarian grass roots.
 
Understanding Stalinism
I say that workers do not understand this new Stalinist anti-capitalism. They are not alone in their ignorance. What chance have they had to understand? Could the Czech workers learn about Stalinism from the capitulationist Social-Democracy? Could they learn from the Czech liberals? Could they learn from the Fourth International which is just as muddled about the nature of Stalinism as the Czech workers. We have to remember too that up to the fall of 1941 the Workers Party held the position that Russia is some kind of workers’ state. Was that because we didn’t know the difference between Stalinism and socialism?
If Comrade Howe’s argument is correct anti-Stalinist workers in Czechoslovakia should have kept quiet when the putsch was taking place. If the workers were consciously giving support to Stalinism because they think Stalinism is socialism, opposition to the Stalinist seizure of power would result in the anti-Stalinists being liquidated as reactionary opponents of socialism; as pro-capitalist enemies of the people. Good political sense would have indicated that anti-Stalinists should wait until the eyes of the workers were opened. Their slogan should have been: “After Stalin we come.”
It is necessary to mention one other aspect of the “support” given the Stalinists by the Czech workers. The Stalinist movement appeared to them as a native movement, a Czech anti-capitalist upsurge. This perhaps obscured the Stalinist insides of the movement. That is why I, for one, take the position that the Stalinists in each country, outside of Russia, of course, must be looked at as invaders, as outside conquerors. Insofar as the native Stalinist bureaucrats act to establish bureaucratic collectivism, they are just as much the representatives of Moscow as is Molotov in the UN. That is, the Gottwalds are an integral part of a worldwide set-up headed by Moscow. The Gottwalds and the Fosters only support “their own” governments when those governments are in a bloc with Moscow, as during the late war. Also it must be stressed that the stability of every Stalinist regime rests ultimately on the Russian army.
The Workers Party has characterized Russia as a bureaucratic collectivist state. We believe this to be the most scientific description of this new political monstrosity. We do not say that the last word has been said nor that enough has necessarily been said. The Stalinists are the supreme opportunists of history. They are not the most inept of opportunists. Combined with this is Stalinist terror and ruthlessness. Not mere terror and ruthlessness but efficient and effective terror. I believe that Judd underestimates this in his analysis.
As I see it the position of Comrades Howe and Judd is off the mark. Both of them seem to have the feeling that the Czech workers have let them down. Next it will be Italy. Then France. Next the United States! Then where will “socialists” take refuge from Stalinism?
 




The miners are returning to work from a four week’s strike. One day after this is written John L. Lewis will face Judge Goldsborough on a contempt charge. Nothing can be said here as to what will be the outcome of the trial. At any rate that result is relatively unimportant. What is far more important is the manner in which the strike came to be settled.
The manner of the strike settlement is really more important than the settlement itself, because the settlement did not come about from any activity of the miners and their union. To a certain degree the coal-diggers have been misled again by John L. Lewis. They have been used and are being used as pawns in a game being played by Lewis, the Republican party and the Democratic party.
The whole settlement procedure stinks. In part it looks like some kind of frame-up. On Lewis’s side the settlement has a more reactionary cast than his support of Willkie in 1940. From Martin’s side it was merely a cheap little every day political trick. Bridges of course was willing to help out a fellow Republican and friend. It is difficult to say anything about the position of Van Horn. It looks as though he was caught in the Martin, Bridges, Lewis double play.
Here is a strike which has been going for four weeks. The miners have a strong case. Their claims are indisputable. They are holding their line with the usual solidarity and tenacity. Nobody will make a single gesture toward compromise or settlement. Lewis has been ordered by the court to get the men back to work but the men are not back at work. They give no indication that they will ever return to work without their pensions.
Right in the midst of this stalemate and just before Lewis is to be hauled into court on a contempt charge, little Joe Martin, of Massachusetts and the House of Representatives, gets the bright idea that it might be profitable to his future if he can effect a settlement of the strike. After all, a neighbor of his, with just as little brains, had reached the White House on the back of thes logan: “He Broke the Boston Police Strike.” How much better the slogan: “He Got the Miners Back to Work,” thus ending the “most devastating strike in all history.” Such a slogan would be in line with other winners such as: “The Full Dinner Pail,” “A Chicken in Every Pot,” and certainly far more attractive than “Back to Normalcy.”
This may be all well and good for Joe Martin and the Republican party but it is not so good for the miners to be pulled here and there by Lewis in line with his, reactionary thinking. He consents to this little trick of Joe Martin’s and his Republican conspirators as a slap at Truman and the Democrats. The Democrats, of course, may be expected to retaliate. And what has all this got to do with miners’ pensions, wages, working conditions? Nothing at all.
Any miner who has kept himself informed as to what was going on will not be misled by this cheap little political stunt of Republican Joe Martin, aided and abetted by Lewis. Out of the night, or from nowhere, Martin suddenly becomes enamored of the bright idea that he can get Lewis to listen to him. A proposal is made to Lewis that Republican Bridges become the “neutral” member of the pension board. Lewis accepts. Bridges accepts. They get Van Horn. Bridges shows up with a pension plan acceptable from an actuarial viewpoint. He and Lewis vote yes to Van Horn’s no and the play is over. No one had seen Bridges’ plan before he got to the conference. He did it all himself. And behind the scene is little Joe Martin thinking how nice it would be to have 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue as his address beginning January 1949.
 
Indecent Horseplay
Some day the miners will begin to realize that this Republican party horseplay carried on by their president is somewhat indecent, reactionary and not in the interest of the men who dig the coal. We do not mean of course that we would approve if Joe Martin had been a Democrat with whom Lewis was making these questionable deals. Not at all. That would be just as bad. But it is extremely difficult to understand how Lewis’s mind functions.
He pretends to be engaged in opposing the Taft-Hartley act. The act was passed by a Republican Congress. It was supported by Republicans and Democrats, on demand of the NAM and the big capitalist employers. Lewis however, makes a deal with the most powerful Republican in Congress next to Taft and a man no less reactionary than Taft. In fact they are two of a kind. On what ground does Lewis continue to make. this distinction between the Republicans and the Democrats? Does he believe that the Republicans are more “progressive” than the Democrats? Where, when and how?
Who will Lewis support for president this year? Or is he in the same fix as Murray: a labor leader looking for a capitalist candidate to hitch his union to? After Lewis has sold his union down the river to the Republicans, and Murray has sold the CIO down the river to the Democrats, and Bill Green has sold the AFL down the river to both Republicans and Democrats – where will that leave the coal miners, the steelworkers and the rest of the millions of labor? It will leave all of labor right where we are today. We will still have the Taft-Hartley law around our necks. The Republicans and Democrats will continue to be the representatives and protectors of their masters: the big manufacturers. coal operators, planters, insurance companies and bankers. Prices will be just as high as they are today or higher. Profits will be just as big or bigger. Wages will be just as low or lower.
This will be true if the Republicans win. It will be true if the Democrats win. Why? Because whichever party wins of these two, it will mean that the coal operators have won and not the coal miners. A Republican or Democratic victory means that the United States Steel Corporation wins and not the steelworkers. Whether it is Taft or Truman, the automobile manufacturers win and not the automobile workers. A big banker or big insurance executive can pick a presidential candidate by spitting on a chip and tossing it over his shoulder. He knows that they all are defenders of “our system of free enterprise.”
 
Labor Can Win
The coal miners, steelworkers, sharecroppers, automobile workers, maritime workers etc. can win too. They can’t win though with the politics of Murray, Lewis, Green and Reuther. We can’t win with little Joe Martin, or Dewey, or Taft, or Truman. We can’t win either with Eisenhower; the new desperation candidate of Murray, Reuther and the discarded liberals who make up Americans for Democratic Action. We can’t win with these people because we can’t win by giving our votes to the Republican and Democratic parties.
Every time a worker votes the Republican or Democratic ticket, or for any Republican or Democratic ticket, that worker throws his vote away. It would be far better not to vote at all. That at least would be saying to the Republicans and Democrats:
“We are tired of you and your lies. We are sick of voting for you while you vote every time for the big manufacturers and the big bankers. We put you in office and you keep the big capitalists in power. We’ll form our own party and elect fellow workers from our own ranks. We’ll take over the Government and put you into overalls. If the Lewis’s, the Greens and the Murrays are not satisfied and want to defend you, we’ll give them a season in overalls also.”
Labor can have its own party. We must have our own party. If we have our own party WE will win and not the big bosses. We can have our own party this year 1948, and before the November elections. This does not mean that our party can win this year but we can get started: The present Republican party was formed in the fifties and ran its first candidate in 1856. They didn’t win the 1856 election but they did with Abraham Lincoln in 1860. Labor can’t win in 1948 but we can form our labor party, enter the November elections and get some practice for 1952.
Labor needs lots of experience. We can only get this experience by participating in elections. We can’t learn how to fight the big capitalists by voting for their candidates. Neither can we learn how to participate in elections with our own party by waiting until after the election is over. That doesn’t make any sense.
We should form our party now and enter the November elections. Then we will be ready and in shape to win in 1952.
 




And so, according to the capitalist judge sitting in the Federal district court in Washington, John L. Lewis and the union of the coal diggers are guilty of “civil and criminal contempt of court.” This “contempt” charge is a handy means the capitalist courts have of kicking the little people around without the little people having much of an opportunity to do anything about it. Almost always it is workers, workers organizations or working class leaders who are held in contempt by some little black-robed servant of the big corporations and big banks.
That’s what has happened to Lewis and the UMWA. Lewis is fined $20, and the union $1,400,000. They didn’t obey an order of the capitalist court to get back into the mines and start digging coal. For that Lewis was haled into court and found guilty.
The court was in a very benign mood before sentencing Lewis and the UMWA. Not toward the miners but toward the Government. Listen to the self-effacing little judge: “Now if the court was to use its individual judgment it would impose a prison sentence upon the individual defendant. But the court is only one man, one individual. So the court feels it should adopt the recommendation made by the government” This is the most transparent eyewash. A one-man court can find you guilty but needs the advice of the government in passing sentence.
 
What It Means
Why didn’t the little judge sentence Lewis to prison? He knows and we know. We know too why he asked the government for recommendations. There ought to be a lesson in this for Lewis, for the miners, for all leaders of labor and for all the working class. Who is “the government” today? “The government” is the Democratic party, headed by Truman. The Department of Justice is the law enforcement section of the Truman government. The assistant attorney general who prosecuted Lewis and the miners has his instructions from the head of “the government,” that is, the head of the Democratic party which hopes to win the election in November and remain “the government.”
“The government” (Democratic party) was really up against it. Joe Martin (Republican party) had stepped into the situation and had been successful in getting the strike settled. This made little Joe Martin talked about as a possible Republican candidate for president. This would never do; the Republicans must not be permitted to go into the campaign with the slogan “we settled the coal strike.” “The government” (Democratic party) struck back at the Republicans. Lewis and the union had to be convicted.
But they were up against something very unpleasant: they were up against the miners. Miners are not easily seared. The weather is nice and this is the fishing season. The little judge was of a mind to put Lewis in jail. And we believe that “the government” shared this view. That would be a feather in the cap of the small fry from the Justice Department who represented “the government” (Democratic party). That would suit the coal operators, the NAM and the big capitalist newspapers.
“The government,” however, preferred to temper justice with mercy. They did not want Lewis sent to jail. A fine would be sufficient. They recommended a good stiff fine; one bigger than the last fine. This of course is more eyewash.
 
Labor Loyalty
There is one reason and one reason only that Lewis was not sent to jail: the little judge knows, the Justice Department knows, Truman knows and the coal operators know, that not one ton of coal would be mined by the UMWA while Lewis was in jail. This and this alone is the reason that Lewis was not given a jail sentence. It was the solidarity, the loyalty, the grim and unshakeable militancy of the miners which deterred the government and the court.
It is the business of all labor today to express its solidarity with the miners. All labor should be prepared to back up the miners in the days to come. Who knows what may come next. All differences, all differences should be pushed aside or at least put on the shelf until this case of the miners reaches some temporary adjustment.
We said above that there were lessons in this case for labor. We hope that Lewis learns something. Above all we hope that the miners and the rest of the ranks of labor learn something. The workers see here, right before their eyes, an indecent scramble between the Republicans and Democrats for the right to pick the bones of the miners; for their votes on election day.
But far more important for us is this: we see in this case of the miners and the government, the reluctance of the government to use its full force for fear of arousing the anger of the miners. What does this mean?It means that the miners have demonstrated their might and their strength. This shows that neither the miners nor labor as a whole need depend on the demagogic and rotten maneuvers of a reactionary Republican Joe Martin nor on the good will of an equally rotten Democratic administration, whether of Roosevelt or Truman.
Labor can sail under its own banner and get its own program. Even this little conflict between the miners and the government proves this. Labor does not need the Republicans with their Joe Martin tricks. Labor does not need the Democrats with their “friends of labor” bribery. What labor does need is its own party which will become “the government” and drive the Republicans and the Democrats from the seats of power.
 




The report of the President’s Committee on Civil Rights is a
document of the highest political and sociological significance.
The document is not only of importance for what it says, including
its recommendations, but also because the conclusions and
recommendations of the Report find their way into the Truman message
to Congress on civil rights. In the message, the Report takes on very
real political bone and sinew. This may not have any great
significance in and for the North but such things are very clearly
understood in the South. Aside from the political and sociological
significance of the Report, the document raises certain
theoretical questions in connection with the possibilities of
bourgeois democracy in the United States and the resolving of what
Myrdal has called “An American Dilemma.” Each of these questions
will be treated in the course of this article.
The pertinence of the Report does not arise from any
novelty in the publication of hitherto unknown facts about the
failure of the democratic process in the United States. All of the
findings of the Report, everyone without exception, have been
known for decades and have been written down before. One can find
every “discovery” made by the committee in the files of the Negro
press, the archives of the National Association for the Advancement
of Colored People, in Myrdal’s An American Dilemma, in a
host of books, pamphlets and other writings. What is of the greatest
import at the present time is that Jim Crow and discriminatory
practices have been uncovered, revealed, exposed and condemned by a
committee with the composition of the President’s Committee.
What is new is not that the committee has discovered the existence
of Jim Crow with all its heinousness. What is new is the fact that a
committee whose chairman is the head of the world’s most powerful
electrical manufacturing corporation has openly and definitively
admitted that fact of Jim Crow, has said that discrimination must be
eliminated, that it should be eliminated now, and that all minorities
in the country, including Negroes, should be accorded and guaranteed
full democratic rights.
Furthermore these democratic rights are not to be accorded and
guaranteed in a purely hortatory manner as in the past; they are to
be actual and real. They are to be established as a consequence of
the letter and spirit of the Declaration of Independence and the
Constitution. The laws are recommended and new government bodies are
envisaged which will supplement present laws and commissions wherever
and whenever they are needed to make the committee’s
recommendations effective. In brief, what the Report proposes
is the wiping out of every legal disability which the Negro suffers.
 
Against Jim Crow Myths
The committee’s Report sets forth what these disabilities
are in the longest section of the Report, The Record: Short
of the Goal. The committee finds that all basic democratic rights
have been and are being violated, particularly in the case of the
Negro. The committee expresses these basic rights as: “The Right to
Safety and Security of the Person,” “The Right to Citizenship and
its Privileges,” “The Right to Freedom of Conscience and
Expression,” “The Right to Equality of Opportunity.”
In plain language the Report affirms and substantiates
contentions which have been made by the NAACP, for example, about
lynching, police brutality, discrimination by the courts, peonage,
restrictive covenants, disfranchisement, discrimination in the armed
services, job discrimination, educational restrictions and refusals
of accommodations by public carriers and places of public
accommodation. Under the heading of Segregation Reconsidered,
the Report has this to say about the “separate but equal”
philosophy: “In the committee’s opinion this is one of the
outstanding myths of American history for it is almost always true
that, while indeed separate, these facilities are far from equal.”
The committee takes hold of another matter which also can be
placed among the myths: the point of view, held mainly in the South,
that the federal government should keep hands off and leave matters
of civil rights to the states and to educational processes at work in
the localities where civil rights are being violated. The Report,
however, takes the position that “The national government of the
United States must take the lead in safeguarding the civil rights of
all Americans.”
The committee gives several reasons for this demand: many of the
offenses are committed by private persons or by local public
officers. The American civil liberties record has international
implications. There is a growing tendency for the people to look to
the federal government for the protection of their democratic rights.
Lastly, the federal government is the largest single employer of
labor in the nation. It is incumbent on the government to set its own
house in order and to set a correct example for the whole country.
In insisting on the necessity for the intervention of the federal
government the committee “rejects the argument that governmental
controls are themselves necessarily threats to liberty. This
statement overlooks the fact that freedom in a civilized society is
always founded on law enforcement by government.”
 
Program for Federal Action
After analysis of the situation and presentation of its arguments
the committee sets forth its recommendations. The recommendations
important for our purpose now include: Increase in the size and
authority of the Civil Rights section of the Justice Department.
The establishment of a permanent commission on civil rights by the
federal and state governments.
Strengthening of the United States Code by amendment and by new
statutes to give additional protection for civil rights and to make
possible stiffer penalties for civil rights violations, particularly
“police brutality and related crimes.”
The enactment by Congress of an anti-lynching act, a new statute
on involuntary servitude, anti-poll tax legislation, federal
legislation protecting the right to participate in federal and state
elections, and legislation by Congress “to end immediately all
discrimination and segregation based on race, color, creed, or
national origin in the organization and activities of all branches of
the Armed Services.”
The committee did not confine its position on how to secure civil
liberties to educational and legislative procedures. It proposes the
use of “sanctions” in the administrative and law enforcement
fields. These would include: fines and imprisonment for civil rights
violators; injunctions and suits for damages; administrative
cease-and-desist orders, as in the case of the Food and Drugs
Administration; refusal of federal financial aid to private agencies
and institutions that practice discrimination; exposure of persons
and institutions that practice discrimination.
“The committee ... believes,” says the Report,
“that the national government has at its command varied powers and
administrative machinery which are capable of being used with great
profit in safeguarding civil rights .... The nation’s program for
the protection of civil rights ... should move forward on three
fronts, legislative, executive and judicial. Anything short of this
full cooperative effort will jeopardize the success of the entire program.”
How does the committee motivate and justify such radical
proposals? It must be borne in mind that this committee contains not
one “radical,” not one individual who is anti-capitalist, not one
individual who wants to effect any basic transformation in present
bourgeois-democratic society. Every member of the committee is a
defender of capitalism and of capitalist society as the correct and
proper “American way of life.” It is to this kind of committee
that the question at the bead of this paragraph is put, and the
committee answers in the Report itself.
 
Can Capitalism Afford Jim Crow?
(1) What the committee calls “The Moral Reason”:
The pervasive gap between our aims and what we actually
do is creating a kind of moral dry rot which eats away at the
emotional and rational bases of democratic beliefs. There are times
when the difference between what we preach about civil rights and
what we practice is shockingly illustrated by individual outrages.
For example:
Wartime segregation in the armed forces is another
instance of how a social pattern may wreak moral havoc. Practically
all white officers and enlisted men in all branches of service saw
Negro military personnel performing only the most menial functions
... As a result men who might have otherwise maintained the
equalitarian morality of their forbears were given reason to look
down on their fellow citizens ... The United States can no longer
countenance these burdens on its common conscience, these inroads on
its moral fiber.
(2) “The Economic Reason”: The big economic problem before the
United States and the rest of the world is to achieve
maximum production and continued prosperity. The loss of
a huge potential market for goods is a direct result of the economic
discrimination which is practiced against many of our minority groups
... Discrimination depresses the wages and income of minority groups.
As a result, their purchasing power is curtailed and markets are
reduced. Reduced markets result in reduced production. This cuts down
employment, which of course means lower wages and still fewer job
opportunities ... The United States can no longer afford this heavy
drain upon its human wealth, its national competence.
(3) “The International Reason”: The Report quotes from
a letter of Dean Acheson to the Fair Employment Practices Committee.
“I think it is quite obvious,” said Mr. Acheson, “that the
existence of discriminations against minority groups in the United,
States is a handicap in our relations with other countries. The
Department of State, therefore, has good reason to hope for the
continued and increased effectiveness of public and private efforts
to do away with these discriminations.” The Report then goes
on to say:
We cannot escape the fact that our civil rights record
has been an issue in world politics ... Our achievements in building
and maintaining a state dedicated to the fundamentals of freedom have
already served as a guide for those seeking the best road from chaos
to liberty and prosperity. But it is not indelibly written that
democracy will encompass the world. The United States is not so
strong, the final triumph of the democratic ideal is not so
inevitable that we can ignore what the world thinks of us or our
record. [Emphasis in original]
These are the three main reasons for the position taken in the
Report and for the rather strong recommendations of the
committee. It is clear that the committee was concerned with two main
considerations in the world situation: the existence of Russia and
its aggressive imperialism, as well as the potential or real ability
of Russia to use the terrible violations of democratic rights in the
United States as a means toward world prestige. This would be
possible especially in those countries inhabited by colored
populations as well as among the peoples of the smaller European
countries which have always suffered under the domination of
imperialism. It is true also that it will be very difficult for the
United States to secure the good will or the allegiance of the
peoples of Europe, Asia and Africa, even in the absence of Russian
propaganda, if these peoples look upon Americans in their midst not
only as representatives of the financial colossus of the West but
also as oppressors of minority peoples.
This is not all the committee is concerned with, as is clear from
the Report. The committee still feels the impact of Hitler
fascism and is alert to the threat of Russian totalitarianism: “the
final triumph of the democratic ideal” has not been achieved. The
whole Report is concerned with the question of how minority
groups and populations can be made to believe that democracy is to be
their lot now that German and Italian fascism have been defeated. The
committee was perturbed, and correctly so of course, as to how this
consummation could be brought to pass by this country with its black
record of civil rights violations and the denial of democratic rights
to a substantial portion of American citizens.
It is necessary now to approach this Report from another
direction. We have set forth the analyses of the committee, its
recommendations, and its arguments in defense of those
recommendations. We have emphasized that the committee recommends
legislative, judicial and executive acts, procedures and directives
which, if adopted in their entirety, would remove every legal,
economic and civil disability encountered and suffered by minority
populations in the United States. There are important and
far-reaching assumptions involved in the position taken by the
committee. It is these assumptions and implications which must now be
examined, specifically and concretely as they relate to the Negro in
the United States because it is the Negro group which is the worst victimized.
 
Can Capitalism End Jim Crow?
First of all, the committee assumes that the Declaration of
Independence, the Constitution and “The American Heritage: the
Promise of Freedom and Equality” all do apply or should apply to
the Negro the same as to the white citizen. Next, and of greater
significance, is the underlying assumption that full democratic
rights, in a practical way, can be accorded Negroes in the present
social order and within the framework of that social order. By this
is meant, of course, that full democratic rights can be accorded the
Negro in the United States within the bounds of capitalism and
bourgeois democracy.
Naturally, the committee’s Report does not approach the
question of civil rights for Negroes from this direction. It proceeds
always from the assumption that there is no incompatibility between
full democratic rights for Negroes and the existence of and the
continuation of capitalism and capitalist society. The question which
arises, therefore, is not whether it can be done “now” as the
committee demands but rather: can it be done at all inside capitalist
society in the United States?
There are those who say that the answer to this question is “No.”
Numbered among those who deny the possibility of achieving such
equality are some Marxists, the American Socialist Party and some
independent radicals. I am not concerned here with the attitude of
the Socialist Party on the question; it is prompted largely by the
disinclination of this organization to carry on a militant struggle
for Negro rights here and now. They prefer to maintain a pacifist
attitude and to substitute the theory that the Negro will get his
rights only when all workers have been freed from capitalist
exploitation. I am concerned with the question as posed by Marxian
revolutionists, because I do not believe that there is any sound
theoretical argument in support of the position that full civil
rights cannot be achieved by the Negro in the United States in
capitalist society.
We have to be clear what it is we are talking about when we speak
of democratic rights and of civil rights. We also have to be clear
what we are talking about when we say that the bourgeoisie profits
from the exclusion of Negroes from equality and from the intra-class
division which results from teaching white superiority and Negro inferiority.
 
Psychological Barriers Secondary
We have to remember that there was a time when the commercial
bourgeoisie profited from the slave trade and the industrial
bourgeoisie from the labor of ten-year-old children. It did not
follow, however, that the slave trade and child labor would always be
retained and defended by capitalists. It cannot be denied that for
decades after the Civil War it was the position of capitalism that
the Negro should be held as a special reserve to do the heavy, dirty
and dangerous labor. To make such a scheme successful it was
necessary to cultivate race inferiority and superiority myths, or to
exploit such beliefs wherever they existed.
It was financially profitable for capitalism in the United States
to have a period in which there was enmity and hatred in the ranks of
the working class. The Northern bourgeoisie used this situation just
as it had used the pronouncements of various clergymen and
pseudo-ethnologists, before 1860, to the effect that slavery was not
a violation of the teachings of the Bible and that Negroes and white
people did not have a common ancestor. The bourgeoisie used both of
these attitudes as a means of exploiting the Negro, making a profit
and enhancing capitalist accumulation. Capitalism today, however,is
not in the period of the early and middle nineteenth century. There
have been development, expansion and many structural changes.
Furthermore, it may be the case today that leading capitalists have
come to the conclusion that not only does “free enterprise” in
the United States need to cleanse itself of Jim Crow but also that it
will be beneficial and possible of accomplishment.
To demand democratic rights or civil rights for Negroes and other
“minorities” means to demand that Negroes and others be fitted
into and accepted into the general economic, political and cultural
fabric of the country without discrimination, segregation or
disfranchisement. It means to lift every public disability from
Negroes to which white people are not subjected. This is to apply to
the whole United States. This is to say that the Negro shall have the
same legal rights and the same protection of his citizenship rights
as are accorded a white man in every section of the nation: the right
to vote and run for office, get a job, travel, attend school, and go
into all public places on terms of equality with white people.
The establishment and formal protection of this right have nothing
to do, objectively, with any individual’s personal thinking and
attitude on the question, or the attitude and thinking of any group
of the population. Students at the University of Mississippi may be
against admitting Negroes and may remain opposed even after the
legislature has voted to abolish Jim Crow schools. It will be many
decades before all the white citizens of South Carolina agree to
Negro suffrage or the natives of Monroe County, Georgia, agree that
Negroes have the right to be free from and protected from mob
violence. Many decades will pass before the white people of Arkansas
adopt the practice of sitting beside a Negro in the train after the
elimination of Jim Crow cars. But it must be emphasized that, to one
degree or other, everything that is said here about Mississippi,
Georgia, South Carolina and Arkansas is true of New York, Michigan,
Massachusetts or California. It was only a few years back that the
white people of Ohio voted by referendum to retain a clause in the
state constitution which confined the right of suffrage to white
people. This in spite of the fact that the right of the Negro to vote
is protected in practice in Ohio.
The same observations can be made in connection with the attitude
of groups of white people on the question of restrictive covenants
and the right of Negroes to live in “white neighborhoods,” to sit
beside white people in theatres, to be treated in the same wards in
hospitals and accommodated in restaurants and hotels. Even after Jim
Crow is outlawed there will be persons who will not agree to Negro
equality. There will be Negroes who will go on just about as they do
now: sitting beside Negroes exclusively, eating only in Negro
restaurants and frowning on social intercourse with white people. All
of these are psychological and sociological factors in the situation
which have no necessary or theoretical connection today with any
basic requirement of capitalist and bourgeois welfare.
Capitalist society today can get along as well or as poorly
without Jim Crow. Neither capitalist profit nor the rate of profit
will be lessened by the complete equality of black and white people
in the United States. On the contrary, it seems clear that some parts
at least of the bourgeoisie are moving to the position that the rate
of profit and the mass of profit might be enhanced by the
establishment of civil rights for the whole population.
 
Temporary Way Out
It may be argued that for the bourgeoisie to demand and carry
through equal civil rights for Negroes would mean to dig its own
grave, because such action would cause the working class to close
ranks eventually and establish the reign of intra-class peace. While
this is correct it must be added that capitalism has been digging its
own grave for many, many decades but still refuses to descend into
that grave. Right now it seems that the bourgeoisie is looking around
for a way out to escape the grave for a few more decades.
It must be said also that the bourgeoisie has faced many dilemmas
before. I mention only two: free public education and collective
bargaining. The ruling class after a while came to the conclusion not
only that free public education was necessary in the interest of
capitalist development but that it could be so controlled as to
become a buttress for bourgeois society. Also one would have to look
far and wide for an employer who today would openly demand the
abolition of collective bargaining. Capitalism has not fared badly
with these two “revolutionary” innovations. Charles Luckman,
member of the committee and president of Lever Brothers, soap
manufacturers, has written an article for Colliers entitled
Civil Rights Is Good for Business. Charles Wilson, chairman of
the committee and of General Electric, is clearly of one mind with
Luckman on this matter.
The bourgeoisie has had experience enough to know that,while
proletarian solidarity is a high explosive, it does not necessarily
follow that there will be an explosion. Also there can be various
types and degrees of working class solidarity. Advocacy of civil
rights for Negroes may not produce such solidarity at once but rather
the contrary. The bourgeoisie might at a certain time adopt such a
course as a new and subtle means of keeping Negroes and white workers
apart; that is, for the bourgeoisie to become the champions of Negro
rights would seem to validate what some Negroes have always
contended, namely, that the white upper class is the best friend of
the Negro.
But even if the result should be intra-class peace this does not
mean the end of capitalism, as is occasionally proclaimed in
agitational utterances. Only devotees of the romantic movement in
politics entertain such notions. Class solidarity is necessary for
the elimination of capitalism but not sufficient. Something is needed
in order to set off an explosive. The bourgeoisie has always
believed, often mistakenly, that it can at least retard the
development of anti-capitalist action by the proletariat. For
instance, it is well known that the capitalist ruling class has been
fairly successful up to now in thwarting the development of
independent political action by the proletariat. Therefore, from its
side, there is no reason to believe that the bourgeoisie is gripped
with the fear that civil rights for Negroes and the demise of
capitalism are synonymous.
 
Open Door to New Market
The “Solid South” is the chief barricade against civil rights
for Negroes. But the South is a huge potential market for the
manufacturers of consumer goods. It is eighty-three years since the
close of the Civil War and the victory of Northern industrial
capitalism, and yet the South remains only a potential market for
consumer goods. Here are millions of American citizens who would buy
the products of industry if they had the money or a cultural level
which prompted the desire for an ever-increasing standard of living.
This is a primary concern not only of Northern bourgeois but also of
the new Southern industrial bourgeoisie.
There is reason to believe that the Northern bourgeoisie is ready
to enforce an “Open Door” policy on the South. This means to
force the South to consent to the raising of the living standards of
the Southern masses, black and white. To raise the living standards
means to raise wages, to build homes, schools, hospitals, roads,
transport. This cannot be done effectively with the dominance of Jim
Crow, the poll tax, lynching and the hegemony of the backwoods. It
cannot be done by support of the present forces which represent the
South politically. It cannot be done in conjunction with the
extremely reactionary attitudes of Northern heavy industry, power
companies, banks and insurance companies which function in the South
like colonial administrators.
Southern congressmen and governors are raising a great furor today
over the president’s civil rights message. Who are these people?
They are native Southerners. Some of them are men of modest ability.
Some of them are ignorant, ill-informed, lacking in culture, and
altogether bombastic, demagogic, venal and corrupt. They are a part
of that general phenomenon known as “the South”: general
backwardness, a vast Tobacco Road stretching from the Carolinas to
Arkansas and the far reaches of Texas. A section represented in
Congress by Lester Jeeters in custom-made suits. A section which
glories in sending its clowns, its mountebanks and its “one gallus”
men to the state capital to be the chief executive of the
commonwealth.
These men have had an interesting, stormy, but uncertain career.
Most of them are not descendants of the old plantation aristocracy
but of the poverty-stricken poor whites who were held in subjection
by the slavocracy. Historically they are part of the line of
poor-white political leaders which came to power in the South after
the overthrow of slavery and particularly after the overthrow of Reconstruction.
 
Poll-Tax Politicos Hinder Expansion
This is, the group which carried through the disfranchisement of
the Negro, which wrote the segregation laws of the South, which
reorganized the Ku Klux Klan, which fomented the lynchings and led
the mobs. This is the group which perpetuates and lives by all the
discarded ethnological mumbo-jumbo of a half century ago. These are
the protagonists of “white supremacy,” “pure white womanhood,”
and no “mongrelization.” When they speak of white supremacy they
mean supremacy of the Southern white. According to Eastland of
Mississippi, “Southern white boys out in the Pacific” were
“fighting for white supremacy.” Furthermore, white supremacy does
not mean to them some distinction the Southern white has achieved in
competition, intellectual, artistic, physical or scientific, but
rather a state of affairs which the white Southerner has achieved by
brute force and which he proposes to hold on to by brute force if necessary.
These present-day Southern politicos – the Rankins, Eastlands,
Overtons, Ellenders, Dorns, Gossetts, Johnsons in Congress and the
state government politicos – are the beneficiaries of all that is
vicious, reactionary and culturally backward in the United States.
They know this. As it was put by the elder Talmadge: “I can win in
any county where there are no streetcars.” Also it can be said that
these men can win as long as there is ignorance: so long as there are
white men and women in the South who believe that Negroes kill their
fathers and then eat the head, who believe that the superiority of
the white race arose in the Garden of Eden, who don’t know that
there is a better life than that which they now live. These
demagogues can continue in their places in the capitol at Washington
and in the various states only so long as there is a poll tax; so
long as Southern poor whites believe that God has limited the supply
of food for mortals and that he must therefore starve the Negro in
order to keep from starving himself.
The Southern politicos know all this and very cunningly play on
this ignorance and degradation. They are against civil rights because
civil rights would be a blow to their rule. Democratic rights would
recognize and emphasize the rights of all human beings and not as now
the rights of the mob. Civil rights would place the masses in a
position to elevate themselves, to acquire higher wages, education,
health, and a change in their political representatives.
This Southern rabble in Congress are men of the greatest
brazenness. They own nothing substantial and have no controlling say
in the industrial and political life of the country. And yet they
demand that the owners of railroads continue the unprofitable
practice of maintaining dual accommodations for two groups of people.
They demand that states and individuals keep giving money to support
two schools where one would suffice. They demand that the bourgeois
who gives donations to hospitals should give enough for two hospitals
if the bourgeois giver insists that hospital care be provided for
Negroes. The Eastland-Rankin demagogues are very free with other
people’s money.
 
Jim Crow and Imperialist War
There is reason to believe that at least a section of the North
which foots the bill is growing weary of paying for the maintenance
of the “purity of white womanhood” in the South. If the Report
means anything it means that some bourgeois are more frightened at
the prospect of not getting at the twenty-one million potential
customers in the South than they are at the prospect of
“mongrelization” in that section.
Finally, there is something more involved in these gestures toward
the enforcement of civil rights. The United States and Russia are
facing each other today in the peace and formality of the United
Nations, while back home each nation prepares its war regalia to be
donned at a moment’s notice. Furthermore, there is a contest going
on between the United States and Russia for the support of the
peoples and nations of Europe, Asia and Africa.
This country may face some difficulty in explaining to the Chinese
why American Jim Crow is superior to Russian “aggression.” It
will not be easy for the State Department to make an Indian
understand that segregation is far more moral than the Russian
practice of denuding a country of its machinery. European small
nations may not be able to distinguish between being stumbled over by
big Russia and being milked and regimented “gently” by big
America. American Negroes might conceivably decide to remain neutral
in a war between this country and Russia. They may find some
difficulty in differentiating between a totalitarianism which they
have only heard about, and a vicious totalitarian-like Jim Crow which
they have lived under for over three hundred years.
The bourgeoisie and the government are concerned about these
things. They know that they cannot go into a war with Russia and have
this discrimination-segregation burden to carry and explain. To
prosecute the next imperialist war will require greater
solidification of the people, all of the people, colored and white,
citizen and non-citizen, the mainland and the colonies. I believe
that the bourgeoisie and the government have this prime necessity in
mind. In addition to all the other reasons for the proposals at this
time, there is this other: the civil rights program is a plan for
achieving national unity in the coming imperialist struggle against Russia.
 




The Council on African Affairs, which is a sort of Stalinist luxury front for catching soft-headed or senile Negro intellectuals, has been having some difficulty with its executive director, Dr. Max Yergan. The difficulty has been brewing for some weeks and expresses itself in a conflict between Yergan and that chief of Negro Stalinist stooges, Paul Robeson. Before that there had been some unpleasantness on the People’s Voice when the Stalinists controlled that weekly paper through Yergan, its treasurer and chief stockholder.
It seems that Dr. Yergan, who used to be a YMCA secretary in Africa,is, according to the Stalinists, mixed up on the question of imperialism and particularly imperialism as it relates to Africa. Last February, Yergan presented a statement of policy on imperialism which the Stalinists, through the party mouthpiece, Robeson, claimed was “conciliatory to the present position of major colonial powers.” The Yergan statement of policy was rejected and a policy committee was set up. The chairman of the new committee was Dr. W.E.B. Du Bois. Many people will be surprised to learn this. They remember Dr. Du Bois when he wore, no man’s collar but his own; when he had intelligence as well as courage; when he could not be made a stooge for anybody.
The Du Bois committee reported last week. The report which was adopted, of course, puts the Council on record “to fight aggressively for the liberation of African peoples.” “To combat the new imperialist offensive now threatening Africa.” “Not to shirk this task because it entails criticism of American state policy.”
In true Stalinist fashion there is no concrete indication as to how the Yergan position differed from the Du Bois statement. One can only guess that Dr. Yergan is on the verge of breaking with the Stalinists. Perhaps he is being influenced by Dr. Channing Tobias, who, it seems, has escaped the Stalinist net. Perhaps Yergan has learned that Stalinist Russia is also an imperialist nation which is doing a little wholesale threatening.
This Council on African Affairs is of course merely one of the numerous Stalinist farces. This is far worse than most of them because the council isn’t really an organization, but only a staff and an office. What its real function is in the Stalinist totalitarian, GPU set-up is anybody’s guess. Knowing the Stalinists, however, one can be certain that it is not what it purports to be.
After the adoption of the Du Bois-Robeson (Communist Party) policy statement, the Council “sharply condemned Dr. Yergan for serious laxity and mismanagement in the council’s financial affairs.” After this was over,the council re-elected all officers. Dr. Yergan was re-elected as executive director. This is the self-same man who had not only compromised with imperialism but had mismanaged the council’s financial affairs and also had placed police guards at the February 2 meeting of the council. It seems clear either that the Stalinists cannot get rid of Yergan or do not want to put him out. They may feel that they can use him some more. Or perhaps he knows things which they don’t want told.
 
Where Tragedy Lies
The tragedy of all this is not Max Yergan nor Paul Robeson but W.E.B. Du Bois. It is a tragedy that this man who was looked up to almost with reverence by more than one generation of young Negroes has seen fit in his old age to become an apologist for a totalitarian regime which in brutality and oppressiveness is equaled in history only by the Nazis.
We wonder what goes on in Du Bois’ head these days. He has been steadily retreating from his former clarity, force, intelligence and irreconcilable opposition to tyranny for several years now. We knew all this but we never dreamed that this man who once could see so clearly and who was the peak of independence, could end as Stalinist’ stooge; a little weak hatchet man doing a job for the Stalinists on some former favorite who had fallen into disfavor.
Last month William Edward Burghardt Du Bois was 80 years old. That is a long time to live and then at the end walk into the Stalinist trap.
 




On March 31, Mr. A. Philip Randolph and Mr. Grant Reynolds appeared before the Senate Armed Services Committee to testify in connection with universal military training and the peacetime draft program. Mr. Randolph is president of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Employees and Mr. Reynolds is a New York State Commissioner of Corrections. Both Randolph and Reynolds are officers of the Committee Against Jim Crow in Military Service and Training. Randolph, backed by Reynolds, told the committee that “passage now of a Jim Crow draft may only result in a mass civil disobedience movement along lines of the magnificent struggles of the people of India against British imperialism.”
Randolph said that he personally pledged himself “to openly council, aid and abet youth both white and Negro, to quarantine any Jim Crow conscription system ... I shall call upon Negro veterans to join this civil disobedience movement ... I shall appeal to Negro parents to lend their moral support to their sons – to stand behind them as they march with heads high to federal prisons as a telling demonstration to the world that Negroes have reached the limit of human endurance.”
It can be said immediately and without qualification that it is totally correct for Negroes to carry on an irreconcilable struggle against Jim Crow in all forms. This is particularly true of one who is asked to consent peacefully to being shot and butchered in a Jim Crow outfit. Negroes get murdered in civil life in this Jim Crow U.S. and then are drafted into Jim Crow military units to be shot and murdered in Europe, Asia and Africa.
Furthermore, it is a fact that Negroes are not only Jim Crowed, mobbed and lynched in the U.S., but they are Jim Crowed as the victims of American capitalism. They are oppressed and exploited as workers, and oppressed and exploited as Negroes. To be drafted into a Jim Crow military outfit and sent off to die in one of the imperialist wars being waged by U.S. capitalism is again to be oppressed and exploited as a Negro and as a worker.
 
Civil Disobedience
When this is said, it is necessary to evaluate objectively the Randolph proposal for civil disobedience on the part of Negroes. In the first place it would be well for the sponsors of this idea to pay some attention to the differences between India and the U.S. and to the fact that there was actually a movement in India. It is not often possible to lift sociological concepts and political programs out of one environment and transfer them whole to another social, political, economic and cultural environment. The basis for the civil disobedience program of the Indians is not identical with the situation in which Negroes find themselves in the U.S. The Indians were engaged in a struggle for their national independence and for release from British imperialism. They were demanding their own national state; the right of self-determination. It was not only these considerations which helped determine the nature of the struggle but also Gandhi himself. The passive resistance movement was organized by Gandhi on the basis of real philosophical and religious convictions in connection with the manner in which struggles of the masses should be conducted. Furthermore, the Indian movement came to its full development over a period of years. It did not spring full grown out of Gandhi’s head.
The situation in the U.S. is not comparable to that of India except in a very superficial way, and Randolph is not a Gandhi. We do not mean this in derogation of Randolph’s abilities or capabilities. What we mean is that so far as I have been able to learn Randolph is not himself a believer in passive resistance, or non-cooperation. For instance Randolph was not an opponent of the Second World Imperialist War; he only said that the democratic aims of the war could not be achieved if Negroes were subject to Jim Crow in the armed services, government and industry. In fact Randolph was a supporter of the war and only objected to the practice of Jim Crow against Negroes.
I have talked to Mr. Reynolds. He is certainly not a Gandhi; great or small. He is a full-blown American patriot, ardent supporter of “free enterprise,” the capitalist class, the Republican Party and Governor Dewey. I have a hunch that Reynolds was thinking as much about embarrassing Truman and the Democratic Party as he was of Jim Crow. It is good to embarrass the Democratic Party but I don’t have much faith in the exposure when made by Republican politicians. That is only the pot calling the kettle black.
These remarks do not, of course, apply to Randolph. He is of a different breed, and his a different record. However, Mr. Randolph is not on very solid ground in my opinion. I have already given some of the reasons. I do not say this because some Negro leaders have spoken in opposition to Randolph’s proposals. Most of the Negro leaders would be against any militant proposals, precisely for the reason that it was militant and called for the mobilization of the Negro masses and those white persons who support militant activity by Negroes. I do not therefore support these Negro leaders.
 
Something More Needed
In my opinion it would have been better for Randolph to have been farther along the road toward the formation of something concrete in the way of a movement before he made such categoric statements as those before the Senate committee. A program for civil disobedience is not something to play around with. It is not something that one can turn on and off like a kitchen faucet. Also, there is no need to drag in India and Indian civil disobedience. Negroes in the U.S. have every concrete and practical reason for organizing and fighting against all Jim Crow, wherever it occurs, in any way which will be effective. Negroes have the right and the duty to mass protest and mass organize against Jim Crow in the armed services, or any other place. I can see no difference between submitting to Jim Crow in the army and submitting to Jim Crow in a theater or restaurant. Negroes protest in various ways against Jim Crow travel laws. I can see no reason why we should not protest against and organize against a Jim Crow military set-up.
I don’t think much of passive resistance, however. I am not for Negroes preparing to submit peacefully to “a countrywide terrorism.” I am not for Negroes marching “with heads high to federal prisons.” Not much of a struggle can be carried on in a federal prison. Some Negroes may go to jail as a result of a militant struggle against Jim Crow army and navy, but that is different from mass marching to jail by Negroes, or mass dragging to jail in passive “resistance.” I am for a positive struggle against Jim Crow, outside of the capitalist jails.
I am for a struggle against imperialist war also. I am against the coming war even though every Negro in the country is given the opportunity to become Chief of Staff and Chief of Naval Operations, and no Jim Crow anywhere. A fundamental principle of the struggle against Jim Crow in the armed services is to struggle against Jim Crow everywhere and also against capitalism and U.S. imperialism.
 
Record Speaks
My final observation is in connection with what I said before about not playing with such ideas as those advanced by Randolph. This is serious business. Mr. Randolph should remember that he once was the head of a March on Washington Movement. Some of us remember that there was no march; that the march was called off. I do not believe that Randolph’s reasons for calling off that march were valid. The very fact that we are still faced with Jim Crow in the armed services gives support to this contention.
Now, Randolph has a new scheme. He should go slow and say nothing that he is not ready to follow through and only that which there is reason to believe can be carried out. Nobody is interested in Randolph saving his own soul, important as that may be. We are interested in what we can do as Negroes to organize an effective struggle against Jim Crow everywhere; the armed services included.
I see no virtue in marching to jail with “heads high” or low. I CAN see virtue in fighting, in resisting, in marching on Washington, in organizing for our defense, in casting out every Negro traitor and compromiser, every Negro who licks at the Republican or Democratic Party boots. These are only a few suggestions for A. Philip Randolph to think about before he marches to a federal prison.
 




The Workers Party observes its 8th birthday this year on May 1 simultaneously with the celebration of May Day. There is a fitting connection between the birthday of the Workers Party and the celebration of May Day. In the beginning, and for decades thereafter, May Day represented and symbolized the struggle of the toilers against the exploiting capitalist ruling class. The workers and their allies all over the world poured into the streets and demonstrated before their masters and all the people that the working class really possessed the manpower necessary to end the rule of the capitalist exploiters. The one thing needed above all others was the program, discipline and activity of revolutionary socialism: of Marxism.
The old social-democracy, that is the Second International, did not supply this program nor this discipline and activity. The social-democracy of today does not and cannot. In Europe this social-democracy is submitting without a struggle to the seduction and the bribery of Moscow or Washington. In the United States the Socialist Party of Norman Thomas has been engaged in congratulating Churchill, uttering pious platitudes about “democratic socialism” (as though there were any other kind of socialism), and supporting American imperialism.
There is the so-called Social-Democratic Federation. It is a federation of anti-Stalinists who are also anti-socialist and anti-Marxist. It is an aggregation of liberal do-gooders, near liberal busybodies, old-fashioned conservative trade union business agents, Daily Forwarders, politically anaemic college professors who want to pose as politicians and at the same time not jeopardize their jobs; and old, encrusted, moss covered, morally palsied social-democratic hacks who were yelling for the U.S. to enter the last World Imperialist War long before the big capitalists.
The “Communist” Parties (Stalinists) cannot supply the program, discipline and activity of Marxism. This is not their aim or their goal. They are peddlers of Stalinist totalitarianism, terrorism, bureaucratism, stultification and Stalinist slavery. They are purveyors of evil, uncleanness and indecency.
In every case where the working class places any confidence in the Stalinists, that section of the working class will be lead away to slavery, or corrupted and broken on the wheel of Stalinist bureaucratism and imperialism.
 
Program of Class Struggle
Not one of these groups therefore can present a program of socialism to the working class. Not one of these three groups will or can call the working class of the U.S. and of the world to gird itself for a real, genuine and irreconcilable struggle against our capitalist masters, oppressors and exploiters. Not one of these groups can lead or inspire the working class even to carry on the economic struggle in any militant way. Not one of these groups will aid the working class to open its eyes and rise to its feet for the independent political struggle and for a proletarian victory over the capitalist ruling class.
The social democrats and the liberals of all stripes have only the program of class collaboration, class peace and surrender to the capitalist exploiters to offer the working class. They can only aid the bourgeoisie to chain the workers to the next imperialist war. They cannot guide the working class to freedom but only toward the graveyards of capitalist imperialism and the gas chambers of fascism.
The Stalinists will beguile the proletariat away from U.S. imperialism only to fasten them to Russian imperialism and Stalinist bureaucratic collectivism. They will not lead and guide the working class to freedom but only to the graveyards of Stalinist imperialism and the slave camps and torture chambers of Stalinist totalitarianism.
On this May Day and on its 8th birthday the Workers Party proclaims its adherence, without apologies or compromise, to the program of the class struggle, to the program of proletarian socialist revolution, to the program of Marx and Lenin. Our voice does not carry far into the ranks of the toilers but where we are heard we call on labor to rally to the program of class struggle, to forsake the ways of class peace and collaboration. To the extent that the Workers Party can be heard, we call on labor not to turn its back on Stalinism but to wage eternal warfare and unremitting struggle against Stalinism and all its works.
The Workers Party does not carry on the struggle against Stalinism in the manner of the Socialist Party, the Social-Democratic Federation and the Johnny-come-lately liberals. These others do not call on the working class to defeat the Stalinists by independent working-class economic and political action. They demand that the capitalist ruling class organize the fight against Stalinism and that the working class place itself at the disposal of the capitalist exploiters and imperialists in the struggle between Washington and Moscow. The social-democrats and liberals are not thinking of a powerful militant working class acting in its own name and for its own class interests in the struggle against Stalinism, but only of the millions of workers fighting against Stalinism under the command of the State Department and its social-democratic stooges and hirelings.
 
Road to Freedom
On this May Day and on our 8th birthday the Workers Party remains actively and militantly steadfast and uncorrupted, in the daily struggle for socialist freedom. NEITHER WASHINGTON nor MOSCOW. Neither the road to Washington nor the road to Moscow is the road to socialist freedom. Neither the program of Washington nor the program of Moscow can free humanity from war, starvation, ignorance, nakedness and misery.
The lamentations of the soul sick, the political gyrations of those who shop around from one party to the next, the sophisticated gushing of those who seek enlightenment as to the “viability of socialism,” all those who want to be convinced that the working class is capable of heading the government, those who want guarantees that the proletarian revolution will be successful, those who will join in the struggle for socialism after all the "radical parties get together,” and all those who are conducting researches to discover whether or not “Stalinism springs from Bolshevism;” will not be of aid to the working class. On the contrary all of these people will be and can only be of comfort to Stalinism and American capitalism.
NEITHER WASHINGTON NOR MOSCOW! A working class standing erect on its feet; refusing to be pushed to its knees. A working class resorting to independent political action and class struggle. A working class fighting against the imperialists and imperialist war. A working class fighting for socialism and socialist freedom.
AGAINST WASHINGTON AND MOSCOW!
AGAINST THE SUPPORTERS AND HIRELINGS OFWASHINGTON AND MOSCOW.
FIGHT AGAINST THE COMING 3rd IMPERIALIST WORLD WAR.
INTO THE STRUGGLE FOR WORKING CLASS FREEDOM.
FOR SOCIALIST FREEDOM.
FOR THE FREEDOM OF ALL MANKIND.
 




Michael Quill, pro-Stalinist president of the national Transport Workers Union (CIO) and member of the New York City Council, has resigned his post as president of the New York City CIO Industrial Union Council and from membership in that body. Quill says that he will ask the New York local of the TWU to leave the Council. The Council is controlled by Stalinists. The chief executive officer of the Council is its secretary, Saul Mills, an old-time Stalinist.
It is anybody’s guess as to the reasons why Quill has broken with the Stalinists. He is a first-rate opportunist and probably believes that Murray is a safer leader to follow than Foster and Dennis. It would be difficult to convince anyone except the most credulous that any considerations of principle are connected with Quill’s break with Moscow. It would be interesting to know whether or not Monsignor Sheen has been having any conversations with Quill.
Quill attempts to maintain his “independence” by holding on to his support of Wallace which he accepted when the Stalinists came out in support of the Wallace candidacy. As is his custom, however, he leaves the back door open so that he can slip out on Wallace if later he feels it expedient. He is quoted as saying that he favored Wallace among the candidates now in sight.
He will consider supporting the Democratic Party should it nominate “a man of the type of Eisenhower.” He also wants the Democrats to change their domestic and foreign policies. In order to get Quill’s support the Democrats also must get back to the Roosevelt foreign policies. The Stalinists also want the Democrats to get back to Roosevelt’s foreign policies. If that should happen they too will support the Democrats. There is no break here between Quill and the Stalinists. Quill wants the U.S. to remain at peace but he is against “peace at any price.” He believes in “peace with honor.” Mike didn’t say how he stands on the Woodrow Wilson slogan of “peace without victory,” nor did he repeat any of his phrases of an earlier day about “the peace-loving nations getting together for collective security.”
One thing is clear, Mike is getting in out of the rain. His new slogan is: “Keep dry with Murray.” Quill does not want to touch Saul Mills with a forty-foot pole. He will not even go to a meeting called by Mills. From now on out he is a solid Murray man.
The Stalinists are not quite certain yet what they should call Quill but they are working up to their usual steam ... “war-monger,” etc. Their Daily Worker reports that in his letter of resignation sent to Murray, Quill wrote that “a group of strange people within the CIO Council were splitting the unity of the CIO.” They call Quill an opportunist and feel that that will do while something better is being devised. They also suspect that Quill resigned because a fight for higher wages will bring him into conflict with “certain political forces in the Democratic Party.”
We point out that Quill’s break with the Stalinists is certainly not up to the level of Joe Curran’s break. Curran didn’t talk about “strange people.” He called the Stalinists by their names and opened a real fight against them. Curran supports Murray also but he hasn’t gone in for any bootlicking. We’ll wait a while and see where Quill shows up next.
 




Any intelligent and alert worker who reads through, the Communist Manifesto of Marx and Engels today; without knowing the date of publication or the names of the authors, might conclude that this small pamphlet was of recent origin. If he happened to be a worker who had kept abreast of political, social, economic arid historical developments, and could therefore date the Manifesto fairly accurately; such a worker would nevertheless conclude that the Manifesto described conditions which he himself is experiencing today, 100 years after its publication.
Such an intellectually alert, worker, toiling in factory, mine, mill and field, would perhaps say to himself or to a fellow worker: “They haven’t changed much. This has been going on for a long time. The bosses are just like they always were. The workers, have to keep on fighting. I can understand things better now.”
This of course would be really a sound and significant evaluation of the Communist Manifesto. Down through the years, one hundred of them, this eloquent, moving but compact distillation of proletarian revolutionary theory and practice has come through every campaign of abuse unsullied and through every assault unscathed. The Manifesto has lived through “refutation” piled on “refutation,” and lives today in all vigor after a thousand of its detractors and defamers have long since been forgotten.
 
Traced Development of Class History
Why is this? Why is it possible today for the working class or a part of the working class to pick up the Communist Manifesto and read passage after passage, as applicable and as fruitful as though they had been written only last week. The answer can be discovered by the thoughtful worker-militant by a reading of the Manifesto itself. Where did the present capitalist class come from? Has the present bourgeoisie always been here, and with its present dominant position in society? Where did the Fords, Mellons, duPonts and Morgans come from?
“The modern bourgeois society has sprouted from the ruins of feudal society ... From the serfs of the Middle Ages sprang the chartered burghers of the earliest towns. From these burgesses the first elements of the bourgeoisie were developed ... We see, therefore, how the modern bourgeoisie is itself the product of a long course of development.”
What are Marx and Engels saying here? They are telling us that the capitalist class, the bourgeoisie, had a beginning and that its history did not begin in the Garden of Eden, as some of the capitalists would have us believe. Marx and Engels say that the present capitalist class fought its way to supremacy and dominance: to political, social and economic dominance. They had to fight because the feudal class would not yield their power. Power had to be wrested from them by the present capitalist class. This they did in England in a series of armed revolutions from the middle to the end of the 17th century and in the final death blow to the feudal ruling class in the great French Revolution of 1789. We do not forget either that the capitalist class in the United States acquired power as a class and began its march to economic, political and social supremacy in this country only after it had defeated England in the revolution of 1785, which school boys and girls study. under the name of the Revolutionary War.
 
Saw Capitalist Society Moving to Its Doom
If the working class is not told that the capitalists have always been around, it is taught, that they will always be here and that capitalism is the best possible order of things. Nothing can be produced better than capitalism, say the capitalists and their defenders and apologists. After relating how the feudal system became outmoded, useless and reactionary, Marx and Engels, in the Manifesto discuss the fate of capitalist society. As was the case with feudalism, “a similar movement is going on,before our own eyes ... it is enough to mention the commercial crises that by their periodical return put the existence of the entire bourgeois society on trial, each time more threateningly. In these crises a great part not only of the existing products, but also of the previously created productive forces, are periodically destroyed.”
Not even Marx and Engels could in 1848 envisage how correct was their analysis of capitalist society with its long depressions, millions of unemployed, its two world wars of destruction, carnage and devastation. Destruction of the cities which the working class has built to live in. Laying waste of the fields which have been planted to yield food for the masses. Destruction of machinery which has been made by the working class to produce the necessities of life.
This destruction is possible because of the tremendous accomplishments of the capitalists in the field of production. Vast enterprises arise and millions of toilers are drawn into the production of machines and implements, which the bourgeoisie uses in its wars of destruction, and of commodities which the capitalist sells all over the world to enrich himself.
“The modern laborer,” however, does not rise “with the progress of industry.” “He becomes a pauper, and pauperism develops more rapidly than population and wealth. And here it becomes evident that the bourgeoisie is unfit any longer to be the ruling class in society ... It is unfit to rule because it is incompetent to assure an existence to his slave within his slavery, because it can not help letting him sink into such a state that it has to feed him, instead of being fed by him.”
The capitalists and the defenders of capitalism have seized on this passage from the Manifesto in order to discredit the teachings of Marx and Engels. But they have been exposed and are being exposed all over the world today. What will they say about the pauperized millions of Europe and Asia? How will they answer Marx and Engels now? Can the defenders of capitalism retreat to the U.S. and take refuge here? It is in the U.S. of all countries that they cannot hide. Because here, in the wealthiest country in the world by far, we see insecurity and great concern for the future as the masses wait for the “periodical return” of depression and unemployment: “commercial crises,” the next world war in which the “existing products” and the “previously created productive forces are ... destroyed.”
The Manifesto not only instructs the working class, the proletariat, about the role of the capitalist class, the bourgeoisie, but also about its own role in history. “But not only has the bourgeoisie forged the weapons that bring death to itself; it has also called into existence, the men who are to wield those weapons – the modern working class – the proletarians.” The capitalist class must have the working class. Capitalism, cannot function without the working class. The workers are the main force in production. Without the worker there can be no production; not a wheel would turn. Workers often forget this when they praise the employer.
 
We Have the Weapons to Fight Capitalism
The Manifesto says to the working class, however, that the proletariat should learn something from all these experiences. Marx and Engels say that we have “the weapons for fighting the bourgeoisie.” A large part of the teaching of Marx and Engels is to show the working class how to use these weapons and how to fight.
“The proletarian movement is the self-conscious, independent movement of the immense majority, in the interest of the immense majority.” The working class must have its own political party for waging the class struggle for “every class struggle is a political struggle.” Today the capitalist class is a reactionary class and the “proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class.” The working class “will use its political supremacy to wrest, by degrees, all capital from the bourgeoisie, to centralize all instruments of production in the hands of the state, that is, of the proletariat organized as the ruling class; and to increase the total of productive forces as rapidly as possible ... In place of the old bourgeois society, with its classes and class antagonisms, we shall have an association in which the free development of each is the condition for the free development of all.”
These are some of the things which are said in the Communist Manifesto. This is what Marx and Engels said to the working class 100 years ago. This is what they taught about capitalist society and about the working class. The Communist Manifesto is a living document for the entire working class to be guided by. Labor in the U.S. and throughout the world is trailing far behind the Communist Manifesto and the teaching of Marx and Engels. This must not continue lest the working class itself become responsible for its own defeat. Only the working class politically organized in a powerful party of its own and face to face with the capitalist ruling class in militant array, can guarantee the prediction of the Manifesto about the capitalist class: “its fall and the victory of the proletariat are equally inevitable.”
 




The Workers Party has expressed the position more than once in Labor Action that those unions which are holding out on the signing of the Communist Party affidavits, as required by the Taft-Hartley Act, are not unions which have advanced the most progressive programs of the labor movement: The unions which have not signed include the miners (UMWA), steel workers, (USA), printers (ITU) and electrical workers (UERMWA). To take an uncritical position on the attitude of these unions as non-signers and to lump them all together as progressive militant organizations; is to be extremely naive, uninformed, opportunistic or irresponsible and factional.
There is no unanimity of motivation among the four unions listed above as the basis for concerted action, for instance, in refusing to sign the affidavits. The International Typographical Union has not signed and has engaged in a strike and in long drawn out court action and litigation with the NLRB. The prime procedure of the ITU was not in connection with the affidavit question at all, but in connection with its efforts to win the strike. Lewis is also against signing, but it would be very difficult to establish that his reasons have a progressive character. Nothing has come from the mouth of Lewis since the AFL convention, and since he very bureaucratically took the miners out of the AFL, to indicate that Lewis is motivated by any principles in connection with his refusal to sign the affidavits. Furthermore, Lewis and the ITU both can be very brave and independent in this matter. Who and what union will take over the mines and the printing plants?
Murray’s steel workers also have not signed. Why not? One guess is as good as another. But here too Murray can also be brave. What organization will come forward to oust the USWA from the steel plants? The steel workers don’t sign but it is all right with Murray if the automobile union signs. He agrees for the UAW to sign and for the NMU and the UE not to sign. Murray’s principles are broad and very elastic.
 
Motivations Are Not the Same
We have already dealt adequately with the problem of the electrical workers (UE) in previous issues of Labor Action. All we need do here is to contrast the UE with the other non-signing unions. We have already pointed out that the UE Stalinist bureaucrats do not refuse to sign for the same reasons as Murray, Lewis, Curran and Randolph (ITU). We emphasize that all of them proceed from differing premises and motivations. They cannot be lumped together as a group of “progressive” unions which are opposing the Taft-Hartley Act. It is particularly necessary that the Stalinist leadership of the electrical workers’ union (UERMWA) be isolated from the others and exposed in the proper manner.
This is necessary for the reason that all of the other CIO unions with the possible exception of the NMU are in no danger of being disrupted by raids from the AFL, the unaffiliated machinist union (IAM) or mushroom independents, At we have said, the UMWA and the ITU are certainly in no danger. If such a danger existed, neither Murray, Lewis nor Randolph would be taking the position they are against signing the affidavits. No native labor bureaucrat would take any chance on having his union as an organisation endangered through refusal to sign affidavits saying that he was not a member of the Communist Party and that he did not believe in “the overthrow of the government by force and violence.” When one contemplates Murray. Lewis and Randolph refusing to sign and affirm such a position, it is very difficult to keep from laughing, even in one’s sleep.
This is the reason the Stalinist bureaucrats who lead the UE must be condemned and exposed particularly. Murray, Lewis and Randolph are mere prating demagogues, playing at being “radical” when it costs them nothing and when no harm can come to the organizations which they head. The Stalinist bureaucrats who head the UE, however, refuse to sign in a different way and for different reasons. Not only this but they do not have the same kind of interest in the maintenance of the unions as economic organizations of the workers, as the American labor bureaucrats of the type of Murray, Lewis and Randolph. The native bureaucracy has its roots in the union. Its base is in the union. It has no base any other place. The AFL-CIO-Railway Brotherhood bureaucracy has no refuge save in the unions, no protection, no prestige and no influence except that which it gets from the labor movement.
This is not the situation or the position of the Stalinist bureaucrats who head the UE. They attempt to make the UE membership believe that they are opposed to the signing of the affidavits, from a real position as radicals, socialists, and that they are taking a real progressive and militant attitude on this question. These bureaucrats apparently induce many thousands of workers to believe this.
 
Abject Supporters of Kremlin Policy
We have already discussed the fact that these Stalinist totalitarian bureaucrats have no other principles than their support of the polities of the Kremlin. The Marshall Plan is inimical to Russian interests. The ERP is projected in the interest of U.S. imperialism but that is not the reason the U.S. Stalinists are against it. They are against the ERP (Marshall Plan) because U.S. imperialism is in conflict with Russian imperialism and the American Stalinist bureaucrats in the labor movement are partisans of and the most abject supporters of Russian imperialism. They are only against U.S. imperialism when that imperialism is in conflict with the Stalinist bureaucracy in Russia. They demonstrated this decisively during the war, as the Workers Party has emphasized again and again.
We say that the Stalinists in the U.S. are “abject” supporters of Russian imperialism. We mean by this that they bow the knee and make obeisance before all the twists, turns and changes in political line as ordered from the Kremlin. This is precisely what is transpiring these days In the UE. Since the Stalinist labor leaden are only formally trade union leaders, but actually and in practice mouthpieces in the unions for the Kremlin bureaucracy, their chief aim is to use the labor movement to advance the totalitarian political program of the Russian police state. The foreign policy of Stalin is the program which the Stalinist bureaucrats connive to get adopted by the unions. They are for Roosevelt’s foreign policy but against Truman’s. That is, they are for Roosevelt’s foreign policy as of after June 22, 1941.
The Stalinists in the unions do not concern themselves primarily with the question of maintaining the unions as unions, to take care of the economic demands of the workers. The unions to them are places where you get political resolutions passed which have just been cabled in from the Kremlin, to the GPU agent in charge of the party in each country. They need a big union only to get large per capita payments. This is useful in the maintenance of the expanded Stalinist staffs of bureaucrats, stooges and hangers-on, which infest every union under the control of the Communist Party. Apart from this financial aspect the Stalinist cops, in the unions, are satisfied with a small select group to attend union meetings, conduct negotiations and edit the union paper.
 
Will Members Permit It?
The problem before the UE today is whether or not the members of this international will permit their union to be wrecked by their leadership under the cover of being progressive and militant, when the fact is that this leadership is totalitarian and completely reactionary.
Is the UE membership going to remain asleep and let their Stalinist leadership get itself out of a trap by selling the UE down the river? This they can do by several types of betrayal which the Stalinists are experts at. This leadership is capable of coming fo agreements with Westinghouse. and General Electric which will shackle these workers and set them back for many years. This leadership can play around with its present criminal policy and create all manner of dissension and disunity in the UE. Already there are signs of unrest and same locals and shops are contemplating leaving the UE for the UAW. There are rumors that other international unions are looking with hungry eyes toward the UE. it is certain that the machinists (IAM) will become more and more aggressive in the matter of raiding the UE.
We believe that in the present circumstances the UE must sign the affidavits and place itself in position to preserve its integrity, resist raids from other unions and protect itself from the machinations of the employers who can certainly use use the Taft-Hartley Act against the union.
 
What Makes a Progressive?
These observations have been prompted in part by reading the attitude of the Socialist Workers Party on this question as contained in The Militant. The SWP is enamored of the militant attitude of all the unions which have refused to sign the affidavits. John L. Lewis is their darling and, according to The Militant, the real spearhead of the attack on the Taft-Hartley Act.
In its articles in The Militant, the SWP forms the unions which have refused to sign the affidavits into one militant and progressive front against the Taft-Hartley Act, led by Lewis, Murray, Randolph, Curran, Emspak-Mattes and their captive Fitzgerald. There is no analysis of the role of the Stalinists, of Stalinism in the UE or of the probable effects of the Stalinist policy on the future of the union. Inherent in the attitude of the SWP, as expressed in The Militant, is support of Stalinism in practice while carrying on a literary campaign, of sorts, against the Stalinists.
The SWP and The Militant keep up the tirade against Reuther as a reactionary in tow of the ACTU. This is just as nonsensical as to say that Lewis is progressive because he is not hitched to the ACTU. The fact is that Reuther is not being led around by the ACTU. The UAW program, wage increases without price increases, certainly did not come from the ACTU. But not only is Reuther reactionary, according to the SWP, because of the ACTU leading strings but also because the UAW signed the affidavits. Similarly, according to that position, the UE has not signed and this, of course, makes the Stalinist bureaucrats progressives in the labor movement. This is really a tough morsel to chew and digest.
 




When one reads that the wife of a senator from South Carolina did not attend the Jefferson-Jackson dinner of the Democratic Party in Washington, because “I might be seated beside a Negro,”it is not easy to know what is in this woman’s head and what it is that she is really talking about. She would perhaps say that she does not want to be “mongrelized,” or that she is opposed to being a “conquered province,” or this is her way of showing that “we love our Negroes.”
According to the reports in the papers, only about a dozen Negroes attended this $100 a plate dinner. This would be $1,200 spent by Negroes. Perhaps the senator’s wife is of the opinion that these twelve Negroes should have donated that $1,200 to help toward the building of a school house for the poor white children of South Carolina. That might not be a bad idea, since the intelligence quotient of the Northern Negroes is higher than that of South Carolina whites.
If the intelligence of the poor whites in South Carolina could be brought up to that of the Northern Negro, the white masses of South Carolina might begin to understand that their leaders are a bunch of ignorant and conniving demagogues, who are not only against civil liberties for Negroes but for the poor whites also. We suspect, however, that the lady from South Carolina knows little about such things as intelligence tests and civil liberties. It’s not required reading in the South, especially in the case of women.
 
Underscore Serious Situation
These observations are not mere facetious jibes at the South. They only underscore a very serious situation. It is a fact that the poor whites of the deep South will have to reach a far higher level of intelligence before they can understand even in the most elementary way what is happening to them and why. I will now relate a few relevant considerations which the Southern poor white has never heard of but which undoubtedly played an extremely important role in the deliberations of the Committee on Civil Rights, and in the thinking of Messrs. Wilson and Luckman. The statistical material which I am going to relate is kept from the Southern poor whites by the Rankins, Byrds, Eastlands and Gossetts.
Alabama, with a population of 2,832,961, in 1940 paid income taxes to the federal government totalling $244,285,520. Minnesota, with about the same population paid $612,200,194. Alabama’s corporation taxes were $39,685,414 and Minnesota’s $105,876,454. Alabama and Minnesota are both manufacturing and agricultural states. The population of Kansas is about 250,000 less than that of Mississippi. Yef Kansas paid into the federal treasury three and a half times what Mississippi paid. South Carolina is a manufacturing and agricultural state. And so is Connecticut. The populations are about the same. The corporations in Connecticut paid twice as much as the South Carolina corporations, and individuals paid nearly four times as much. What does this mean? It means that there is something substantial to tax in Minnesota, Kansas and Connecticut, while in South Carolina, Alabama and Mississippi there just isn’t much.
I am not making an argument for paying taxes. I am merely demonstrating that the South is so poor in comparison with the North that there isn’t even anything much for the tax collector. This is one of the reasons – among others, of course – the South has the poll-tax; these poverty stricken backwoods states really need the money.
Georgia has 23,675,612 acres under cultivation. The assessed value of this land with buildings is $654,244,224. Indiana has 20,027,015 farm acres but its assessed value is $1,794,314,968, over twice that of Georgia. In round numbers Mississippi has 19 million acres assessed at 649 million dollars, while Pennsylvania has 15 million acres assessed at over a billion dollars.
There is more to this than meets the eye. Why does the farm land of the North have a :higher assessed value than that of the South? Here again we get back to the question of schools, ignorance, income and wealth; energy and indolence; hookworm and the absence of hookworm. The higher cultural, educational and technical level of the North produces a different kind of farming and a different kind of farm.
 
Reflected in Wage Scales
Let’s look at something else. The sales figures quoted are for 1939 and the population figures are for 1940. The population of Georgia was 3,123,723. The population of the state of Washington was 1,736,101. In Georgia, 32,870 retail stores sold $624,765,000 and paid 78,947 employees $58,874,000 in wages. In Washington, the sales of 26,682 retail stores amounted to $668,790,000; 66,852 employees were paid $75,405,000 in wages. North Carolina and Wisconsin are about the same size in population. In 1939, however, 270,207 North Carolina Wage earners received $199,289,500 in wages. The same year 200,207 wage earners in Wisconsin received $251,946,993 in wages. That is, there were around 70,000 fewer wage earners in Wisconsin but they received 52 million dollars more in wages than the wage earners of North Carolina. And we have to remember that North Carolina is not Mississippi or Arkansas.
This means that the workers of Wisconsin had 52 millions more to spend or save than the industrial workers of North Carolina. It means that the industrial families of the workers of Wisconsin would have more electric irons, radios, washers, pianos, furniture, clothing and food than the families of the industrial workers of North Carolina. This means also that Wisconsin can have more and better schools and that the state does not need a poll-tax to aid in support of the state government. This higher income means that Charles Luekman of the Committee on Civil Rights will sell more Life-Buoy soap in Wisconsin than in North Carolina or Mississippi. Not only because the masses have more money in Wisconsin but because they have better schools and better homes in which they are taught that human beings should use soap, and that it is no longer necessary to make one’s own soap in the backyard from wood ash lye.
Since the figures I have used are for a few years back it might he conjectured that the gap had been closed. This is not the case. The standard of living, in the South, was raised some during the war, but not much. Per capita income in 1946 was $555 in Mississippi, $729 in South Carolina and $809 in Georgia. Compare this with $1,090 in Kansas which was perhaps the median for the North. It would be interesting to see the reaction of a native Mississippi poor white after he had advanced to the point where he could understand the meaning of that $555 for this state in relation to what is going on right now. I mean that raising of $100,000 to teach this poor white not to reach beyond that $555 if thereby the Negro will get a little more. I have the notion that when the bedraggled and ignorant poor whites of the South begin to understand these things, there will be another civil war but all the fighting will take place in Dixie.
 
Cost of Living Higher
It has been said that while wages are low in the South, the cost of living is also lower than in the North. This is another myth which must be discarded. Following are some retail food price indices for October 15, 1947. The base is 100. On this date the index for Atlanta was 198.9, Birmingham 204.8, Dallas 195.5, Houston 200, Jackson, Miss., 209, Savannah 215.1, Memphis 213, New Orleans 211, Charleston 189.8. For Chicago the index was 203.1, Cleveland 204.3, Detroit 195.5, New York 194.3, Philadelphia 191.7, Buffalo, 192.4 and Kansas City, Mo., 183. I have included the highest and the lowest from big cities in each section.
Here at least is something financial which the South is tops in. The assets of Consolidated Edison in New York City may be greater than the assessed value of all property in Mississippi, Arkansas and South Carolina. But there is at least one thing which Little Rock, Ark., and Jackson, Miss., can boast of: it costs more to live in these cities than in New York City. They have a lower standard of living, but a higher standard of prices.
The governors and congressmen from the South are holding session after session and orating all over the place about “Southern democracy,” “states’ rights” and other ancient Dixie nonsense. What they are really concerned about is the possibility of the poor whites: looking into the books and seeing and understanding some of the comparative figures I have quoted above. It would be very silly to believe that the concern of these demagogues right now is with the Negro. They are first of all concerned with keeping the poor whites in ignorance and subjection.
These scoundrels understand, for instance, that a part of civil rights in the United States is the right to organise into trade unions. That process is going on in the South today. White workers who join the CIO will tend to support the civil rights program because they will begin to understand that they too have a stake in civil rights as well as the Negro. When a white worker in Jackson, Miss., learns that his wages are lower than the wages of a worker in New York, but that it costs him more to live in Jackson, he will look around to discover the reason why.
When a white toiler in South Carolina learns that Negroes in the North eat better food, wear better clothing and live in a better house than he does, he will begin to question the value of this “white supremacy” which he has been sold by his representative in Congress and his governor.
It is the economic aspects of this question which I have been discussing that the Committee on Civil Rights was concerned with. That is what the white members of the committee were primarily concerned with, particularly Charles Wilson of General Electric, the chairman, and Charles Luekman, president of Lever Bros., soap manufacturers.
 
“White Supremacy” Too Expensive
Wilson and Luekman and other Northern manufacturers of consumer goods see a vast potential market which they are being kept from developing by the operation of something known as “white supremacy,” “Southern democracy,” “the purity of Southern womanhood.” Northern industrial capitalism is kept from the development of a potentially huge market by the prevalence of ignorance, poverty, disease and “lawlessness” in the South. Wilson can’t sell vacuum cleaners to people who haven’t the money, who have nothing to clean or who believe the broom they have always used is good enough.
It is clear that Northern capitalism is preparing for another showdown with the South. “Southern democracy” is again interfering with the frantic attempts of capitalism to stabilize itself. Southern “white supremacy” is getting in the way of the maintenance of capitalist supremacy. Jim Crow is too expensive for capitalism today. As capitalism plunges deeper into difficulties, the capitalists tire of contributing to two universities, two hospitals, two law schools where one could serve adequately. All the railroads in the country are owned in the North. The Southern political leaders don’t own even a hand car. The money in Southern banks isn’t even owned by Southerners. Southern cotton plantations are owned by the Metropolitan Life, New York Life and other insurance companies and banks in the North. Northern owners of railroads will come to the place where they will conclude that it is too expensive to provide separate accommodations for Negroes in order to keep something known as “white supremacy.”
I emphasize again that the Northern manufacturer of consumer goods wants to get at this vast potential Southern market. Right now he can’t because there is an iron curtain around the South: “white supremacy,” “the purity of the white race,” “states’ rights.” The civil rights report and the civil rights message mean that Northern capitalism is ready to apply the policy of the “open door” to the South. Open the door to Northern standards of living, educational standards, cultural values and political practices. This means that the door is open for Northern products and the increase of profits and dividends.
It is not my intention to give the impression that the above is the only reason for the new insistence on “civil rights.” In the first article I quoted from, the report on The International Reason for the establishment of civil liberties. Furthermore, there are in the U.S., fortunately, people who sincerely believe that “democracy” can and should be made to work. All of these points of view were represented among the white members of the committee. This means that these points of view are held by members of the capitalist ruling class today. If this were not true such opinions as are set forth in the report would not have come from the presidents of the University of North Carolina and Dartmouth College, the presiding bishop of the Episcopal Church and the president of the General Electric Co.
 
Negroes Will Not Always Submit
There is another reason why some attention must be given to this question by the leaders of society. In the eight states of Alabama, Georgia, Mississippi, South Carolina, Arkansas, Louisiana, Texas and North Carolina there are fourteen million white people and seven million Negroes. These are round numbers. To realize what this means, let’s imagine the Negro population of New York to be six million, Pennsylvania five million, Illinois three million and Michigan two million. This would be about one-half of the total population. For instance, would any restaurant or other public place dare deny accommodations to a Negro? Given the present cultural level of the Negro in the North and the Negro population, 30 to 50 per cent of the total population, there could be no possible way by which Jim Crow could be maintained. Under such conditions the Negroes would eliminate Jim Crow by force if necessary.
This is precisely what is likely to transpire in the South. The seven million Negroes in the states I mentioned will not forever consent to live in subjection to fourteen million whites. There is no way for the white people of these states to keep up the subjugation of the seven million Negroes should the Negroes decide that they have had enough. I think it is safe to say that the Committee on Civil Rights did not ignore this aspect of the question. In their opinion civil rights are certainly to be preferred to civil war.
Will Truman hold to his program and insist on passage by Congress? This is a difficult question but relatively unimportant. Why these recommendations were not brought in before has already been answered above. To berate the ruling class or the capitalist parties for using the civil rights question for political advantage may be, stating a fact, but it is also demonstrating that one is a little stupid.
To take the position that the findings of the committee have been known for some time even to the white members of the committee and that therefore these members are hypocrites and not to be trusted, is only to waste one’s time feeling good over the discovery of a hypocrite.
Any one of these attitudes may be factual and consoling but they hardly contribute to an understanding of what is behind this civil rights agitation from on top, by white people who have civil rights aplenty. That is what I have tried to explore in these three articles. As a result of that exploration I believe the Southern rabble in Congress and the state capitals is going to get a real licking. The South will have to back up. It is interfering again with “free enterprise” at a time when “free enterprise” is less able to bear undue burdens than ever before. The South is going to be forced to put up with a little “mongrelization,” with less “white purity,” and less “white supremacy.” If the South insists on chewing its bitter pills, that will be too bad and nothing can be done about it. Operation Dixie will go on: will go on from CIO headquarters in Washington and from the centers of capitalist production all over the North.
 

    [Campaign Abandoned] A. Philip Randolph has announced that the League for Non-Violent Civil Disobedience Against Military Segregation is being abandoned. This is the group which he set up to urge non-compliance with the draft as long as racial segregation was in practice in the armed forces. In other words, Randolph and Grant Reynolds are getting out. According to Bayard Rustin, the League will continue to function. Randolph announced that he is giving up the non-violent struggle on the strength of Truman’s “announced plan to end segregation in the armed forces.” What this means is very difficult to say. It is not easy to say just what the Truman directive means. The chief of staff seems to have a view which is not that held by Senator McGrath, who gave Randolph the assurance as to the meaning of the Truman statement. Whatever the meaning of the Truman statement, the McGrath interpretation, or Randolph’s opinion as to its meaning, this really has nothing to do with the abandonment of the League. This movement was in a state of abandonment from the day of its founding. We commented on this in Labor Action the first week the movement got under way in a hearing before a Senate committee. The movement was born in the capitol at Washington and not out in the country where hundreds of thousands of future Negro conscripts reside. It has never had any reality or any real base among Negroes except perhaps among a few pacifists, careerists, publicity seekers and crackpots. It was an attempt to import the essence of the Gandhi movement into the United States for use by American Negroes, in a totally mechanical and artificial manner. We certainly have not the slightest objection to the importation of movements or ideas. What we objected to was the attempt to organize a Gandhi movement among Negroes who had no background for such a movement: psychologically, socially or politically. Furthermore we attempted in that same article to explain that it was incorrect to separate army segregation from any other type of segregation. Also we asked the question whether or not Randolph and his followers were taking the position that they would not oppose the present militarization program if there were no segregation. Or would Randolph support American imperialism provided it was conducted on a non-segregated basis? There may be other reasons for the abandonment of the League. Perhaps the Stalinists were sneaking in through the Wallace Party, which is being supported by some of the League members. We said right at the beginning that Grant Reynolds would not be in at the finish unless the finish came in just the manner it has. Reynolds is just an ordinary little Republican pro-Dewey politician. He was merely out to take a rap at Truman in the interests of Dewey and the Republican Party. That was all. We intend to have more to say on this matter after we have learned more about the developments in the League. 

    [Olympics] During the past three and a halt months while in the shop for physical repairs and reconditions, I have accumulated a few clippings which deal with Negroes. The funniest of them is about the reaction of the British editors to the victory of the U.S. in the 14th Olympiad. Also the manner in which British editors explained the defeat of real white men and above all real Englishmen, by black men from the U.S. The following quotations are from Views of Sport, a column by Red Smith, sports editor of the New York Herald Tribune. After the British entry had been defeated by the American Negro, Barney Ewell from Lancaster, Pa., a London paper announced: “McCorquodale Holds U.S. to No. 1.” When this same native British white McCorquodale ran third behind Dillard and Ewell, two American Negroes, a British paper complimented McCorquodale on being the “world’s fastest white human.” When the photographs of the 400 meter relay were developed it was revealed that the American team composed of three Negroes and one white runner had really won the race. However, one British paper screamed on front page: “Our Victory Is Victory No Longer; Camera Gives Race to U.S.” And Red Smith comments: “The camera, mind you, not Ewell, Dillard, Lorenzo Wright and Mel Patton.” Some of the British papers blamed the defeat of English athletes on the austerity diet. Red Smith points out, however, that the “steak-fed Americans were shut out in all distance races, where stamina is essential.”   “Just Like White Folks” There are people in this country who are also worried. For instance, there is the man who wrote to the New York Herald Tribune, H.C. Tuthill from Eastport, N.Y. Tuthill is outraged by people who write and talk about Negroes being mistreated in the South. Tuthill knows what he is talking about because he left the North to run a tobacco plantation in North Carolina after his 48th birthday. “I had some 40 tenants, about 30 Negro and 10 white.” Tuthill found that the division of the crops “was exactly the same with the Negro as the white.” He also discovered that the Negro was equal to the white in other ways. For instance: “each bought their supplies at the same places at the same price, and they sold their crops at the same places at the same price.” Tuthill does not say, but presumably they bought from him and sold to him. “Also, they (Negroes) have their hospitals and schools and buses go over the same routes to carry their children to school. So how can anyone make such statements as some that I have read?” Another proof that Negroes are not abused is that “many of them own their own automobiles; you will see them outside of their churches on Sundays.” There we have it. Negroes in the South are not mistreated. They are allowed to own automobiles and to park them in front of “their churches on Sundays,” just like the white folks. The police don’t tow them away. Furthermore, buses carrying Negro children to Negro schools run on the same roads as buses carrying white children to white schools. Southern states don’t build separate roads for buses loaded with black children. There are Jim Crow schools and Jim Crow buses but by the beard of Robert E. Lee, neither Southerner nor copperhead Northerner (Tuthill) will tolerate Jim Crow roads. A correspondent who signs himself Reb Hull writes to the Herald Tribune. He objects to the series by Ray Sprigle now running in that paper. Reb doesn’t like “the emotional manner in which Mr. Sprigle presents his material.” He objects to the statement of Sprigle that the Constitution is a mere scrap of paper to the Southern Negro. Reb knows better. “The Constitution, I believe, insures freedom of worship, freedom of expression, freedom from want. Nowhere in the South will one find a Negro deprived of his church. If the Negro expresses himself courteously, he will not be mistreated because his opinion is averse to the Southern white.” Reb is also convinced that any Negro will be supplied with food and lodging in the South “if he applies in the proper channels.”   Mississippi Liberalism One can laugh at Reb and Tuthill. They are mere ignorant nobodies. Ten to 15 years in a New York State night school might do them some good. At least they might learn how not to make a complete ass of oneself in print. But down in Mississippi there is a man by the name of Hodding Carter. Carter is the editor-owner of the Delta Democrat-Times in Greenville, Miss. Last year Carter won the Pulitzer Prize for this articles on racial intolerance. I suppose that one should be thankful for any small ray of light which shines out from Mississippi, probably the most backward spot in the civilized world. About the best which can be said for Mississippi is that Negroes there are not so bad off as the Jews under Hitler or the unfortunates in Stalin’s Siberian slave labor camps. This man Hodding Carter is alleged to be a “liberal,” or better a “Southern liberal.” I suppose, to be precise and careful, one should say a Mississippi liberal. Carter is just as wobbly as Reb and Tuthill. In fact, he is worse because he is an educated man, a man of experience and ability. Reb and Tuthill are just two big-mouth ignoramuses. Carter has written an article for the New York Times Magazine, entitled A Southern Liberal Looks at Civil Rights. Carter wants to talk to the “extremists within and outside the South.” This is an old game of the Southern “liberal.” He is against all extremists, North and South. But who are the Northern extremists and what do they advocate? What do the Southern extremists advocate? I would like for this liberal Carter to tell us who are the Northern Bilbos, Rankins, Talmadges, Eastlands, Dorns, Thurmonds? Where are their counterparts in the North? Certainly not in Congress. There is not a governor in the whole North who can be compared with the governor of Mississippi. Senator Taylor of Idaho is the only Northerner who goes through the ignorant clownish antics and monkeyshines of the Southerners in Congress. But otherwise Taylor is one of the Northern extremists Carter is talking about. Carter, the liberal, takes solace in the fact that the poll tax “in itself does not discriminate against the Negro alone.” That’s what the Civil Rights Report said. Carter goes on in his role as advocate for the Southern lynchers, disfranchisers and segregates. “The proposal to make lynching a federal offense appears to most white Southerners as evidence of a gratuitous disregard for the South’s own success in reducing lynchings to a nearly non-symptomatic incidence.” I don’t know what this sentence means, but I am certain that it will have no effect on the next Mississippi mob bent on lynching some Negro woman or burning the Negro section of the city. This Carter is a scoundrel. He knows that whatever reduction in lynching which has taken place in the South was not due to any initiative on the part of Southerners. It was due to shifting economic conditions which include the organization of Southern workers and the attempt to increase industrialization in the South. It was due also to merciless public criticism heaped on the South from the North and the exposure of Southern savagery in all the enlightened countries of the world. This is what brought the Southern liberals into the struggle. Whatever of improvement which has been initiated by the Southern leadership has been in order to head off action of the federal government. If there had been no campaign in the North and no pitiless publicity of the South, one would have heard very little from the Dixie liberals.   Vicious and Ignorant Carter finds that although segregation may be wrong in theory, “it is also an actuality which the white majority in the South intends to maintain in its mass aspects.” What does the liberal Carter think of this? Nothing, except that “as a theory” segregation is wrong. The liberal Carter is convinced that “a standing army would be necessary to end segregation in the South.” This is plain nonsense of course, but we don’t want to discuss that now. We are interested to inquire what camp Carter would be in on that day. Carter has discovered that the Negro is becoming less and less vital to the “changing economy” of the South. This is, of course, just more nonsense. Is the Negro to be excluded from the factories as the South becomes more industrialized? Then what will the South do with them – all 10 million of them? How will the South be able to move forward as an industrial area and follow a course which the North has been forced to abandon? All that Carter has really done in this article is confirm what has already been said about the South: it is a backward, ignorant, vicious, corrupt and incredibly stupid section. 




This piece is being written on June 9, just eleven days before the new “truce” in the mine strike situation expires. It is probable that a settlement will be reached before the “truce” expires. The settlement will not come because of anything that the operators have contributed, or because Ickes or the WLB decided to gather up their marbles and go home. The strike will not end because the miners have been scared by a bill presented to Congress by a couple of backwoods “statesmen” from two poll-tax states of the South.
The strike will probably be settled before June 20 because it must be clear by now to everyone, the WLB included, that the miners are getting mad. It is about time. This runaround has gone on long enough.
All the forces lined up against the mine workers realize now” that they put their foot in it. Now they are only trying to save face. They know now that they haven’t scared the miners, and that they are not likely to. The WLB, a group of labor leaders, big business men and something known as the “public group,” attempts to wield the big stick with a great deal of bravado and strutting, but no one is impressed, certainly not the miners. This board has no prestige and should quit and go home. Its hatchet man and chief cop in the present dispute is Wayne Morse, law professor and “liberal.” Mr. Morse has the nice-sounding title of WLB “compliance officer.” In the past. Mr. Morse has talked about strikers being charged with “treason.”
Mr. Ickes has entered the scene again with statements and telegrams. He is the “custodian” of the mines but he has no authority. It is reported that Roosevelt was inclined to let Ickes handle the dispute and reach a settlement, but the WLB took the position that, if Ickes was given authority, the board would resign. The WLB won out, and saved its face for the present.
The operators don’t like the situation either. They have been sitting tight since March 10, hoping that the miners would crack. They depended on the government to do their dirty work for them, but the miners’ ranks have held firm, even in the face of this threat. Now the operators feel that their WLB has made a few mistakes.
Mr. Burke, representing the Southern Appalachian operators, in commenting on the order of the WLB to cease negotiations, said that while the instruction of the UMWA officials to the miners to return to work “was not technically in compliance” with the WLB directive, “it is a sufficient compliance so that we could at once proceed with our efforts to reach an agreement.” Mr. O’Neil of the Northern Appalachian operators used stronger language when he said: “As far as I am concerned, the board made a grave mistake. I think the action constitutes a wholly unwarranted and unnecessary obstruction to the work of the conference.”
The instructions of the UMWA leadership for the miners to return to work on Monday wasn’t enough for the little WLB. They wanted to see every last miner all over the country actually back on the job before permitting the resumption of negotiations. Said “Compliance Officer” Morse: “... the United Mine Workers of America and the coal operators are not to resume contract negotiations until the mine workers are actually back at work.”
It is clear that the miners have the whole bunch backed against the wall. If they keep them there they will win. The miners should take full advantage of the disagreements that must be under discussion behind the scenes. The WLB quarrels with Ickes, and Ickes quarrels with the WLB and the operators. The operators, after putting all their eggs in the WLB basket, now perhaps feel that the WLB has let them down since the board hasn’t been able to frighten the miners yet.
The operators were hoping that the government would break the strike quickly. They are afraid that the miners will win a substantial award that will be retroactive. This means they will have to pay out a lot of money in back wages. That’s the reason they did not agree with the WLB decision to halt negotiations until the miners were actually back at work. They haven’t been able to break the ranks of “the UMWA, and they would like to get on with negotiations.
When the last walk-out began, the press reported the President had sent for Murray, Greenland other labor leaders. We, don’t know why. It is difficult to see what Murray and Green could contribute. They don’t have any influence with the UMWA. In fact, there is reason to believe that these two gentlemen are losing influence iri their own organizations. The AFL has just lost the machinists, and it has a few strikes on its hands. Murray has seen the Chrysler and rubber workers strike for several days despite HIS pledge to Roosevelt that there would be no strikes.
We would like to suggest to Murray that he keep away from the White House and spend some time in Detroit at the Packard plant, where 20,000 white workers struck because a few Negro CIO members and workers were given better jobs.
Bill Green might also stay away from the White House and give /his attention to Jim Crow and discrimination inside the AFL. Along with other problems this matter of union discrimination against Negroes can well occupy the time of Green and Murray. It seems that the miners are capable of handling their own affairs.
 
Cards Are on the Table
The miners are still in a very strong position, despite the many truces they have consented to. It is our opinion that this “truce” should be the last. We have the impression that this is the opinion of the UMWA. If their demands are not met in a substantial amount by June 20 it will be clear to every miner that there is nothing to be gained by any further extensions.
The cards are on the table now. The miners know what the operators are up to. They also know what the WLB game is.
There is the Smith-Connally bill, but there have been “anti-labor bills before. For centuries the labor movement has been fighting its way against, anti-labor legislation and anti-labor decisions of the courts. If Murray and Green had let it be known that they and their organizations would not tolerate the anti-labor rampage that is now going on in Congress, this body would not dare pass the Connally-Smith bill. And Murray, and Green would get the solid support of the ranks of labor – with the exception of the Stalinist stooges in the unions.
 




As this is being written, a half million coal miners of the UMWA are holding THEIR line from eastern Pennsylvania through West Virginia to Alabama and the bituminous regions of the Middle West.
Without intending to do so, the very reactionary New York World-Telegram pays a high tribute to the UMWA. Says the World-Telegram: “The work stoppage became general today when the morning s lifts in the biggest coal producing centers ignored whistles at the shafts and remained at nol ie, apparently unimpressed by the fact that they now were striking against their government and face the possibility of military action to open the pits.”
The miners had nothing else to do; they had no other alternative. Every proposal they made to the coal companies was rejected. Every compromise suggested by the UMWA was rejected by the operators. ,Th| miners have agreed to extensions and truces, but the operators have refused to give ah inch. The owners of the mines (the real owners) have violated every principle of collective bargaining procedure. All of their scheming, all of their planning have been originated with one purpose in mind and that is to replace collective bargaining with WLB “directives” and presidential decrees aimed solely at the mine workers.
What the operators really have in mind is to create a situation where the government would claim justification for sending troops to the mine fields, Or a situation where the Senate could claim justification for the passage of the Connally-Smith bills by Congress. The operators want the government to break the strike even if it is necessary to resort to armed force. They want the government to come to their aid and help them to break the miners’ union.
They know that if they can break the UMWA, other employe ers will have an easier time in their anti-labor fight against other unions. The coal operators and all other employers and their paid press know that the miners are the fighting spearhead of the organized labor movement today.
The miners are not “apparently unimpressed” by any of the important and serious matters they face today. That they take many things into consideration is proved by the fact that the
UMWA has consented to the various extensions and truces, even in the face of the bull-headed, uncompromising and reactionary deportment of the coal operators, and the run-around which they have had from Ickes and the WLB.
The latest compromise on the part of the miners is the proposal that the portal-to-portal pay be $1.50 a day instead of $2.00. This was rejected by the operators. Not only did they reject this proposal, but they spread the lie that the miners were holding to their $2.00-a-day demand.
The miners also proposed that a coal commission be set up with equal numbers from each side to study the portal-to-portal question during a thirty-day period while the $1.50 portal-to-portal arrangement was in effect; the arrangement not to be binding on either side after the thirty-day period. This proposal was also rejected by the operators.
The operators have written to Mr. Ickes that “you may be sure that within the limits of the directive of the War Labor Board we, in our individual capacities, will do everything necessary to assure continuous production of coal on a normal basis.” When the whole course of the operators is considered, all that this can mean is that they will do everything possible to maintain coal production except bargain collectively with the miners and pay the wages that the miners are justly demanding.
The operators say, further, that the responsibility for the present situation is the fault of the miners, “who have refused to recognize the wage stabilization policies of the government as reflected in the laws of the United States and executive orders of the President of the United States.” Now everyone, including even the dullest mine owner, knows that this statement is only a lot of hooey.
The miners refuse to recognize a boss-controlled government political board that is stacked against them. They refuse to recognize the pompous antics of “Custodian” Ickes, who blustered around and then capitulated to the WLB. They refused to recognize that they should accept a wage scale lower than that of other workers in the war industries. The UMWA refused to submit to the procedure of the coal operators, whose plan was to wreck all collective bargaining processes and the mine union. They refused to work without a contract and to go hungry. When Roosevelt and the government accept the position of the coal operators and reject these just demands they prove again that they represent the bosses and that they are against the miners and the rest of labor.
In his telegram to the operators and the miners, Ickes says “the failure of the union members to work constitutes a strike against the government of the United States, which is in possession of the mines.” The government is “in possession” of the mines and Ickes is custodian for the government, but he has no authority. The WLB claims authority, but it has no influence either with the operators or the miners. The operators only follow those “directives” of the WLB that fit in with their own interests.
Mr. Ickes goes on to say that there are “a few powerful operators who from the beginning have deliberately opposed any compromise which might lead to a reasonable settlement.” This is true and binds the case of the mine workers. But the government does not put any pressure on the operators. Workers should not be deceived by the fact that the government is “in possession of the mines.” They are still private property, owned by coal companies, railroads and banks.
Ickes also says: “The president of the United Mine Workers cannot escape responsibility, for the cessation of work today ... I call upon the president of the United Mine Workers to cause the members of the UMW to return to their wartime posts of duty.”
Of course, Lewis cannot escape responsibility for the strike. He is the chief officer of the UMWA. None of the leaders of the UMWA can escape responsibility. Not a single individual miner can escape responsibility. So far as we can see, nobody has tried to escape responsibility. The miners are out in a solid mass. That is the proof.
Why do Ickes, the WLB, the employers and the capitalist press think that the miners elected Lewis their president? To work in the interests of the coal operators, or in the interests of the mine workers? Whom is he expected to represent, the coal diggers or the coal owners?
Lewis and the other UMWA leaders have the responsibility to fight until the miners win. This is the only basis on which the miners can have any reason to support Lewis and the other leaders.
Ickes calls on Lewis “to cause” the miners to return to work. But Lewis’ primary responsibility is not to Ickes but to the miners who elected him their president and who pay him a salary of $25,000 a year from their low wages.
We have no way of knowing what will happen. We do know that the UMWA is in an impregnable position and that it can win its just demands if the miners stick it out and hold THEIR line.
 




You are assembled in Chicago in answer to a call from the leaders of the March on Washington Movement. The slogan of the conference is: “We Are Americans, Too!” The call for the conference declares that “the need for mass organization is now. Negro Americans must awake to the cause of their nation’s freedom. Black men who have so long seen and cherished democracy from afar must arise and take this sacred goddess for themselves. Democracy must be Saved for America and hence for the world. We must join the swelling ranks of all people who are on the march toward a free world. We must be the standard bearers of this new community, of the spirit that has as its motto, the matchless slogan, ‘with malice toward none and justice toward all.’
“Here we will ponder and discuss whether Negroes should march on Washington and if so, when ... We will demand the abolition of the WAR’S GREATEST SCANDAL – JIM CROW IN UNIFORM! ... We will dedicate our lives to the cause of American freedom, the freedom of colored people everywhere and the freedom of the world. We will proclaim our dedication to the cause of a free Africa and the freedom of the West Indies ...
 Here we will map out a broad national program in the interest of abolishing Jim Crowism in America. We will ponder and discuss nonviolent techniques for mass action that may some day point the way toward a foundation of peace for a new world. We will proclaim anew and reaffirm the determination of the colored people to struggle for the victory of the United Nations over the Axis powers and for democracy. We will seek a solution to the problem of race which will avoid and prevent riots, violence and bloodshed.”
This is quite an ambitious program the conference sets for itself. Is it more than verbiage? Are we to assume that the MOW leadership will come to the conference with definite and concrete proposals for the delegates to act on, proposals that will be in line with the purpose for which the MOW was formed two years ago, namely, to organize Negroes in the United States for a mass MARCH ON WASHINGTON?
If the conference is carried through with the same indecisiveness that has characterized the MOW during the past two years or in the spirit of the high sounding but empty platitudes of the call, then this conference will begin and end as nothing more than a “Cave of the Winds.”
The call says that “the need for mass organization is now.” This is true, but mass organization for what? For more calls for organization? For more speeches? For more protest meetings? For more lamentation on the wrongs against the Negro? For more wailing over Jim Crow and lynching and segregation?
 
What Needs to Be Done
The imperative need is for mass organization followed by militant mass action. Furthermore, experience has demonstrated that the road to mass organization, the way to get the masses to respond to an organization call is through militant mass action. Neither the Negro masses nor any other masses can be organized merely by holding conferences and making speeches. The Negro masses, just like other groups with deep-seated, grievances, will respond only to the call of a leadership that comes with a program for concrete and practical action commensurate with the magnitude of their wrongs and grievances.
The call states that “we will dedicate our lives to the cause of American freedom, the freedom of the colored people everywhere and the freedom of the world.” The first and primary business of this conference is to dedicate itself to the cause of the freedom of the Negro here in the United States, to demand and organize for complete POLITICAL, SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC EQUALITY for the Negro right here in the United States – NOW. When we have made’some appreciable progress in this direction, we can consider the larger question of the “freedom of the world.”
The call says that the conference will “reaffirm the determination of the colored people to struggle for the victory of the United Nations over the Axis powers and for democracy.” Now, we can see no reason whatsoever why Negroes should desire a victory by the Axis powers. That is, we cannot imagine any Negro desiring the victory of the fascist nations. But, on the other hand, it is difficult for us to reconcile “our dedication to the cause of a free Africa and the freedom of the West Indies” with the victory of imperialist Britain in this war. That is, we cannot understand such a position unless the leaders of the MOW believe that after the Axis powers are defeated England will free Africa and the West Indies (which isn’t mentioned in the call).
Also, what is there in the present, situation which leads Mr. Randolph and the other leaders of the MOW to believe that the United States ruling class and its government have any intention of according equality to the American Negro after the Axis powers are defeated? After nearly four years of England’s participation in the war and eighteen months by the United States, we see no reason why any Negro, British or American, should have any such belief. The question of the liberation of the colonies by England and the elimination of Jim Crow in the United States have no place whatsoever in the minds of the American and British rulers.
 
The Negroes Do Understand
The Negro masses in the United States can see this. They see it written in their own blood in the streets of northern Detroit and southern Beaumont. They see it in the Jim Crow policies of the Washington government, in the brutal treatment of black men in uniform, in the savagery of the mob and in the discriminatory practices on Negro workers in the factories: the “arsenals of democracy.” All we need do is listen.and hear the groans of hundreds of thousands of black agricultural workers writhing under the lash of the plantation boss just as though i slavery had never been abolished. Then where is democracy? Where are the “Four Freedoms”? Where are even their beginnings to be discerned?
The March on Washington Movement began its career with at least a partial recognition of these facts. It was organized arpund a slogan calling for a militant mass march on the capital of the nation; the center from which flows out to the whole country a national policy of Jim Crow. In its original call for a march on Washington the MOW said that “our valiant and heroic forebears won the right for Negroes to enjoy the priceless gift of freedom ... they won it through tears, sweat and blood.”
Commenting on this statement at the time, Labor Action said: “Nat Turner didn’t put in much time contemplating or condemning the oppressive governments of Europe in his day. He had an uncanny knowledge what government and what group was oppressing him and the Negroes of his day. And we are of the opinion that Nat Turner, Vesey and Gabriel did not shed many tears, ‘Toil, sweat and blood,’ yes, but not tears.”
After making a very militant beginning, so far as words could be militant, the march was called off. It was called off in the most undemocratic manner, without any consultation with the thousands of Negroes who were ready to march. Mr. Randolph announced that the march had not really been called off but only postponed. This was two years ago. Since then the movement nationally has been nothing more than a paper organization.
During these two years the United States entered the war as an active participant. Jim Crow, lynching, discrimination, segregation continued everywhere. Attacks on Negroes and
Negro communities became the order of the day. While this outrageous Situation was developing Mr. Randolph and the MOW leaders were stumbling along from one pronouncement to another, from one speech to the next. Randolph went over to full support ot the war and called for “national unity.” But Negroes found that they could not unite with those designated by the MOW leaders.
They could not unite with a government at Washington in war, because leading government officials had no inclination for “sociological experiment.” This is a new term for demands for democratic rights for Negroes, for freedom from lynching and the security of Negro neighborhoods from invasions by white mobs.
 
A Concrete Program Is Needed
Now, the leader of the MOW has had a revelation which takes on a sort of modified form of the Gandhi philosophy , of “non-violent resistance” or something known as “constitutional obedience.” The call for the July conference says that “we will ponder and discuss non-violent techniques for mass action that may some day point the way toward a foundation of peace for a new world.” (We can imagine with what profound interest the Negro delegates from Detroit, Beaumont, Newark, Alexandria, La., Florida and around Fort Bragge will listen to these discussions!)
The supreme need, of this, conference is to organize for ACTION and not more speech-making. There has been enough and too much of that already. We say again that the conference hall must not be a mere “Cave of the Winds.” The delegates must demand and insist on definite plans for action from Mr. Randolph and the other MOW leaders. The time for talk has long since passed.
One thing to be insisted on is the orientatipn of the MOW, in a very practical way, toward the organized labor movement. This means to call on the labor movement for support, to urge Negro workers to greater activity in the trade unions, to bring thousands of Negro workers into the MOW. If the MOW is to be an effective organization it must have a working class base and a working class membership.
 
MOW Must Become Working Class
Working class Negroes must rise to positions of leadership in the MOW. This must;! be real and not a fake. At present the MOW is led by middle class Negroes. Furthermore, we can see no reason why white workers should not be permitted to become members of the MOW. We have the opinion that one reason for excluding white people was the desire to exclude the Stalinists. But the most effective way to combat the Stalinists is to adopt a militant program which would automatically either exclude the Stalinists or render them impotent. But Mr. Randolph, in excluding the Stalinists, is in a very contradictory position. The Stalinists are warm and ardent supporters of the war – and so is Randolph. On the question of the main event of the day Randolph and the Stalinists stand together on the same platform.
The MOW should be made a genuinely democratic organization, with a real membership and controlled by that membership. This means democratically elected’officers in every branch and in the national organization.
The conference should adopt a militant and realistic program, specifically for the United States in the present concrete situation. The call to the conference contains far too many mushy and tender generalities.
The MOW, was called together for a MARCH ON WASHINGTON. There is greater need for such a. march how than two years ago. This, should be the main item on the agenda and all the other questions should be held over for more peaceful times and. occasions. It is all right for the leader of the MOW to indulge in philosophical musings on “non-violent techniques,” “the freedom of the world,” “peace for a new world,” the “brotherhood of man” and saving America “for God.” But that’s not the business of the conference.
After Detroit and Beaumont, the problem is to organize for saving the Negro masses in the United States and to secure for them SOCIAL, POLITICAL AND ECONOMICAL EQUALITY. A militant mass MARCH ON WASHINGTON will contribute more toward this end than anything else!
Workers all over the country are beginning to think on the question of independent working class political action. They are not ardent in their support of Roosevelt today. This does not mean that they will necessarily support Willkie or any other Republican in 1944.
Negroes too should fall in line with this current. They must join any movement for an Independent Working Class Labor Party. That is, a party formed of Negro and white workers, free from the control and domination of the two ruling class political parties, the Republican and Democratic Parties, Along with the main question of organizing the MARCH ON WASHINGTON, the Chicago conference might well give thorough consideration to the matter of independent working class political action and the formation of a Labor Party.
There are important things for the conference to do. We have mentioned a few of them. There may be more. The time has come for more action and less talk. While the MOW leaders talk and talk, the Klan and the native fascists incite to murder and pillage.
We do not believe that Negroes have no alternative to support of Axis fascism save crawling before American imperialism which Jim Crows and maltreats them. Negroes are of course against fascism. They are like the white workers who are also against. fascism. They will give no support to the Axis powers and, of course, they are correct. Labor Action and the Workers Party hold that the road to freedom, liberty and security for the Negro worker, is the same as the road the white worker must follow. They must go up that road together, arm in arm. That is the road of independent political action, of socialist political action; of political and economic action against capitalism and imperialism, whether the imperialism of the Axis powers or the “United” Nations; of the liberation of all oppressed and exploited peoples.
 




The “decision” on the settlement of the coal strike which is expected from the War Labor Board has not yet been announced as the time approaches for Labor Action to go to press. This is too bad. We would have liked to comment this week on what the board has to say and the “award” it makes, if any. But despite the fact that Labor Action goes to press before the WLB thunders forth again, there are a few significant happenings that require comment.
The first is the “fines” that Custodian Ickes threatened to levy against the miners. It is generally known that Ickes is Secretary of the Interior, Solid Fuels Administrator and Custodian of the Mines by directive of the President, following his “seizure” of the mines and making of them “United States property.”
We have commented in previous issues of this paper on the strange role of Mr. Ickes. He is mine custodian and the mines are “United States property,” but Mr. Ickes has no authority to deal with his new “employees” in the matter of wages and other matters involved in the present dispute! In all questions of contractual relations and wages, Ickes must take a back seat while the WLB takes over and does nothing that the miners can accept or agree with.
Although Mr. Ickes has no say in the matter of contracts and wages, it seems that he does have the authority to levy fines! We don’t know whether or not he has the power to collect the fines. What needs to be exposed is the manner in which Ickes handled this business of fines. There is a clause in the UMWA contract which says that if the miners go on strike during the life of the contract they shall be subject to a fine of $1.00 a day for the days each miner is on strike in violation of the contract.
 
Facts About the Contract
After the men had gone back to work following the first “truce” some operators attempted to levy fines for such “violations,” Ickes was against this, and so advised these operators.
When the second walk-out came on May 31 the miners had no contract with the operators or anyone else. Therefore they could not violate this or any other contract. Neither the government or the operators asked that the contract be extended. And yet it is because they were on strike during these five days that the miners were fined.
According to Ickes, it would be unjust for the operators to fine the miners for striking during a period in which the contract had been extended, but it was not unjust for the government to fine the miners for a walk-out at a time when the government had not asked for an extension of the contract, and when no contract, in fact, existed. Ickes perhaps would argue that the contract remains in operation automatically so long as the mines are “United States property.” This is an excellent example of the manner in which government bosses and bureaucrats interrupt and make “laws” to fit the occasion. Ickes was floored by the WLB and he tried a come-back, not against the WLB, but against the miners! Ickes, a government bureaucrat, is on a rampage, using his administrative post as a springboard.
Later he modified his order levying the fines. The miners owners were to be permitted to act as they saw fit. Operators in Pennsylvania and West Virginia employing 225,000 miners have already agreed to waive the fines. This means that few if any miners will be faced with the fines, since the order did not apply to the anthracite and captive workers.
 
A Behind-the-Scenes Fight
It is clear from all that is going on that the real battle from the side of the government and the operators is taking place behind the scenes. The WLB and Ickes maneuver with each other and against each other. The operators sit tight, grant nothing, still hoping that the government will pull them out of the ditch. That this is the situation is well illustrated by the latest move from the operators. The Central Pennsylvania Coal Producers Association, which had agreed to portal-to-portal pay of $1.30 a day, has now withdrawn from this agreement.
These operators say that they asked the UMWA to concur in an extension of this agreement beyond the one-year term which would expire April 1, 1944. This the UMWA would not agree to. We are of the opinion that pressure was put on these operators to try and get out of the agreement they had made for $1.30 portal-to-portal pay. If this agreement had been signed it would have set the standard for the rest of the country and by now the strike would have been settled.
There is strong evidence for the belief that the WLB and other New Deal government bosses do not want this strike settled in this manner. That is, they don’t want the operators and miners to come to agreement through collective bargaining processes between themselves and without the “aid” and intervention of the WLB:
The WLB has clearly demonstrated that it is against, genuine collective bargaining between employers and labor. Its whole handling of the mine strike has been an attempt to establish itself, a government board, as perpetual and decisive arbitrator. If the WLB can get away with this procedure, genuine collective bargaining will be a thing of the past.
 
Hold the Ranks
The actions of the WLB and Ickes in this strike give a clear indication of what is in store for labor if the unions do not arouse themselves from the dangerous slumber into which they have been lulled by the AFL-CIO leadership. An attempt is being made at the regimentation of labor by the government and under its direct supervision. The role of policeman will either be assigned to the WLB or this board will attempt to usurp such authority. What is more than tragic in this situation is the fact that leading officials of the AFL and the CIO have remained on the WLB throughout the mine dispute. Not only have they stayed there, but they have been part and parcel of the most outrageous unanimous decisions against the miners and their union.
All the miners need remember is what we have said again and again: they have an impregnable position, they are right, they can win. They must hold their ranks!
 





CIO Political Action and the Labor Party
The Statement on Political Action adopted at the recent convention of the CIO said: “It will not be the policy of the CIo in connection with the 1944 elections to build labor’s political organization in the form of a third party, but to abstain from and discourage any move in that direction ... a third party at this time will only serve to divide labor and the progressive forces and assure the election of our political enemies.”
The resolution talks about a “third party” and does not use the expression, “Labor Party.” This kind of talk obscures the real issue and everything that is relevant in connection with independent political action by the working class. We should not be concerned with the number of parties in the United States, but with their character, program, composition and the all-important question: what group or class do they serve, represent and protect?
The Republican and Democratic Parties do not serve, represent or protect the working class. They serve, represent and protect the boss class, the ruling class of capitalists.
This is just as true of the “New Deal” Democratic Party as of the “New Freedom” Democratic Party of Woodrow Wilson or the Republican Party of Herbert Hoover. The same would be true of some “third party,” such as might call itself a “Progressive Party” or “People’s Party.”
There was some talk ot forming such a party around former Senator Norris and other people who go by the name of “liberals.” Such a party would be a capitalist party and could hot be any improvement over the ill-fated New Deal.
A Labor Party would not be a “third party.” It would be a FIRST party, so far as we workers are concerned. It would be a party that the mass of workers would give allegiance to. The CIO should abstain from any move in the direction of a “third party.” It should, however, encourage any move in the direction of: the formation of a Labor Party in the United States.
If the labor leadership doesn’t move in this direction, and soon, the most intelligent and militant of the secondary leaders have the responsibility for taking the initiative. There is plenty of time to get a Labor Party movement under way for the 1944 elections.
Philip Murray and the other CIO leaders will hang on to Roosevelt’s coat-tails until they are battered and bruised beyond recognition. These leaders have already demonstrated that they have unlimited capacity for taking punishment. And what is their response? More tears and more supplication. It’s about time, it seems to us, that labor began thinking of getting the capitalist bosses and their stooges in Washington into the position of beggars and supplicants.
Labor Action and the Workers Party believe that the first political step for labor is the formation of a militant labor party, free from the capitalist Democratic and Republican Parties.
Such a party would not have given a no-strike pledge, it would not have accepted the Little Steel formula. Such a party would have backed the miners’ strikes without any ifs and ands. Such a party would not be frightened by Roosevelt’s work-or-fight decree or by Smith-Connally acts.
This free, independent and militant Labor Party would educate its members and the working class in the principles of aggressive trade unionism and working class political action.
Roosevelt, Willkie and the bosses would not like this but – so what? The masses of the workers would like it because they would know that such a Labor Party would protect, serve and defend their interests.
*

Davis, the Times and White Collar Workers
The little patent lawyer, Davis, who is head of the anti-labor WLB, is very downcast over the low wages of the white collar workers. The New York Times is also very excited about the condition of the office slaves. Aside from the hypocrisies of Davis and the Times, which don’t deserve much attention, all that can be said is what every worker knows: let the white collar workers organize and fight!
One other suggestion is in order. Let Merrill and the other Stalinists who head the CIO white collar workers’ unions, pay more attention to the misfortunes of the members of their unions and less attention to the Stalinist bureaucracy in Moscow. The Stalinist leaders of the white collar unions might try a season of organizing the white collar workers and leave the opening of a “second front” to the capitalist politicians and generals.
 





On the Hiring of Negroes at East Alton, Ill.
The Western Cartridge Company does not employ Negroes at its East Alton, Ill., plant for the reason that “local residents” have maintained a hostile attitude toward hiring of Negroes at Western Cartridge or other local industrial plants. The company says that there is no Negro poplation in East Alton or other towns in that industrial area.
Negroes have had a thorny road in this area for many decades. It was near East Alton in Alton, Ill., that Lovejoy the abolitionist was murdered by a pro-slavery mob. Lovejoy was the publisher of an anti-slavery newspaper. The pro-slavery gangsters had already destroyed three presses belonging to Lovejoy and murdered him in an attack to destroy the fourth press which he had bought.
We take it that there are anti-Negro gangsters in this area today ready to tear down the plant of the Western Cartridge Company, should it employ Negro workers. We are also of the opinion that there are a lot of white workers in that plant who have no objection to working with Negroes. Those who do object will learn to work with Negroes if the Western Cartridge Company goes ahead and puts Negroes to work in the plant. This has happened in other situations and can be repeated all over the United States.
If a strike were in progress at Western Cartridge, and scabs were being run into the plant, the company officials would be yelling their heads off for the city, county, state and federal governments to “protect our loyal employees.”
The union can do a job here, too. It can demand that Negroes be hired. It can protect these Negro workers with union defense guards. These union defense guards can protect Negro workers not only in the plant, but if necessary, to and from the plant, against the attacks of anti-Negro, anti-union hoodlums.
 
*

An Incident on a Train in Texas
Down in Galveston, Texas, two Negro soldiers were refused a seat in the dining car of a Missouri Pacific train. They were told by the steward and the conductor to “go back where you belong, you can’t eat in here.”
The Negro waiters, backed up by the train porters, refused to serve the white people in the dining ear. They refused to feed anybody until the ban against the Negro soldiers was lifted. The white guests insisted on being served but the waiters held the line.
Finally the steward and conductor surrendered, and the Negro soldiers were served along with the white people. Later the Missouri Pacific issued an order that Negroes be served on its trains along with other people.
This should serve as an example to all handkerchief-heads and Uncle Toms, white and black, and, especially, to all unions.
 




The “stoppage” in the New York dress industry which began Tuesday morning, and the reasons for the strike given by the ILGWU leadership, raise some interesting questions.
In the first place, President Dubinsky and General Manager Hochman say that the “stoppage” is “spontaneous.” What does this mean when the facts in the case are taken into consideration? The union asked for an increase in pay, or “wage equalization,” The employers refused. Then the unions asked the employers to consent to arbitration. This request was presented to the employers in September 23, four months ago. All that the employer associations have done since then is stall. They wanted the OPA to approve an increase before they discussed wage increases. The union replied correctly that “we are not concerned with the OPA. We have no standing before the OPA. We don’t participate in profits.”
Furthermore, Mr. Dubinsky declared that “We cannot hold back our workers any longer, and we will make no more attempts to do so.” At another point Dubinsky said’ “All we can say is that our worker’s will not carry the burden for the continually rising cost of living. The employers have continually evaded and have finally rejected our offer of arbitration. The conferences are over. The workers will now take such action as they see fit and we cannot stop them.”
These are brave new words by Dubinsky. Not only brave, but democratic new words: “The workers will take such action as they see fit.” But in the circumstances as related by Dubinsky, they don’t add up to spontaneity. There have been long negotiations which got nowhere. Of course these workers are disgusted and want to strike. What else can they do? But there is nothing spontaneous about it. After weeks of organized and planned negotiations they got nothing. Then no doubt they began putting pressure on their leaders, Dubinsky and Hochman. This is perhaps the “spontaneous” aspect of the situation. They want the leaders to quit horsing around, get results and deliver the goods.
There is something else interesting about this “stoppage” that makes one wonder whether or not Dubinsky’s declarations are so brave. Is the stoppage a demand for a wage increase? No, the demand is for the employers to agree to “submit the controversy to arbitration.” That is, after four months of stalling by the employers they are now to have months more while a Labor Department conciliator investigates, then reports to Madam Perkins. Then Secretary Perkins must meditate on the matter and decide whether or not to certify the case to the War Labor Board. After running through all this red tape, the WLB may get the case and meditate for a few weeks. The board may then decide to order the employers to submit to arbitration. And by this time the Fourth of July may have arrived.
 
Can Cut Through Maze
The dress workers of course can cut through this maze. Should the stoppage involve the majority of the workers the WLB may decide to take the case directly and render a decision in about a week. Thousands of workers away from the sewing machines may have more influence on the WLB than all the talk about arbitration. And, after all, these workers are employed by and paid, by the dress manufacturers, and not by the WLB. Idle machines don’t produce any profits.
Dubinsky says that “real” wages in the industry are the same as in 1933. The average wage is $32 a week for about seven months in the year. An increase of $25,000,000 in volume of business last year over 1941 brought the gross income of the industry to the highest point since 1933.
The most interesting observation made by Dubinsky is in connection with the Little Steel wage formula of the War Labor Board. He said that the 10 per cent increase of August 1941 had been absorbed by the increase in living costs and any new wage rise would have to be above the Little Steel formula. Dubinsky said that the Little Steel formula “has outlived its usefulness and it is not a proper equalization formula under present conditions.”
The fact is, as pointed out previously by Labor Action, the Little Steel formula had outlived its usefulness immediately after it was announced. It was never a formula for increasing real wages. It didn’t even bring the wages of the steel workers up to the level necessary to bring the income of the workers abreast of the increase in the cost of living. The recommendations of the WLB panel made this clear. All this award does is to guarantee that workers don’t starve, go naked and live in the parks. And no WLB intervention was needed to guarantee this. As long as the employers are in possession of millions of dollars of government contracts, from which they are getting huge profits, they will see to it that workers get the minimum necessary to keep them alive and in condition to produce.
Dubinsky, like other labor leaders seems to be much in love with the words “readjustment” and “equalization” in connection with demands for more wages. They shy away from such good old-fashioned expressions as “wage increase,” “boost in pay” and “a raise.” But that is what labor needs and wants. No hifalutin’ phrases are necessary to express this demand. Labor doesn’t want its wages “readjusted.” It wants them made bigger. It doesn’t want any “equalization.” It wants more dollars in the pay envelope every week so that it can buy more food, clothing and the other things necessary for life and happiness.
We don’t hear employers talking about the readjustment or equalization of profits. They are for bigger profits and bigger salaries. As a means to this end, they are all for the “readjustment” and “equalization” of wages.
 




As this issue of Labor Action goes to press, the miners give no sign of weakening or of giving up their just demands made on the government and the coal operators. So far they have stood their ground, and the latest announcement coming from the meeting of the Policy Committee is to the effect that if their just and fair demands are not met they will lay down their tools at the zero hour and “will not trespass upon the properties of the coal operators in the absence of a contract.”
The miners ore correct, they are right. They are leading the fight of labor all over the country for relief from the Little Steel formula and the “hold the line” decree of Roosevelt. They need and should have the full and complete support of organized labor and of every single working man and working woman. There can be no question about this. When Lewis says that “the mine workers are hungry,” we know exactly what he is talking about. Every worker knows from his own experience with taxes and profiteering prices what Lewis is talking about. Furthermore, Roosevelt, the WLB and the employers know what Lewis is talking about.
Perhaps Green, Murray, some other CIO leaders and the Stalinists don’t understand. The Stalinists don’t want to understand. They are busy helpin<g the bosses get more production, and helping the WLB get its “incentive pay” plan across.
We mustn’t be deterred from giving full support to the miners just because Green, Murray, R.J. Thomas and the Stalinists are attempting to becloud the issue by flag-waving and heroic but feeble gestures. The Little Steel formula and the Roosevelt wage decree have the workers bound. If they submit, they will be bound even tighter in the days to come.
This is what the miners are fighting against: the Little Steel formula and the Roosevelt wage decree. All unions and workers who are opposed to these attacks on labor must support the UMWA. The miners have a right to expect this; it is they who are leading this struggle.
The coal operators have rejected every proposal made by the mine workers. These mine operators who are merely tools of the House of Morgan, the House of Mellon and the anthracite coal-carrying railroads, are counting on the WLB, the WPB, the OPA and Byrnes to win a victory for them while they lurk in the background but, as the miners charge, remain “in constant communication with certain political figures in Washington and from them receive encouragement to deny the coal miners of the country an increase in wages.” We agree, and the workers of the country should know that the miners speak the truth when they say of the War Labor Board that it “wields the headsman’s axe against the workers of the country. It has fallen to a low estate. It has breached its agreement with labor when it publicly substituted political expediency for equity in the settlement of disputes. The board is malignant in its prejudice against the United Mine Workers of America and its members. The board has already rendered a decision in the mine workers’ case. Its chief headsman so announced again on Saturday, April 24, when he said that the board would follow its ritualistic limitations in deciding the mine workers’ case.”
This is a correct statement of the case except it must be pointed out that this WLB really never had any “agreement with labor.” How could this outfit of big business men, lawyers and college professors (“the public”) have a genuine agreement with labor? The labor members of the board have no influence. The majority of them have only been captives of the board majority, which was composed of the business men and their stooges, the college professors.
It was a tragic situation which developed when labor permitted its leaders to drag the whole labor movement into the web of the WLB, this “discredited political agency” as it is called in the statement of the UMWA Policy Committee.
For at least six months the leaders of the AFL and the CIO have been expressing mild objections to the policy and procedure of the WLB. Such stink surrounds this outfit that even Murray and Green have had to hold their noses. And yet they have been telling labor that they must hold on to the WLB. The AFL and CIO leaders retained their back row seats on the board.
Why should labor hold on to the WLB? All that the CIO and AFL leaders can answer is that “it is the best we’ve got.” This should make any militant worker sick enough to vomit. Because it is a lie. This capitalist board isn’t all that labor’s got. In fact, it isn’t anything that labor’s got. This board belongs to the bosses and the Democratic Party. (If the Republican Party were the government, it would belong to the bosses and the Republican Party. There’s no difference.) Are Murray, Green and the other AFL-CIO bureaucrats too stupid to understand this?
The miners have some understanding of this matter. That’s why they press their demands in the manner they do. They insist on collective bargaining with the employers and not with the WLB. They don’t work for the WLB. Thirty thousand or more miners have already demonstrated their understanding of these questions by laying down their picks and shovels and refraining from trespassing on their employers’ property.
The outcome of the first phase of this struggle may be determined before Labor Action appears again. We say the first phase because if the miners do not win this time they will not surrender. They will surely try again. We do not believe the Little Steel formula will stand. We do not believe that the Rooesvelt wage decree will stand. The final decision must and will be rendered by the working class.
The mine workers have taken the lead. Murray, Green and the AFL-CIO leadership are wrong. Labor must march around and past this leadership, and give full support to the mine workers. THE MINERS ARE RIGHT!
 




The present strike of the miners is the high point of a half century of almost continuous fighting by these workers to improve their working conditions, gain a decent standard of living and protection from injury and violent death by cave-in and explosion. To gain what little they have the coal diggers have been forced to go on strike almost every year since 1899.
All of these strikes were, like the present stoppage, concerned with wages and working conditions. They cover the administrations of eight Presidents from McKinley to the present Roosevelt. These mine strikes took place in peacetime and in wartime. In 1917–18, over 100,000 miners were on strike. In 1919, over 450,000 miners struck for a 60 per cent increase in pay. They got 27 per cent. In 1935, over 400,000 participated in a strike, and the captive mine strike of 1942 called out 325,000.
The government, in 1919, was able to obtain an injunction making it mandatory that the strike stop. This was the first year that John L. Lewis was president of the UMWA, and William Green was secretary-treasurer. When the officers failed to call off the strike according to the injunction, they were cited for contempt. Before being brought to trial, however, the union officials submitted, Lewis taking the position: “We are Americans. We cannot fight our government.”
 
What Victory Will Mean
It is interesting that, through all these years, the bosses have never been able to break this union; not even with the aid of court injunctions, threatened prosecution, clubbing and murder by the coal and iron police, and assaults from the National Guard and the Regular Army. Through all this persecution, the privation of long and bitter strikes, the enmity of government officials and labor-hating judges, the miners’ union stands today, stronger than ever, the rock of the American labor movement, the vanguard of the trade union movement in battling for the economic demands of labor in the United States.
Despite this, despite their long past of victories and hard-won struggles, the mine workers face the gravest danger now of their whole militant career. They can suffer a major defeat. And a defeat now for the miners means a set-back for the whole labor movement in the United States. No worker, no member of any union, Should disregard this warning. If the miners win, it will be a victory for every worker, for every union.
The struggle being waged by the miners’ is a struggle against the Little Steel formula, against Roosevelt’s “hold the line” decree and against substitution of government boards for the employer in collective bargaining procedure.
If the miners win, the Little Steel formula will be broken, the “hold the line” decree will have to be modified, the WLB will be reduced to a decorative committee with no real authority – and, above all, the ranks of labor will have received a lesson in the way a union should go about gaining its objectives.
The bosses and their stooges in Congress and on the daily papers understand this. They are united as one man against any concessions being made to the mine workers. They know, and say, that if the miners get a wage increase, demands will come in from other unions which will have to be granted. These increases will cut into profits and reduce the amount available for dividends, big salaries, commissions to war contract brokers, anti-labor propaganda, lobbying in Washington and bribes.
 
The Mongrel Press
The entire boss capitalist press is calling for the suppression of the miners and a denial of their demands. This is to be expected, and as it should be. There is no reason to expect the capitalist press to defend the interests of coal miners or of any other workers. Hence the attitude of the New York Times, the New York Herald Tribune, the Chicago Tribune, the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette and the Scripps-Howard papers should surprise no one.
Perhaps the miners expected better treatment from that part of the capitalist press that poses as liberal and friendly to labor. For example, that journalistic mongrel known as >PM has always posed as a friend of labor. The Sunday, May 2, edition of PM carried the following head on the front page around a cartoon of Lewis: “Don’t Let This Man Run (and Ruin) the U.S.A.” The second page featured a signed editorial by James Wechsler, ex-Stalinist stooge and PM’s labor reporter.
Here are a few of the gems that Wechsler hands out: “The coal miners must learn ... that their best hope for a decent and fair solution of their troubles lies in Franklin D. Roosevelt, not in John L. Lewis. The stand of this newspaper is plain. We are against John L. Lewis and the strike which he – without daring to issue a strike call – has encouraged and blessed. We believe that the President of the United States must be supported in any moves he makes to insure the uninterrupted production of coal. When this strike ends – no matter how terrible the circumstances – we shall fight, in spite of John L. Lewis, for a full airing and a fair settlement of the miners’ grievances. And we shall also fight to put John L. Lewis out of the business of labor-leading.”
We don’t quote this because we fear the influence of PM on the miners. We know better than that. We quote it to show where the so-called liberal press stands; to demonstrate that PM is no different from the New York Times, the Scripps-Howard papers or the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. All of these papers are willing for the miners grievances to be “aired” and “settled fairly.” But the miners don’t want air!
David Lawrence, in one of his Today in Washington columns, seems to think that the miners are fortunate in having Lewis as their leader. Lawrence says: “Lewis has again out-maneuvered the Administration and ... he has emerged as the most aggressive champion of organized labor that the country has today.”
Despite the fact that Lawrence writes from the position of an anti-Administration commentator, and is certainly no friend of labor, what he says here is simple fact, clear to all except such weasel-word “liberals” as PM and its Wechsler.
The last comment we wish to make about the Wechsler-PM editorial is the threat to run Lewis out of the labor movement. We are glad that Wechsler added this. It makes the editorial funny. Just think, PM, with no influence at all anywhere, and Wechsler will fight to get a new leader for the miners. PM really hasn’t influence enough to drive a two-bit Willie Bioff from the labor movement.
The New Republic, one of the “liberal” weeklies, also commented on the strike. This journal very generously admits that the miners have grievances and that “in many respects they have behaved better than their employers.” But “President Roosevelt’s answer to Lewis’ challenge was the only possible one.” Evidently the New Republic is of the opinion that it was not possible for the miners to get an increase in pay and thus end the strike by that procedure.
This “liberal” weekly thinks that the “no-trespass” slogan of the, miners has a “ridiculous” sound, but it gives the miners “a feeling of standing on respectable ground.” The New Republic goes on: “and though soldiers may not be able to force men to work, they certainly could prevent pickets from keeping away from work any who wished to obey the President of the United States instead of the president of the United Mine Workers.”
That is, the New Republic is saying here that the Army might not be able to break the strike by forcing loyal union miners to work, but the Army could break the strike by covering the scabs who attempted to get through the picket lines and into the mines.
These are samples from the “liberal” press. They will come to the aid of the mine workers AFTER the war is over! In the meantime, these workers can remain hungry, and the coal operators can work full blast at increasing their profits, dividends and salaries.
 
The Labor Misleaders
Did the mine workers fare any better at the hands of the leaders of labor? They certainly have the right to expect different treatment from those who lead labor. But did they get it? They did not!
Emil Rieve, president of the Textile Workers Union, CIO, and a member of the CIO Executive Council, speaking at the opening of the convention of that organization in New York on May 10, had this to say in connection with the no-strike pledge given by the labor bureaucrats to Roosevelt: “Nothing has happened which should cause labor to deviate from that pledge one iota. No matter how great the grievances of the miners, and that they are great I would be the first to acknowledge; no matter how much the coal operators had sought to take advantage of the situation in their hope of destroying the solidarity of the miners, there is no justification for the complete stoppage of production.”
Here is speaking the complete stooge and traitor. No matter what happens, no matter what attacks they suffer, the workers must go right on producing. No matter if they are hungry; no matter if the cost of living and taxes keep going up; no matter if the coal operators did get a government subsidy and permission to boost the price of coal – what does it all matter? The miners and other workers, according to Rieve, must grin and bear it.
At the recent conference of the AUW in Detroit, while the rank and file delegates were applauding and cheering the miners, the leaders were trying to explain what a fearful man Lewis is. Walter Reuther held that the UAW should back the economic demands of the miners, but “we ought not to support their strike or Lewis’ leadership.” Reuther said that Lewis is only interested in fighting the President, and is using the miners in his personal quarrel with Roosevelt.
Richard Frankensteen, who acted as strike-breaker during the North American Aviation strike, is, of course, against the miners’ strike. Frankensteen is “for the demands of the United Mine Workers, but I’m against their strike 100 per cent and without reservations.”
Despite the tirades of Reuther and Frankensteen, the delegates gave the loudest ovatioA to a delegate who said that labor should not straddle on the mine strike by “supporting the UMWA in their wage demands and not John Lewis.” Another delegate said: “Lewis and the mine workers are fighting today the fight that you and I and the entire CIO should be making.”
All of these situations demonstrate just how the matter stands. The miners should know who their friends are and from whom they can expect support. That they cannot get support from the capitalist press is clear. They understand this full well. But it is also true that they cannot get support from the so-called liberal press; these puppets who talk about fighting for the miners after the strike is over, or after the war is over. The leaders of the AFL and the CIO cannot be depended on. They too are against the strike; they stick to the no-strike pledge they, gave to Roosevelt without consulting their membership. And the worst, of course, have been the Stalinists and their slander sheet, the Daily Worker, who have waged an all-out fight against the miners. But we’ll return to these RATS some other time.
 
For or Against Lewis?
It is clear now, however, that the miners have powerful support. This support comes from the millions of organized and unorganized workers in the United States. These workers know what is at stake; they know that the miners are right and they know that the UMWA is doing what every international, union should be doing today.
The delegate to the UAW conference hit the nail on the head when he said that workers should not listen to talk about supporting the miners while being against Lewis. This is the rankest sort of nonsense. Even the reactionary David Lawrence recognizes this when he says: “If, when it is all over, the miners get more pay – and it appears they will somehow – you can chalk up another sensational victory for John L. Lewis, Who serves his union well for that $25,000-a-year salary which he earns many times over.”
In this particular struggle, to talk about being for the “economic demands” of the miners, but against the strike and against Lewis, is outright betrayal on the part of labor’s leaders. Any talk of this kind coming from the rank and file is plain stupidity. We can criticize Lewis; we have criticized Lewis; and we will criticize Lewis. But our general criticisms of Lewis have nothing to do with the present situation. In this situation, we judge Lewis according to how he lives up to his responsibilities as a union leader, according to how he leads the miners in their fight. Lewis is the leader of a union that is waging a battle for all labor – and waging it properly.
The test of a labor leader is very simple. Does he recognize the existence of these conditions and does he attempt to do something effective to improve conditions.
The miners and other workers attempted to improve their conditions by negotiations and got nowhere. They got nowhere with the employers and they got nowhere with the government. The strike was forced on the miners by the employers and the government. Every other union was faced with the same situation: strike or go hungry.
There was no other alternative but to strike. The miners and other workers have no other weapon. The daily press knows this. That’s why it can only lie and distort the facts. Roosevelt knows this. That’s why he tried to be alternately friendly and tough. The AFL and CIO leaders also know the truth, but they are cowards floating between the pressure of Roosevelt and the upsurge of their own membership.
 
Can’t Compromise Here
To be “against Lewis” in this fight is to be against the miners and against the interests of the entire labor movement.
The issue is NOT Lewis; it is the MINERS, the miners’ UNION, and the miners’ DEMANDS.
There can be no compromise here, no fence-sitting and no straddling. No worker, and especially no miner, should have any doubts about this. If the miners waver for one second they are lost. If they do not get and hold the complete support of all the ranks of labor, their struggle will be immeasurably weakened. This means that weaker unions, less militant unions and those not so well led as the UMWA, regardless of their size, will have no chance whatsoever to improve their wage position.
The bosses want to break the miners because they are the strongest and most militant link in the labor chain. They have called to their aid, THEIR Congress, THEIR government, THEIR press, THEIR pulpit, THEIR radio and THEIR lieutenants in the labor movement. These are all against the miners and their strike.
But over against these stand the solid and disciplined ranks of the UMWA and the support of millions of workers who wish that they had a union like the miners: unafraid, unbowed and determined. This is something; in fact, it can be decisive and with this the miners can win.
 




PITTSBURGH – As this is being written, the miners are returning to work following the fifteen day “truce” arranged between their Policy Committee and the new coal czar, the Secretary of the Interior. As the chairman at one local meeting which I attended put it, “Mr. Lewis has granted Mr. Ickes a fifteen-day truce.” And as far as I could learn, this is the way the miners view the matter: it is only a truce.
The battle isn’t over yet. The miners haven’t the least intention of giving up their demands. They are determined about these demands, and it can be said plainly that they will never agree to any compromise that does not result in substantially higher wages and improved working conditions. On this matter of better working conditions, I will say more later.
It is necessary to emphasize that while the mine workers have formally agreed to the. “truce” and are back at work, they do not like this truce. Numbers of them that I talked to, individually and in groups, remarked that this thing has been going oh long enough: “We’ve already given them a thirty-day extension.”
From what I have heard in getting around from place to place, I am of the opinion that thousands of these miners really did not want to go back to work until they got their new contract.
 
Maintained Discipline
It is also important to emphasize as strongly as possible that, while they went back to work, they maintained the same superb discipline with which they began their action and the same discipline that kept them off the job for the four days from Saturday to Tuesday.
Even in Fayette County, where the return was somewhat in advance of other Western Pennsylvania counties, the movement was not as stated by the Pittsburgh Sun-Telegraph (Hearst), which paper carried the head on Monday afternoon, “Fayette Miners Troop Into Pits.” Even the most casual observation in Fayette County on Monday afternoon and evening revealed the fact that there was no danger of a jam at the mine entrance caused by men rushing back to work.
This was very clearly demonstrated by the fact that all through this region coke ovens, which bad been charged for pulling within 96 hours, had not been pulled by Monday night. At Allison, a miner told me that the ovens there would have been pulled sometime on Monday if the men had been at work. In discussing, the matter with the mine superintendent, however, the men had decided that they would carry out the instructions of their Policy Committee and return on Tuesday. Furthermore, the fact that Fayette County was ahead of other counties in getting going was due to instructions from the president of District No. 4, William J. Hynes, who went on the air Sunday night, immediately following Roosevelt’s speech, and gave instructions to return to work on Monday morning. The Pittsburgh papers which carried dispatches of the Associated Press and the United Press failed to inform their readers that this was the situation in District 4, made up of Fayette and Greene Counties.
In other counties, notably Washington and Alleghany, the miners held strictly to the Tuesday opening instructions. Meetings were held by the various locals and a vote was taken. While voting on the return was more or less a matter of formality, it was necessary to discuss the arrangement of the shifts; that is, which of the three shifts that came off at the beginning of the strike should be the first to begin work. At one local meeting which I attended, this matter consumed three-fourths of the time of the meeting.
 
Papers Distorted Facts
It can be said that the daily papers distorted the issues of the strike, fabricated events and deliberately lied. They acted precisely as they have in the past. It was their purpose, of course, to make the, reading public, far away from the scene, believe that the miners’ grievances were a sort of figment of the imagination, and that if it had not been for Lewis they would have continued at work. This is far from the truth!
It is no wonder that representatives of the daily papers were not tolerated in the mine fields if their presence became known. At one local meeting I was stopped at the door and told that I could not remain until I had been approved by the local’s president. I used the last number of Labor Action with the front page head “THE COAL MINERS ARE RIGHT” as my credentials. This was all that was necessary to prove that I was not there to “misquote and lie,” as one of the officers put it. One officer said to me that “if you had been representing one of the Pittsburgh papers we would have thrown you out on your head.”
Anyone who traveled through the region in the past few days would wonder just how the daily papers and the press associations did get the “news” which was carried by their papers. The reporters were not at the meetings, and they were not accepted by the miners individually. Even in talking to the men individually and in small groups it was clear that they were suspicious of anyone who looked like a newspaper man. Many of them told me so in plain words that could be easily understood.
 
Ranks Held Solid
This is the real story of how the men returned to work and what they thought of the way the daily papers were handling their strike. Despite the fact that the men wanted to work because they need the money, they maintained discipline and kept their ranks solid. Hundreds of deserted pits attested to this. Sunday afternoon and all day Monday, in five or six countries, I saw only two men “trespass on company property.” This was at one mine of the Pittsburgh Coal Co., where two men were pushing a mine car up the tracks.
In trying to discover the reasons behind this solidarity and determination, I talked to many miners about wages, working conditions and prices in the company stores. While conditions may vary a little from place to place, and company to company, conditions are fairly general for the whole bituminous field.
While it is known that deductions are made from the miners’ pay for such items as powder, caps and light, it is not known that this is a rule and just how much it amounts to. At the Pittsburgh Coal Co., the largest producer, a miner must pay out of his wages eight cents a stick for his powder. He uses from five to ten sticks a day. He is charged eight cents each for firing caps and may use four or five a day. He pays eight cents a day for his light, whether or not he works.
Everyone knows that there is slate in coal deposits and that the slate is waste material. Miners do not get paid for the first twelve inches of slate. Slate and deductions for powder, caps and light reduce his pay. A man who is rated at eight or ten dollars a day can have his income cut to six or eight dollars a day after paying for his powder, caps, light, and putting in his time shooting down eleven and a half inches of slate, for which he is not paid, with powder which he has paid for. Add to this the fact that they do not work a full year, and it is easy for anyone except a captive reporter of the daily press to understand why the miners did not flock back to the pits.
A loader for the Pittsburgh Coal Co. has a rate of eighty-seven cents a ton. He can load about ten tons a day. But for one reason or another, he may not get the coal to load. Or, as explained to me by some men at one mine, the pumping system may not work or may be inadequate. Then they must work in water, which not only endangers their health but makes it impossible to load the coal and get the daily ten tons. These are some of the reasons why the miners do not make enough money to live on.
The matter of prices at the company stores in the mine patches is another grievance. This, of course, is the basis of the rapid rise in the cost of living in the mine field. Dozens of miners talked to me about the high cost of living. At one company store, a rather elaborate and gaudy affair, a sort of department store, I saw sweet potatoes at two pounds for 35 cents; ordinary apples, two pounds for 29 cents; and some wilted spinach, two pounds for 29 cents. The miner who was conducting me around said that “common (white) potatoes” had advanced in the last three months from sixty cents to ninety cents to $1.10 a peck. In thirty days, cabbage advanced from nine cents to nineteen cents a pound.
 
Their Attitude Toward Lewis
These things that I report here, are what make the ordinary miner act as he does. These are the ordinary everyday things they talk about when you discuss the strike with them. They want more money because, with the high prices, they can’t live on their present incomes. They want better working conditions, because present physical conditions in the mines cut down their incomes, jeopardize their wealth and endanger their lives.
I talked to them about John L. Lewis and Roosevelt’s speech. Most of those that I talked to were not much impressed with the speech. Because to them the speech didn’t seem to bear on their daily lives in the mines and mine communities. They have an idea that Roosevelt can do something for them, but they now expect him to act in their favor. However, they will be disappointed if they do not COMPEL him to act that way, because he certainly has no desire to do so. I came across a few miners in Fayette County who expressed great confidence in Roosevelt. One man also said that the reason that Lewis was willing to confer with Ickes was that “he seen he was swamped.”
As far as I could learn from the men that I talked to, there was no heat for or against Lewis. He is their recognized leader and they take his instructions in a most forthright manner. They seem willing to obey and abide by whatever action is taken by the Policy Committee. It was clear, however, in their meetings and in conversation, that they expect an increase in pay. They are confident they will get it. At one meeting the chairman said: “We have already won, a victory.”
One thing that seemed to give a great deal of satisfaction Is their belief that they have successfully side-stepped the War Labor Board. They believe that Ickes, the official representative of their “new employer” will find a way around that will produce at least a portion of the increase they are demanding.
 




The attempt by the coal operators, government officials and the daily capitalist press to defeat the mine workers and to wreck their union proceeds with increased vigor and determination. The whole boss class in the United States is engaged in this campaign and its chief weapon today is the War Labor Board.
The latest tantrum of the WLB was its “order” to the coal companies and to the UMWA to resume collective bargaining negotiations. The board, however, did not stop here. It issued a “directive order” as follows: “The board instructs the operators not to proceed with collective bargaining until both parties are ready to proceed under the auspices and instructions of the division of the board. No other agency of the government is now authorized to direct otherwise.”
In the light of such an order, it is important to ask just what kind of collective bargaining this WLB has in mind? If the WLB has even the slightest interest in the resumption of collective bargaining it would not be putting on the present show. The brute fact is that if it is collective bargaining that the WLB is interested in, it should have directed the coal companies to resume negotiations with the UMWA. It was the companies that stalled negotiations by refusing to make any concessions whatsoever.
There is reason to believe that the coal operators knew in advance that they would be backed up by the WLB. Every proposal made by the miners was rejected by the operators. They stood pat on their decision to grant nothing. Theirs was an “I don’t know nothin’” attitude. They said on a large scale what every little jackleg foreman has been saying for over a year: “Take it to the WLB.”
 
WLB Bombast
What does the WLB mean by resuming negotiations “under the auspices and instructions” of the board? What instructions will the board give the miners and operators even before they resume negotiations?”!)? the board has authority to give instructions, then why hasn’t this board the authority to decide the case now and make an award? We ask this because negotiations went on for several weeks, and broke down because the operators refused to make any concession whatsoever, no matter from what direction the proposal came. The coal companies stood pat and demanded unconditional surrender from the UMWA.
This little board knows all of this and if, as it says, the board alone has the authority to handle this case, then why doesn’t the board handle the case in a responsible way? At present this WLB gives the impression that its chief interest is only to whip the UMWA into submission.
What did the WLB mean by its demagogic, inane and bombastic statement about Lewis “defying the lawfully established procedures of the government of the United States ... this defiance challenges the sovereignty of the United States in time of war and gives aid and comfort to our enemies.” This board calls itself, in some sense, a judicial body. But the above quoted screech sounds like it came from a cheap Hearst editor, a Pegler, or a Stalinist hatchetman.
The UMWA is a real union of a half million militant workers who know that they have just grievances. They know farther that they are being given the runaround by the employers and the WLB. They know that posing this fight as a patriotic struggle against Lewis is primarily an attempt either to destroy their union as a militant organization of workers, or to force it into impotence as they have almost succeeded in doing with other unions such as those, under the leadership of Green, Murray and the Stalinists. The employer members of the WLB and their controlled stooges, the “public members,” are aided and abetted by their labor lieutenants on the board.
No matter what any individual miner thinks about Lewis, if he has any intelligence at all he knows that Lewis is not the issue – but hunger, misery, unbearable working conditions and a concerted attempt to wreck the union. The miners are resolved, and they are right, that this, shall not be accomplished by the operators, by the WLB – nor by the two working together.
 
What Is the Issue?
In its “unanimous statement” (which means that the CIO-AFL members voted for it) the WLB says: “the issue now confronting the the nation in this dispute is whether Mr. Lewis is above and beyond the laws which apply to all other citizens of the United States.” This is not the issue, and this board knows it. There are several issues. The main issue is whether or not the wages of the miners, which average around $35 a week, shall be brought up to the $46 average for aircraft, $51 for automobile workers and $61 for ship workers. This is what the miners are primarily interested in, and the miners are right.
Another issue is to discover what the WLB means when it says that that the “defiance” of Lewis is “the only thing that stands in the way of the working out of a new contract for the mine workers by orderly, peaceful procedure in accordance with the order of the NWLB ... and the national stabilization policy under the Act of Congress of October 2, 1942.”
This is sheer nonsense or worse. How about the operators? What did they do at the time when “orderly, peaceful procedure” was in progress? What did they think of the “sovereignty of the United States in time of war”? Have the operators given any “aid and comfort to our enemies”? The board is strangely silent on all of this.
Despite all of this, the UMWA has agreed to extend the “truce” to May 31. This extension was granted at the request of Mr. Ickes, who wrote to the UMWA expressing the “hope that by this action the way will be open for immediate collective bargaining conferences.”
The union assumed that this statement meant that Ickes had some intention and authority, as “custodian of the mines,” to initiate collective bargaining procedures. The WLB contested this and the very next day the papers carried a letter from Mr. Ickes to the union saying that, “as I told you on Sunday, May 2, the President’s executive order does not give me the power to negotiate a contract with the United Mine Workers nor do I have the power to institute collective bargaining conferences between the mine workers and the owners of the mines. In addition, I have said from the very beginning, any contract must have the approval of the WLB.”
 
What Are Ickes’ Powers?
This is plain and clear enough, but where does it leave the miners? What is the meaning of the extension of the “truce”? What is the status of this “truce” today? The miners did not resume the temporarily suspended strike because Ickes requested that they continue production, hoping that “by this action the way will be open for immediate collective bargaining.” Were the miners double-crossed by Ickes? If so, why should they continue at work until May 31?
The mines all over the country are plastered with signs saying that they are “United States Property.” But in the quotation Ickes talks about the “owners of the mines,” meaning the coal companies. Ickes says further, in his letter to the UMWA, that he is “eager to restore the mines to private possession ...”
The mines are government property and they are also the property of the coal companies. The miners’ are working for the government and at the same time they are working for the coal companies. Ickes is the custodian of mines which are U.S. property, and the workers in these mines are working for the government. Presumably then they are working for and under Ickes, representing their new employer, the government. But the WLB says “nothing doing”; the operators, who no longer own the mines, and the miners, who no longer work for the coal companies, are to appear before the WLB, and be told how to proceed with collective bargaining.
In his letter, Ickes capitulates to the WLB but he doesn’t say that he has no authority to negotiate with the UMWA. He says that he has no power to “negotiate a contract” or to “institute collective bargaining conferences between the mine workers and the owners of the mines.” Ickes also says that “any contract must have the approval of the WLB.”
What are Ickes’ powers, anyhow? Does he have any powers? How can the UMWA discover what they are if he has any? If the miners are working for the government and Ickes represents the government, then why can’t he negotiate a contract with the miners, even though it must later “have the approval of the WLB”?
Furthermore, we would like to ask by what authority some coal companies attempted to levy fines on the UMWA in connection with the strike? Does Ickes have anything to say about this? Does the WLB?
 
On the Alert!
What we want to emphasize, and what the miners had better get clearly in their heads, is the fact that they are in for a thorough walloping from Ickes, the WLB and the real owners of the mines (the coal companies) if they waver for one instant. The position of the UMWA is impregnable. They have a considerable amount of “public” support. They have the suppprt of the overwhelming majority of the workers, especially the membership of the CIO. They are only opposed, in the ranks of labor, by the top leadership and the Stalinist jackals and jackasses.
The miners must keep their ranks solid -as they have so magnificently done up to now. They have set the example for all of American labor to see and follow. When they do this, all of their enemies combined cannot defeat them. Their demands are just. They have demonstrated, as the operators have’ not, willingness to adjust the grievances by genuine collective bargaining. They kept the “truce” even after their union was unjustly attacked by the WLB as an organization which “gives aid and comfort to our enemies.”
But enough is enough! The UMWA must keep on the alert. The miners must maintain discipline and eternal vigilance. They must stand by for action!
 




At least one unusual event took place at the UAW convention this year. A resolution was brought in by the Resolutions Committee on the question of racial discrimination, which demanded the same social as well as economic and political rights for Negroes as for white workers. This was the first unusual aspect of the question. Next came the debate, where, for the first time, those who oppose Negro equality, took the floor and spoke.
When this resolution was presented. President Thomas remarked that if there were any delegates in opposition they should be honest enough to get up and say so. He said that he had been accused of railroading such resolutions through UAW conventions, and he wanted everyone to express his convictions on the matter if they were in opposition.
 
Anti-Negro Remarks
A delegate from Local 174, Detroit, took the floor to speak against the resolution. He said that he did not believe in, “social equality” and that there is a natural barrier between the two races. The delegate went on to say that he would never go to a convention and take his wife and daughter where they are to mingle socially with Negro delegates.
The delegate went on in this vein for his full speaking time. It was an interesting instance of the same old story: ignorance, stupidity and arrogance combined to produce the familiar and nauseating pattern of race prejudice – race prejudice practiced by the poor, the exploited and the oppressed white worker.
It probably has never occurred to this delegate that Negroes attending a social affair might never become aware of the presence of his wife and daughter. It is also pertinent to point out that his wife and daughter might not agree with him on this question.
A delegate from Dodge Local 3 also had some remarks on the question. He was also against the resolution but was not so plainspoken and candid as the Briggs delegate. This delegate used the familiar and insulting “Some of my best friends are Negroes” formula. He said: “I ate in public places with Negroes and am proud of it.” He wanted to know if the delegates had the guts to go back to their locals and tell the members that they voted for the colored people to have the same social rights as white people.
It seems that the overwhelming majority were not afraid of the consequences of voting for such a resolution. It carried with only about two hundred of the two thousand delegates voting against it.
 
Ex-Servicemen and Assessments
Another progressive resolution passed by the convention was for the formation by the CIO of an ex-servicemen’s organization after the war. The resolution pointed put the reactionary character of the American Legion and resolved “to explore the possibilities of contacting all progressive sections of existing servicemen’s organizations with the objective of creating a bona fide progressive servicemen’s organization.”
For the third successive year, the convention voted down a proposal of the leadership to increase the dues. The proposal was for an assessment of fifty cents a month for the duration of the war. The proposal was in the form of an amendment to the constitution providing that thirty cents shall be retained by the local, and twenty cents be forwarded to the international treasurer to be placed in a special post-war fund.
Many good arguments can be made for the establishment of such a fund. However, the delegates evidently felt that this was just another attempt on the part of their officers to increase the income of the international board. And, too, this may be a way the delegates had of voicing resentment and real feelings about such things as the no-strike pledge. If there are no strikes and no strike benefits to be paid, then, in their opinion, there is no need for large sums of money in the international treasury.
The last observation we wish to make in connection with this convention is on the general democratic character of the UAW and the pronounced democratic procedure in UAW conventions. This is a refreshing departure from the usual methods in the organized labor movement and is to be found in no other international in the CIO and, of course, not in the AFL.
 




That malicious and contemptible little band of business men and college professors on the War Labor Board has again thumbed its nose at the miners in a decision rejecting the agreement between the Illinois Coal Operators Assn. and the United Mine Workers of America.
Supporting the decision of rejection were William Davis, WLB chairman, a hitherto obscure manipulator of patents for big business; George W. Taylor, vice-chairman; Frank Graham, of the University of North Carolina, and Wayne Morse, the WLB chief cop, known as the board’s “compliance officer.” Added to these three were Mead, Batt and Horton, for the employers.
Another business member, A.E. Roth, voted against the decision because it was his opinion that the Illinois agreement should have been rejected completely, with no concessions whatsoever.
The four labor captives on the board, Meany, Watt, Brophy and Bittner, “dissented.” We do not know their reasons, as no statement from them was carried in the press story announcing the decision.
The board is still mainly concerned to see to it that the miners do not get any real increase in pay. Since it is now clear to everyone that the board is in a trap and that something has to be done because the miners are again refusing to “work without a contract,” this group of envenomed business men decided to offer the miners a gold brick. They are willing for the coal diggers to have their weekly earnings “increased over the 1941–43 agreement by approximately ten dollars, per week ...” The original demand of the UMWA was for two dollars a day increase in wages. This would amount to twelve dollars a week.
There is a catch, of course, which the board reveals by saying that “the total effect of what we can approve amounts to a very substantial increase in the mine workers’ weekly wage SO LONG AS THE MINERS WORK MORE THAN FORTY HOURS A WEEK” (our emphasis). That is, the board is willing for the miners to get more money – but from overtime work. This is what they consider a wage increase.
Under the present “award,” the mine pay would be about $55.50 per week. For six days the pay would be around $60. Presumably, if the miners work seven days they can earn enough additional to bring the weekly pay up to around $70.
The point is, therefore: If you want more money in your pay envelope, then you should be willing to work more hours and more days at your present hourly rate. This, we suppose, does not make for inflation, because we have been told that this method of putting more money into the worker’s envelope does not “increase the unit cost of production.”
It is probable that the WLB, with its “experts,” economists and statisticians, went to consult with Byrnes and Vinson, who, presumably, appeared “with THEIR “experts,” economists and statisticians. Then Wage Czar Vinson went into a huddle with Economic Chief Byrnes, who in turn consulted with his chief in the White House. After all this “consulting” was completed, the WLB was told what to do.
 
Again, the Little Steel Formula
Under the Illinois agreement, the base pay for an 8½-hour day, including travel time, would have been $8.50. The board’s “experts” discovered that this agreement had hidden away in it a daily wage increase of 37½ cents. This, the board, according to its statement, could not allow. The board could only approve a daily wage of $8.12½. It was based on the WLB’s claim that productive time in an 8½-hour day is 7 hours and 45 minutes. The board’s decision means straight time for seven hours and time and a half for 45 minutes.
The board, in turn, approved the overtime provisions of the Illinois agreement because this part of the agreement follows “the statutory provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act ... the provisions: of the proposed Illinois agreement as to overtime are exactly fitted to the Fair Labor Standards Act and we can therefore approve them.”
It is by approving these “statutory” and “overtime” wages that the board very generously announces to the miners that they can approve an addition of from ten to twenty dollars a week in their pay envelopes.
Against the WLB, the UMWA contends that the Illinois agreement “does not involve an hourly wage increase. It lengthens the work day beyond the hours requested by the government. It is in no wise a violation of the ‘Little Steel’ formula. It meets all the requirements of the government’s heretofore stated objections.”
 
Miners versus Business Men
We don’t know all of the details of the Illinois agreement but what the miners say about the matter is good enough for us. We believe what the miners say. We believe this not only for the reason that the miners have competent officials and experts to deal with such questions but also for the reason that we know that the
WLB is composed of business men looking out for the interests of big business; fake liberals also looking out for the interests of big business; and four labor weaklings, without power or influence on the board.
Furtherrnore, we are against the Little Steel formula. We are against the lengthening of the working hours. We can see no reason why the “government’s hitherto stated objections” should be met by the miners.
Without doubt, the little concession that the board is making and over which it gloats so hypocritically, has been prompted by the fact that the miners, ate marching again. They don’t “work without a contract.” Added to this is the strike vote being taken by the railroad workers. Remember too that the shipyard workers have been holding a few demonstrations against unsettled wage grievances.
All of labor is dissatisfied and resentful. Even the WLB knows this. Vinson, Byrnes and Roosevelt know it. Murray and Green know it too!
The capitalist press is also dissatisfied and resentful. They don’t like the Wagner Labor Relations Act. It makes trouble for their masters, the big industrialists and financiers.
The capitalist press doesn’t like the Smith-Connally Act. It is too lenient with labor. They want an all out law banning strikes completely with no loopholes and no thirty-day “cooling-offi period.”
But the working class is stirring again all over the country. Thousands of miners are out waiting for a contract and a wage increase.
 
The Labor Situation Today
The railroad workers are having a referendum to determine whether or not they shall go home, tend their vegetable gardens and do the painting they have had in mind for some months now.
What else can they do? What can any of us do?
We are tied to our jobs by the government in Washington.
We have a Little Steel formula to hold our wages down.
There is the WLB striking out against us and spewing its poisonous decisions into every wage situation.
There is Congress listening to the voice of its masters in Wall Street, and coming out with its Smith-Connally anti-labor bill.
Labor leaders from the AFL and CIO sit on the WLB, They aid and abet the board’s anti-labor campaign by their mere presence there. If Meany, Watt, Brophy and Bittner were true to the age-old principles of the labor movement they would rush out of this board in disgust and anger.
If Phil Murray were true to the age-old principles of the labor movement he would not talk nonsense about John L. Lewis being responsible for the passage of the Smith-Connally bill. Murray ought to know that the attack on Lewis is really an attack on the UMWA. If he is not a complete nincompoop, he knows that an attack on the miners today is also an attack on the CIO and the whole labor movement.
The miners know this. The railroad workers are learning. Other workers will learn.
What else can they do?
 




Trade union conventions this year have carried on their deliberations in the shadow of strikes and the threat of strikes. While the CIO was meeting in Philadelphia, the miners were out for the fourth time this year and in Philadelphia itself CIO members employed by the city transportation system walked off the job in protest against a company order not to wear their CIO buttons on the job. In Detroit a UAW local was voting overwhelmingly in favor of a strike despite the efforts of the National Labor Relations Board to intimidate these workers by asking them to vote on the question of whether or not they wished to hold up war production by striking. There were other strikes in the making, not the least important of which was the strike vote being prepared by the railroad unions.
These events and others unquestionably had some effect on the slow thinking of the trade union leadership. This leadership has been compelled to bend just a little away from its blind and uncritical support of the Roosevelt Democratic Party and its governmental machinery to give attention to the restlessness of its own membership. It was unmistakable that there was an acceleration of the unrest and resentment over the fact that, so long as labor adhered to the no-strike pledge, it was an army without a weapon.
These sporadic but stubborn and ominous outbursts evidently compelled the leadership to think over its course of the past two years, and especially during the past eleven months, since giving the no-strike pledge and adopting as its main slogan: the first duty of labor is to make any and every sacrifice necessary for complete victory over the Axis powers. This “Win the War” slogan of the trade union leadership had been dinned into the ears of the membership, not always skillfully, sometimes tearfully and beseechingly, but always with persistence and constancy. The whole labor movement had been encompassed about with the conception: “this is labor’s war;” “victory through equality of sacrifice;” “support to our Commander-in-Chief.” “My primary consideration ... for the moment,” said Philip Murray, “must necessarily, therefore, be the winning of this war.” R.J. Thomas, president of the huge UAW, told the delegates to the aircraft workers’ convention that he knew the employers had not cooperated but that “two wrongs don’t make a right.” Labor must submit, suffer under indignities, accept all manner of inconveniences, but renew its sacrifices. If the ruling classes refuse to win the war, then labor must win it for them.
One illuminating aspect of the submissiveness of the trade union leadership was its elevation of Roosevelt to a new post: Commander-in-Chief of the United States. He was no longer to be Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Navy only, but of the civilian population as well. Roosevelt seemed to think well of this promotion granted him by the Stalinists and the CIO-AFL leadership because he himself began to use the title and had it appear on billboards for the war bond drive.
 
The Policy of the Labor Leaders
For the past year or eighteen months, the trade unions have attempted to carry on their proper functions within this “Win the War” framework. Every consideration and every need of the labor movement was crowded into the narrow compass of this main slogan. The most important resolutions of conventions emphasized that, no matter what the grievances, they must be subordinated to winning the war. And what was to be labor’s main contribution to the winning of the war? Refusal to strike for the duration!
The struggle against John L. Lewis is at least partially motivated by the attitude of the CIO and some of the AFL leaders on the war and what they hold to be labor’s responsibility. Bureaucratic interests of course are prominent on both sides but the other factor is far more important and relevant. Lewis is not sufficiently patriotic for Murray and friends. He doesn’t keep his word as given the President. The bitterness of this conflict and the heat that has entered into this fight can only be properly understood if the struggle is evaluated in the light of the unqualified pro-war position, for instance, of the CIO leadership. Many of the CIO leaders, aside from the Stalinists, approached very near to the line of treason against the labor movement in their attitude toward Lewis in relation to the miners’ strikes. These treasonable attitudes can be interpreted properly only if we fit them into the general position of the trade union leaders on the war and the support of Roosevelt.
What Murray would call the first “constructive,” “intelligent” and “wholesome” contribution of labor toward the war was made on December 17, 1942, when he, Green, Lewis and others went to the White House and gave the “Commander-in-Chief a pledge that the millions of workers in the United States would not strike for the duration of the war. To be sure, no conventions were called to go through the forms and mechanics of getting the consent of the workers, following argument and discussion. This little democratic detail was considered either a luxury not to be indulged in during the war, or these leaders were fairly certain that their proposals would be rejected by their memberships. Subsequent happenings and events prove that their fears were well founded.
 
Who Gave the No-Strike Pledge?
In an address to the CIO Executive Board in May 1943, Murray made the statement that “we have consistently adhered to our no-strike policy for the duration of the war. That commitment was made to the President of the United States. ... The President did not ask for that commitment. Organized labor went over to the President of the United States ... and said: ‘Mr. President, we are not going to strike for the duration of the war.’ He did not ask for it ... It was made voluntarily. There was no compulsion, there was no legislation pending.”
This statement by Murray can be correctly called bureaucratic nonsense. “Organized labor” did not give Roosevelt that no-strike pledge and had no part in it. Organized labor was bureaucratically delivered to Roosevelt by Murray, Lewis and Green, claiming to represent the sentiments of their organizations. This act was fully in line with their other actions, especially those of Green and Murray, before Pearl Harbor. They had been preparing the way for this capitulation for many months. Roosevelt had been consistently putting on the pressure and tightening the screws. After Pearl Harbor the labor bureaucracy knew full well what was expected of it, i.e., what rôle it was to play. It had been through the First World War and knew its place.
Murray also attempts to make much of the fact that they made obeisance before Roosevelt voluntarily and without “compulsion.” “The President had addressed no communications to anyone,” says Murray, “asking them to give up the right to strike, nor had he any conversations that I am aware of with any leader of labor asking labor to withhold its right to strike.” Murray evidently wants us to believe that Roosevelt really had no interest in this question. It was only the great men of labor who thought about strikes and their relation to production. It had never occurred to Roosevelt. But the mass of labor was not panting in its dash to the White House to give a no-strike pledge. It was left to Murray and Green and Lewis to get Roosevelt and labor together in this “constructive” and wholesome “Win the War” commitment.
Murray consistently berates Lewis for not keeping the no-strike pledge. And not only this but, according to Murray, “Mr. Lewis knows perfectly well that his acts were wholly responsible for the conduct of the Congress in seeking the enactment of the Smith-Connally Bill.” The “acts” of Lewis that Murray was speaking of were the miners’ strikes.
It is necessary to ask how Murray can confine his anger to Lewis and the miners? Did Lewis alone break his pledge to the President? But thousands of workers in the CIO did the same thing. That is, if we take Murray’s word for it that “labor” as a whole gave Roosevelt the no-strike pledge. Murray’s steel workers have been on strike in town after town, in mill after mill and from week to week. The shipyard workers have been on strike – thousands of them. The rubber workers, after yean of peaceful slumber, virtually had a general strike of the industry in Akron. The aircraft workers have had strike after strike, despite their leader’s solemn dictum that “two wrongs don’t make a right.” There have been strikes in every type of industry in the CIO and AFL. And now the railway labor executives, the elder statesmen of the labor movement, have authorized a strike vote in their crafts.
 
Background to Labor Conventions
This year’s crop of trade union conventions faced discontentment, resentment and strikes. The labor chieftains had given the no-strike pledge without “compulsion” and had in all probability been rewarded with the promise of maintenance of membership clauses in contracts approved by the National War Labor Board. Under this exchange, they would maintain union membership at high levels and thus build up local, international and federation treasuries. But the workers wanted something more than big unions and million dollar treasuries. They wanted more wages, less job freezes, lower prices and the settlement of grievances through genuine collective bargaining.
It was one thing for three men to tie labor bureaucratically to the imperialist war machine by making a no-strike promise without the consent of the workers; it was a far more difficult task to induce the millions of workers to live up to that promise. It is one thing to tell labor to make sacrifices and carry the main burden of the war, but it isn’t so easy to keep labor on its knees after months of experience with knee-bending and retreats in which their union directors took the lead.
While it is true that the leaders of labor have learned something about the mood of the working class today, they haven’t learned too much. I suppose, however, that we should be thankful for even this small amount of progress made by these men. What is also important to remember is whence the fire comes that causes them to step up forward just a little. The many strikes tell the story. Sad and bitter experience is beginning to have effect. Roosevelt is a little less “labor’s friend” now than a year ago.
The myth fabricated by the trade union bureaucrats, which had Roosevelt on one side of the barricades with labor, and Congress, along with the administrative boards, on the other side, is not so palatable to labor today as when it was first invented. The President was pictured as a sort of man of sorrows, always busy with foreign affairs, while his aides distorted his real aims. These aides carried on anti-labor practices behind Roosevelt’s back which were unknown to him. But labor today has learned enough of the truth to be able to influence the leaders of all except the Stalinist - dominated unions to withhold, for the present at least, endorsement of Roosevelt for a fourth term.
Furthermore, while it may be easy to get a no-strike pledge formally reaffirmed, the leadership knows now from experience that in order to get labor to give heed to its unwilling reaffirmations, it is necessary to take a stand against the crippling Little Steel formula. If you don’t want strikes, pledges are not enough; you must talk very concretely about practical things like more wages for the workers. Hypocritical sobbing about not letting “our boys suffer for the lack of supplies” no longer suffices for workers who are getting their eyes open to the fact that they have produced but haven’t been paid for it; who know that supplies are piled high all over the country and who know now that where there has been a let-down in production it is due to the venality of profit-hungry employers always protecting their capitalist class interests, and, finally, to the skullduggery of bureaucrats in Washington bureaus.
 
New Pressures from the Ranks
This is what gives meaning to, and helps explain, the fact that the UAW convention modifies its support of Roosevelt while the CIO convention fails to pass any resolution on the fourth term. Murray can say, today, that he doesn’t like what is going on in Washington and that he does not intend to permit the CIO to be delivered to the Democratic or any other party. He can say these things because he must. The CIO and the ranks of all organized labor are stirring. This is what has pulled the trade union leaders off their chairs and into some action.
I said that the leaders have moved forward a little bit, but not much. The CIO convention was a good illustration. The leaders were aware of the dissatisfaction but they undoubtedly decided to wait as long as possible before taking any action such as demanding the elimination of the Little Steel formula. This decision was made on Tuesday, the second day of the convention, in a special meeting of the international board.
The very first resolution of the convention was on Murray and his leadership. This unusual procedure probably had several reasons behind it. For one, in the face of the known flop of the no-strike pledge and the failure of the workers to profit by the policy of bowing to Roosevelt, it was necessary to make sure that none of the resentment was directed at Murray. Positive and glowing support, presented in a resolution right at the beginning, would take care of this.
The next resolution was on the no-strike pledge. It was necessary here, too, to keep the lines clear. There were a lot of matters coming up in the convention that might lead some of the bolder delegates to suggest that a strike vote might be the solution. To steer the convention away from any such dilemma, the no-strike position was presented second and passed without any discussion at all.
Then came the resolutions on organization, Smith-Connally Act, WLB, NLRB, support of Roosevelt war policies, political action, and manpower. The discussion on each of these resolutions revealed clearly that the leadership was in a very contradictory position in advocating support of Roosevelt’s war policies and reaffirmation of the no-strike pledge and at the same time hoping to solve the problems raised in the above-mentioned resolutions. Of course this was true also of the resolution on the Little Steel formula. Concrete instances came up in the convention, for example, the case of a copper plant in Utah where the CIO had won an NLRB election, but the employer refused to bargain. The refusal was made on the grounds that the so-called Frye amendment to the appropriations act to the NLRB forbids the NLRB to proceed against a company union that has a contract which had been signed three months or more prior to an election in which the company union was defeated in the voting.
It was clear that there was one simple, tried and true procedure for the copper workers: strike. But the no-strike resolution had been passed the first day of the convention.
It is reported that this matter was raised in the meeting of the CIO’s International Board just before the convention. Reid Robinson, president of the Mine, Mill & Smelter Workers, and Stalinist line advocate, was complaining bitterly over the plight of his union in this case. He didn’t know what to do. Murray expressed surprise that an international president expressed impotence in such a situation. Murray said that if that happened to his union he would fight. Robinson asked whether or not Murray meant that he would, call a strike. Murray replied again that “I would fight, I would fight.”
Before Hitler invaded Russia, Robinson would have fought also. He knew precisely what Murray meant. Let the president of the local call the workers out. That would be no violation of the no-strike pledge: for what a leader does in such situations is proclaim the walkout to be “an unauthorized strike.”
During the whole week of the convention the delegates seemed to be suffering from an acute case of inhibited jitters. They were not rank and filers but high officers of the internationals and of the CIO. They knew that the millions they were expected to represent were watching and waiting to see what come out of Philadelphia. These high ranking officers knew also that the masses were against the no-strike pledge. After they had reaffirmed the pledge their pent-up emotions were unloosed in a flow of oratory on the resolution, “Organization.” This continued throughout the convention in connection with other resolutions. It was a sort of safety valve, a kind of therapeutic against bad dreams caused by voting for a no-strike resolution which these men knew they had no business to vote for and which they feared they could not enforce.
The worst case of jitters was among the Communist Party delegates. (Perhaps I shouldn’t say the Communist Party, since there is some evidence that it may change its name to the “Community Party.”) They certainly must have sent in a crop of resolutions on a fourth term for Roosevelt and for incentive pay. But none of these appeared in the resolutions book nor did they breathe a word on these pet themes in the convention. This is really astounding. It seems that the only possible explanation for this curious conduct is to say that they were halted and driven into retreat before the convention opened. It is highly probable that they were told by Murray not to bring in any fourth term resolution, that he would have to oppose it and that this would impair the unity of the convention. The Stalinists, being in favor of “unity,” therefore subsided.
On the matter of the wage resolution calling for the elimination of the Little Steel formula and for an increase in the base pay, the Stalinists were probably caught off guard.
Mrs. Eleanor Roosevelt appeared at the convention to discuss the no-strike pledge and related matters. Her speech was interesting from several points of view. She was glad that the convention had adopted the no-strike pledge but “for us at home there is something that must go along with that pledge ... and I think sometimes you haven’t done it quite as well as you should do it. That is, I believe that you should tell the story of injustices, of inequalities, of bad conditions, so that the people as a whole in this country really face the problems that people who are pushed to the point of striking know all about, but others know practically nothing about.” Mrs. Roosevelt said that she was convinced that a great deal more would have to be done to change conditions, and recited what a soldier said to her overseas: “Since I have been out here I have had medical care, dental care, so that I would be in good fighting shape. They watch me all the time. I wonder why I could not have had that when I was at home and growing up, in order to be better able to live.”
The President’s wife received tremendous applause. The reason behind the applause is significant. To the CIO leadership arid to hundreds of thousands of trade union members, Mrs. Roosevelt, along with Wallace, represents the struggle of the New Deal for survival. It is said at time that Wallace and Mrs. Roosevelt express the real opinions of the President, which he cannot say due to the necessities of his political position in connection with the winning of the war.
Whether or not this is true, it is true that Mrs. Roosevelt represents a very insidious danger for the labor movement. She is a liberal, a genuine liberal, and there is no reason to doubt that she means what she says. But what does she say? She says that she is glad the workers have agreed not to strike. But they must publicize their grievances and let the public know that they are suffering injustices. The inference, of course, is that the public will be sympathetic, it will put pressure on the employers (and presumably on the government, Roosevelt and the WLB) and the grievances will be resolved. According to Mrs. Roosevelt, the employer and the worker will come to understand that “their interests are identical.” When the public understands, and the employers and the workers understand, there will be no need for strikes. This, of course, will not happen. The CIO, the AFL or any other group of workers know from experience that they will only be wasting time and falling into a morass of weakness and low morale if any such philosophy is adopted.
The labor movement has at last started to its feet again and is slowly beginning to move forward as it did two or three years ago before the days of no-strike pledges. What is necessary now for all of us in the working class movement, is to renew our pledge of militancy and struggle and solidarity. Striking out against the Little Steel formula and refusal to endorse Roosevelt now is a small and faint beginning in the right direction. The next step is not to endorse Roosevelt at all: nor Willkie, nor any of their kind, but independent political action of the working class and the organization of the Independent Labor Party.
 




In some respects; the recent deliberations of the CIO at its sixth constitutional convention in Philadelphia, marked a step forward for that organization and to the degree that this is true is to be welcomed by the entire labor movement.
The convention did not pass a resolution calling for a fourth term for Roosevelt. There was no such resolution in the book of resolutions and none was presented to the convention from the floor.
President Thomas was there from the UAW, which did pass such a resolution at its Buffalo convention in October.
The Stalinists were there, even on the International Board, but they did not present such a resolution nor did they make the demand in their speeches from the floor. This may seem strange in the light of the fact that the Communist Party is the main agitator for continuing Roosevelt in office indefinitely, or at least until the word comes from Moscow to turn a flip-flop and give the votes to Willkie or some other capitalist candidate.
 
Who Told Them Off?
It is hard to believe that the Browder men did not have such a resolution ready to spring either in the international board before the convening of the convention, or at the convention itself. It is also difficult to believe that no Stalinist delegate took the floor to speak for a Roosevelt fourth term just because it did not occur to him or her.
We have a hunch that this matter was discussed in the international board meeting and that the Stalinist fourth term fervor was squelched by Philip Murray. It is clear that the word went out to the faithful instructing them to lay off any fourth term agitation and demonstration.
While there was no fourth term resolution, this should not be interpreted to mean that the leadership is not committed to the support of Roosevelt for re-election. Nor does the refusal to say now that they will support Roosevelt mean that the leadership of the CIO is ready to demonstrate any friendliness to the idea of a Labor Party.
On this point, the Statement on Political Action said:
“It will not be the policy of the CIO in connection with the 1944 elections to build labor’s political organization in the form of a third party, but to abstain from and discourage any move in that direction.
“Our primary task in the political field today is to weld the unity of all workers, farmers and other progressives behind candidates, regardless of party affiliation, who are committed to our policy of total victory and who fully support the measures necessary to achieve it ...”
This, of course, is only a variant of the age-old position of the AFL. That organization will support candidates who are friendly to its program and who seemingly agree with the AFL on how to achieve “total victory.”
The CIO has its program and a CIO conception on how to achieve “total victory.”
 
Hillman’s Role and Murray
Hillman made a long speech explaining the function of his Committee on Political Action. He emphasized that “ours is an educational movement. Our purpose is to place the issues before the people ... While traveling around I have been asked by all the newspapermen, ‘Is this a fourth term movement you are launching?’ And I said: ‘No, this is not a fourth term movement only.’”
Then Hillman, with his eye on a diplomatic post (Moscow, perhaps) went on to say that “if I would have to make a commitment in the next two or three months ... I would raise my voice and urge, for the sake of humanity, the nation and labor, the nomination and re-election of Franklin Delano Roosevelt.”
Evidently Hillman went out too far on the limb because when Murray spoke, following Hillman, although he felt that the convention might endorse a candidate if the elections were to be held in a few months, he did not stop there.
Murray said that he did not like Washington today: “I am not in a state of mind this morning where under existing circumstances, I am prepared to say to the Democratic Party, or to any other party, ‘Here we are, meek and humble of spirit, prepared to give our body and souls in a state of abject surrender.’” Despite the fact that this was only a mild protest against the present situation, it was a step forward, a step forward taken under the pressure of the ranks of labor, who “also don’t like Washington as it is today.” Furthermore, the CIO convention may have been influenced by the fact that the AFL convention refrained from any endorsement of Roosevelt for re-election.
 
A Turn on Wages
Another significant action that must be welcomed by all of labor was the resolution on national wage policy. This resolution was adopted in a special meeting of the International Executive Board held the day that the resolution was presented to the convention. The resolution calls for the elimination of “the so-called Little Steel formula, which ... is no longer in accord with reality. The working men and women of America must be permitted, through the sound and stable processes of collective bargaining, to secure wage adjustments to levels necessary to maintain their morale, health and efficiency and to meet the special needs imposed on them in this war period:
“The sound and tested processes of collective bargaining must be freed to secure the elimination of inequalities and inequities in wage structures and to bring about, where feasible, industry-wide stabilization of wage structures on the basic principle of equal pay for the same work.”
What were the reasons that brought the CIO leadership to the position of about-face on this question? First, of course, the unrest and dissatisfaction of the masses of the workers. This unrest was showing itself in strikes and stoppages. There were rumblings and outbursts in every CIO convention, except those wholly and totally dominated by a Stalinist majority. Furthermore, the AFL convention had taken a somewhat firm position on these questions of wages, manpower, collective bargaining and labor conscription bills.
And last, the miners’ strike hung over the CIO convention like a solemn warning; serving notice on the CIO leadership that the millions of members in the CIO would be more influenced by what the miners were doing in practice than by any demagogic sobbing about the miseries of the boys in Italy or the Stalinist organized hysteria about strikes being “treason” or aid to Hitler.
All of these events together, but especially the strike of the miners, were present at the CIO convention and’ made themselves felt. Delegate Beddow of the United Steel Workers, from Alabama, speaking in favor of the resolution, said that the miners were on strike, that the steel mills in Alabama were shut down, that mine workers were underpaid, that they worked in “gopher holes” and that he hoped they would get every cent they were demanding.
The strangest sight in connection with this resolution to scrap the Little Steel formula was the behavior of the Communist Party delegates. They forgot all about incentive pay, piecework, more money for more production, and longer hours. They bumped into each other climbing on the bandwagon.
Delegate Merrill of the Office & Professional Workers was jubilant and concurred with Delegate Walter Reuther! This resolution was’”badly needed,” according to Merrill.
Delegate Reid Robinson, president of the Mine, Mill & Smelter Workers, was also enthusiastically in support of the resolution, “it is a very timely resolution,” said Robinson, and one would think that the Stalinists had been agitating against the Little Steel formula for months and months, while everyone else in the labor movement had been trying to saddle labor with the stretch-out and piecework wages.
Here, again, it was clear that the Stalinist delegates had been rounded up and told to pipe down. It is reported that their members on the International Executive Board had some “questions” in the special meeting of the board but that all their doubts had been firmly cleared away. And, as on the matter of the fourth term, they gathered themselves together and went down the line with “our great president, Philip Murray.”
There was a resolution on “organizing.” According to the resolution, the CIO must continue its organizing activities, “since only through union organization can labor demonstrate its leadership in war production, in mobilizing all resources for total war, and furnishing united support to the war program behind our Commander-in-Chief, the CIO now, more than ever, has the responsibility to the entire nation to increase its organizing activities among the workers to bring to them union organization.”
The resolution goes on to speak of expansion of organization in order to mobilize “the nation’s workers into full war production,” the CIO must direct its attention to the problems arising from the entrance of women and Negro workers into industry; “we must demonstrate to our membership” that the new problems of the war situation can be solved only through the strength of organized labor and the benefits of collective bargaining shall be brought to labor through expanded organization.
This resolution brought the first real discussion of the convention. It was not the first resolution presented, but the third. The very first resolution was entitled Philip Murray and set forth appreciation of Murray’s leadership. It also prepared the way for the unanimous re-election of Murray. Not only this, but the resolution was evidently to allay any doubts in Murray’s or anybody else’s mind that there was even the slight est appreciation of Lewis’s presence at the convention.
The second resolution presented was Our No-Strike Pledge. This came on Monday afternoon, the day the convention opened. The resolution commits the CIO to reaffirm “its solemn pledge without any qualifications or conditions that for the duration of the war there must not be any strike or stoppage of work .... any leader of organized labor who deliberately flouts this obligation and any employer who seeks to provoke or exploit labor are playing into the hands of the enemies of our nation.”
The resolution was passed without any discussion at all. Not a single delegate, from the floor or the platform, said one word.
It was after this resolution was passed without discussion that the other resolutions which we have mentioned, were presented and discussed.
It was clear that the leadership, knowing that the convention faced some tough problems, wanted to get the no-strike pledge formally reaffirmed as the first order of business in the convention.
Roosevelt had, sent a telegram to the convention, telling the delegates that he invited and expected their “continued active support and cooperation in the fulfillment of the no-strike pledge of American labor, in the increasing effort in production, in stabilizing wages to balance our economy.’’
Murray and the CIO leaders knew that they would have to have a position on wages for the convention. They knew that they were not going to be able to agree with Roosevelt about wage stabilization. But to keep things in check they also knew that they would have to push in the no-strike pledge resolution before they entered into any discussions of working conditions, wages, prices or expansion of organization efforts.
The leaders of the organization also knew that they must differentiate themselves from Lewis. They must carry on the old fiction, the same old stupidity, that the miners are entitled to more money but Lewis’ methods were not the proper way to get the wage increase. Of course, these leaders know better but they were committed to Roosevelt and the no-strike pledge and they don’t want the CIO membership to get any fancy notions in its head that the way to get more wages, the way to bring the bosses and the WLB to their knees is by use of the strike weapon, the method that was being used right at that moment by the miners.
Lewis was present at the CIO convention, just as he was present at the AFL convention in Boston. Not in the flesh, of course, nor did he have any representative there. But the miners were on strike and it is extremely difficult to say to the workers of the country: “Stay on your bellies, depend on the President, the WLB and friendly congressmen to keep the bosses from walking over you.”
This type of labor leadership does not make much impression when the workers see the miners marching at least to partial victory on the picket line at the end of six months of hard and disciplined struggles.
The low point in the convention in relation to Lewis was reached in a speech by the Stalinist Blackie Meyers, vice-president of the National Maritime Union. Meyers said that “John L. Lewis is a fascist; yes, that is what he is.” The Daily Worker, in reporting Meyers’s speech, made Meyers say that Lewis had “fascistic policies.” Meyers also referred to the strike of the miners as “treason.”
The CIO convention and the leaders of the CIO were under the constant and increasing pressure of the membership. Despite all their wavering and wanderings around in the morass of no-strike pledges, their efforts to keep the workers tied to the imperialist war machine and their concern with their own, bureaucratic interests, the fact is that this leadership did respond in some measure to the demands of the ranks. This reaction will undoubtedly result in some improvement in the wage situation and in the living conditions for labor.
By the decisions of the convention an opening has been made. We are of the opinion that in the months to come organized labor, in the AFL and the CIO, will file solidly into this crack in the walls of wage and job stabilization. They will learn from the miners and from their own experience what to do about Little Steel formulas, WLB decisions and Smith-Connally acts.
 




The first article in this series on the UAW convention closed with the statement that the Communist Party supporters in the convention received a defeat. The delegates voted down piecework wages by an overwhelming majority and would not be fooled by the Stalinist attempts to put over piecework wages concealed by such high-sounding phrases as “incentive pay wages,” or “doesn’t Brother Reuther want the workers to have more wages for more production?”
The next issue to come before the convention that was of a highly controversial nature was the fourth term for Roosevelt resolution. We do not mean that this resolution was hotly debated in the convention when we say that it was highly controversial, but rather that here again it was necessary to give heed to the mood of a membership that was beginning to develop doubts.
 
Two Pro-Roosevelt Resolutions
There were two resolutions, one supported by a majority of the resolutions committee and one presented by the Communist supporters, a minority in the committee. The Stalinist resolution gave unqualified, complete and uncritical support to Roosevelt for a fourth term. In this resolution there was no criticism whatsoever of the Roosevelt labor record, no discussion of any of the anti-labor decrees of Roosevelt, only unconditional surrender.
The majority (Reuther) resolution was timidly and mildly critical of the Roosevelt Administration. The resolution says that, “because of his preoccupation with his military responsibilities, reactionary Southern Democrats, together with industry and farm groups, have grasped at this opportunity to undermine the home front through emasculation of the sound policies of the New Deal.”
For this reason “it will be impossible to mobilize the same degree of continued enthusiasm and support for the candidacy of Franklin D. Roosevelt, and for his election for a fourth term if the present Democratic Party policy of appeasement of the foes of progress continues.”
The resolution urges Roosevelt “to take an aggressive position on the home front; against the foes of the New Deal, of progress and labor within the Democratic Party as well as outside it.” If Roosevelt “will do this as well as roll back prices, stop war profiteering, revise the Little Steel formula, institute democratic rationing, provide equal opportunity for employment irrespective of race or sex, etc., and “on the basis of an aggressive effort on the part qf the President and his Administration to fulfill this program, the membership of the UAW-CIO will mobilize its total resources for a campaign for the re-election of President Roosevelt for a fourth term, the re-election of Vice-President Wallace, and the election of a progressive Congress.”
 
What the Stalinists Wanted
When debate on this resolution opened it was announced that the Communist Party supporters on the committee had withdrawn their resolution. Why shouldn’t they? They are experienced enough to know that the Reuther resolution was also a surrender to Roosevelt; that it was formulated in somewhat cautious language because the ranks of the organization are not so stupid that they had not already begun to have doubts about Roosevelt being a “friend of labor.” The Reuther-Thomas conditions therefore represented not so much the position of Reuther and Thomas but the pressure of a skeptical rank and file.
Addes, expressing the position of the Communist Party faction, remarked that “I am in full accord with the resolution that has been presented by your committee. I am glad to learn that the minority have withdrawn their report.”
The only speech against the resolution was made by Emil Mazey of Briggs Local 212. When Mazey charged Roosevelt with the direct responsibility for the appointment of anti-labor boards and commissions, he was booed. Most of the booing came from the Addes faction (allied with the Stalinists), but other delegates joined in.
 
A Contest for Office
By this time the temper of the convention was rising, in preparation for the contest over the election of officers. The main contests were for the posts of secretary-treasurer and the vice-presidency held by Richard Frankensteen. The Reuther and Addes caucuses had been holding regular meetings and the convention was sharply divided. Everyone understood that this was in fact a contest for control of the International. Thomas was uncontested for re-election.
It must be emphasized again that the struggle between the two groups was for control of the International Board, that is, for control of the union. This does not mean that the fight was a pure and simple struggle for power with no real issues dividing the contestants. To believe that it was merely a struggle over office would create a false picture of the convention and of the real situation in the UAW.
There were and remain important differences between the groups, important programmatic differences, which are far-reaching in relation to the welfare of the International and its membership.
As was said in Labor Action last week, the Reuther group represented to some degree, all to inadequate, it is true, the basic and elementary economic interests of the workers. The element of ambition for power and leadership was probably there. Reuther has it. And so do the others. Reuther may want to become president of the UAW. It may be and probably is true that he would like a high post in the Roosevelt Administration. But of a far more serious nature is the political capitulation of Reuther to the Roosevelt bureaucracy and the war. This was clearly demonstrated in his support of the fourth term for Roosevelt resolution and his cringing attitude on the no-strike pledge.
Addes Retains Post
The struggle for control of the International was centered largely on the post of secretary-treasurer, in many respects a post fully as powerful as that of president. Richard Leonard was the candidate of the Reuther faction, and the incumbent, George Addes, was supported by the Communist Party and other groups.
In his platform, Leonard favored: “Full support of President Franklin D. Roosevelt and President Philip Murray ... for an all-out offensive against fascism on the battle fronts and against un-American, anti-labor forces on the home front.”
Leonard believes that the “war can and must be won without surrender by American labor of its basic rights and standards.” He announced his opposition to the Little Steel formula “and all attempts to force on labor undemocratic wage and manpower freezing.”
Leonard pledged himself to oppose vigorously “interference of any outside political party in the affairs of our union.” (Leonard’s platform did not explain whether or not this would include vigorous opposition to interference by Roosevelt and the Democratic Party.)
Addes’s candidacy for re-election was based largely on his record as secretary-treasurer, his union record and his “experience.” Since it was well known that both candidates were ardent supporters of the war, of Roosevelt and of Phil Murray, there wasn’t any need to go into details on these matters.
On these questions the candidates were like two peas in one pod. The struggle therefore reduced itself to one prime consideration for hundreds of delegates: should the Stalinist Communist Party get the opportunity to drive its disrupting wedge into the International.
Addes won by 3,748,235 votes to 3,676,979 for Leonard, a majority of 71,256.
The next contest was between Walter Reuther and Richard Frankensteen. Reuther defeated Frankensteen by a majority of 350. Since there was another vice-president to be elected, Frankensteen had another chance. After casting around for a man to run against him, the Reuther forces, decided to run Leonard, the defeated candidate for secretary-treasurer. There had been some talk of their supporting Tom Di Lorenzo of Brewster Local 365 in New York City. There was discussion on other Reuther leaders, but the final decision was for Leonard. Leonard, went down to defeat again by a Frankensteen majority of 253 votes.
The next struggle was for places on the International Executive Board. Those elected were: Leo Lamotte, Melvin Bishop, William Stevenson, Percy Llewelyn, William McAuley, Carl Swanson, Arnold Coxhill, Richard Reisinger, Paul Miley, Richard Gosser, Arnold Atwood, Jos. Mattson, John Livingston, L.H. Michener, George Burt, Thomas Starling, William Blakeley and Charles Kerrigan. The Reuther forces retain the leading influence in the board, but the balance of power is held by Thomas, with his 83 votes.
 
A Changing Vote
An interesting question arises as to why the delegates acted as they did in connection with the elections of officers and board members. They supported Addes against Leonard. The next day they swing back to Reuther and support him against Frankensteen. Following this they desert the Reuther faction and support Frankensteen against Leonard. It seemed clear that the delegates were reluctant to give too much power to either faction, the Stalinists-Addes-Frankensteen, or the Reutherites. They were set against turning the union over to the CP, but they were also skeptical about Reuther. Consequently, it is apparent that they decided to keep the status quo, with Thomas as the balance of power.
The majority of the delegates knew that Reuther was closer to their basic economic interests than the Stalinists, as was demonstrated on the question of incentive pay. All of the really alert delegates knew that the Communist Party was not to be trusted at all; that this outfit was playing an “aggressive and sinister role in support of Moscow, a second front, piecework, union-wrecking, flag-waving, that is, Stalinist politics. On the other hand, they did not believe that their best interests would be served by placing too much power in the hands of Reuther.
The No-Strike Pledge
The resolution on the no-strike pledge did not get to the floor of the convention until Sunday morning, the last day of the convention. It was after all officers had been elected and Roosevelt had been endorsed for a fourth term. Thus, this troublesome question could not in any way enter into the determination of the fitness of the various candidates to hold office.
There were two resolutions: the Reuther majority resolution and a Stalinist minority resolution.
Originally the first resolve of the majority resolution read: “That this convention of the UAW-CIO reaffirm its pledge to the nation and its fighting men to maintain continuous and uninterrupted production of materi- [line of text missing] prosecution of the war.” At the insistence of the minority and with the ready consent of the majority, this was amended to insert the phrase “without any qualification” immediately following the word “nation.” The majority and the minority Were getting together on the no-strike pledge.
The Reuther majority was ready to make other concessions also. The second resolve in the majority resolution read originally: “That in those plants where management is not bargaining in good faith and is taking advantage of the war situation and labor’s no-strike pledge to destroy collective bargaining, the International Executive Board shall take steps to insure continuous production by urging government operation of such plants.”
Addes introduced a slick but meaningless amendment to the effect that the International Executive Board shall, in order to assure continuous production, urge that under the conditions named, the plants shall be taken over by the President under his emergency powers and not under the provisions of the Smith-Connally Act. The Addes amendment further provided that there should be full rights of collective bargaining in the conscripted plants and the “elimination of all profits.” The amendment was accepted by the majority.
 
Speech of Emil Mazey
Emil Mazey spoke against the resolution, saying that he was for the “outright revocation of the no-strike pledge.” He said that the problems of the workers would not be solved by this resolution. He pointed out that the Addes amendment about taking all the profits was “outright fantastic.”
“I am in favor of abolishing profits altogether in those plants,” said Mazey. “The interests of the employers and workers are directly opposed to each other.” Mazey told the convention that the class struggle is not abolished during wartime but is intensified. He challenged any person in the convention to prove that a single soldier had lost his life because the workers were not producing enough.
Mazey closed with the statement: “In order to establish collective bargaining we must revoke our no-strike pledge.”
Mazey’s speech got some applause. It is interesting to note that the reception given his no-strike pledge position was received with far greater tolerance than his previous remarks against the fourth term resolution.
Thomas told the convention that before the war he had the best record of any international president for calling strikes. “When the war is over,” he said, and if management acts as it does now, “I am going to make a better record than I did before.”
The ball was rolling and Addes got up next in support of the pledge. He said that the employers want the convention to repudiate the pledge so that they can provoke strikes. Strikes during the war will wreck the union. In Germany or Japan, Addes said that he would advise strikes to hamper production. Addes said that he would not say that those in the union who were for revoking the no-strike pledge were fifth columnists. Addes would not make this charge directly and openly, but there could be little doubt that this was what he meant.
As nearly as could be estimated the resolution for reaffirmation of the no-strike pledge carried by a vote of about two to one.
*
A concluding article will appear in the next issue.
 





[NLRB at Chevrolet, Flint]
The National Labor Relations Board recently conducted a strike vote at Chevrolet in Flint. The vote was on the question: “Do you wish to permit an interruption of war production in wartime as a result of this dispute?”
Despite the phony and tricky formulation of the question, the workers at this plant voted four to one, in favor of strike: 8,099 for to 2,070, against. This is, over 8,000 workers, who knew they had long-standing grievances and who also knew the best way to have those grievances settled, refused to be intimidated by the NLRB. They were not influenced by an NLRB blackjack wrapped in the United States flag.
The strike vote had nothing to do with the “war effort” or “war production.” The 8,000 who voted for the strike were not expressing their opinion on the war, but rather on how they felt about their low wages and working conditions in the plant.,
The problem of the Flint Chevrolet workers is similar to that of labor all over the country: how to get enough food, clothing and decent homes to live in. In the factories, the workers are surrounded by tanks, munitions and airplanes. But they can’t eat them. It isn’t like working at a sandwich counter where you can eat what you are making.
The worker’s wife has to have money to go to the store. She has to pay five, six or seven cents apiece for eggs, fifteen cents for four ounces of butter if she can find any, about the same for a quart of milk, and forty-five cents a pound for bull neck at the corner market.
There isn’t enough money to go around. And so we have to take a strike vote. And after the vote, if the grievances are not settled, we have to strike. That seems simple enough. That’s nothing new. Labor has been doing that for a century or more. To date no one has found a substitute.
*

On the Miners’ Fight
The miners are back at work, but the WLB, the capitalist press, the bosses and the Stalinists are still having the jitters. There is also a little unrest among the top leaders of the CIO and AFL. The “public members” of the WLB charge the UMWA with “cynical and repeated violations of the no-strike policy” and with “sowing confusion” among union members. The three “public members” are Davis, Taylor and Graham: an obscure patent lawyer, a college professor and a university president.
It is extremely difficult to grasp what Davis, Taylor and Graham are talking about. The UMWA was “sowing confusion” among union members? What union members? The members of the UMWA? A strange kind of confusion!
The miners have a tradition and position that they “do not work without a contract.” At the expiration of their wage agreement they asked for a $2.00 a day increase. There was no confusion about this, except in the ranks of the coal operators and the WLB. The miners understood it and so did millions of other workers.
I know of two union locals that were so clear on the matter that they promptly passed resolutions; supporting the miners and demanding the same pay increases for themselves.
As an illustration of the absence of “confusion,” the miners, when they did not get a contract, refrained from trespassing on the property of the coal companies. There was the kind of clarity and lack of confusion in which virtually every miner from Pennsylvania to Alabama, to Arkansas, to Washington and back to Wyoming, through Iowa to Ohio, stayed at home and waited for the contract. When instructed by their policy committee, they returned to work. When the truce expired, they refused again to trespass on company property. When another truce was declared by their elected representatives, they returned to work. A third time they came out and then returned: As October 31 approached they began the fourth retreat from the mines. By this time the WLB, the capitalist press and the coal operators were beginning to see the light – just a little.
The miners had been in and out of the mines, in solid ranks, for a period of six months. The UMWA hadn’t lost a man except by death, or to the Army, or to some other industry. Furthermore, other workers and unions were beginning to get ideas into their heads, very clear ideas about wage increases, and the additional idea that the way to get more wages was to follow the example of the UMWA.
Is that what Davis, Taylor and Graham mean by “sowing confusion”? When the miners maintain the most superb discipline they are supposed to be confused. When they fight to the last ditch, united to defend and protect their union, they are confused, say these “public member” of the WLB. When other workers learn from the miners and begin putting pressure on the Greens and Murrays, these workers are “confused” also.
It’s all the miners’ fault, say Davis, Taylor and Graham. When the shipyard workers or the aircraft workers strike, it is because the UMWA has spread “confusion” in their ranks. The college president, the obscure little professor and the previously unknown patent lawyer couldn’t possibly think of any other reason for the recent strikes and demands for wage increases!
Imagine!
 





WLB Davis Pulls Another Fast One
The War Labor Board, under the lash of the little patent lawyer, William L. Davis, continues its sniping at the United Mine Workers. In a seven-to-five decision, according to the New York Times, the board “cuts mine pay in past thirty-one cents a week.” (It is really thirty and a half cents.) Still firing at the UMWA from ambush, the WLB and its malignant chairman, Davis, strongarm a little “victory” in the form of chiseling a few cents a week off the pay of the coal diggers.
We don’t pretend to understand what the WLB is talking about in its new decision announced in a letter to Ickes. It had to do with the method used for calculating overtime pay. It is claimed by the board that Ickes’ method of calculating overtime pay was not in conformity with the “requirements of the stabilization program.”
The board says that, in the Ickes agreement, overtime was based on the straight hourly rate of $1.00 but that it should have been based on an hourly rate of 97.14 cents. This two cents-plus, it seems, if allowed to stand, would wreck the “stabilization program.” In order to “hold the line” against inflation, the WLB reduces the pay of the miners thirty and a half cents a week. We can’t say right now just how that half cent is going to be worked out. Perhaps the coal companies will take the half cent one week and the miners the next week. Davis told the reporters that the miners, are “getting more money for more work, and we’ve always said they could do this.” Davis went on to say that the miners “wanted $2.00 extra pay for nothing.” That is, according to this juggler of patent rights for big corporations, digging coal is getting paid for nothing! But tricking some little inventor out of his patent right and delivering them to a big corporation, is doing something.
Furthermore, it is nothing new to say to workers that they can have more money if they put in longer hours. The bosses have always been for that: earn more by working longer. What we want under capitalism is more money and less work. Under capitalism that is the only wage slogan that makes sense. Otherwise, all we get is more profit for the bosses and a lower living standard for the workers.


The Ten-Hour Day at Bell Aircraft
The Bell Aircraft Corporation has decided not to initiate two ten-hour shifts in place of the present three-shift system. The company says that the plan “seems impracticable.” Labor has known this for over a hundred years. That’s why we began the struggle against the sunrise-to-sunset day in the early days of the nineteenth century.
That’s why we began the militant struggles for the eight-hour day in the eighties of the last century. And that is why we began thinking of the six-hour day and the thirty-hour week. Labor demanded successively twelve hours’ pay for a ten-hour day, ten hours’ pay for an eight-hour day. Now we have to think again about eight hours’ pay for a six-hour day!
We have to do this because employers all over the country are scheming to get back to the sunrise-to-sunset day. That is really what a ten-hour day is right now. Or, more precisely, in the winter, it is a dark-to-dark day.
We don’t know by what means the Bell Corporation discovered the impracticability of the ten-hour shift, but we are of the opinion that the company had a hunch that labor is smarter now than the workers were, say, in 1815.
 




The American Negro is being asked to participate in what he is told is a struggle for democracy and against fascism. American Negroes see this vast struggle going on. They read the papers. They see almost every nation under arms and sending its youth and old men to the front: the yellow people of the East, the brown people of India, the black colonials of Africa and the white races of Europe and America. They read about and see armed men marching. They hear the hum of the mines and factories. The farmers plant every square foot to produce more food. These are the arsenals of democracy the Negro is told; it is a war for democracy.
The Negro in the United States is examining this picture and evaluating the claims of those who pretend to give him advice on how he should act. He wants to know: do they speak the truth, can Negroes believe what they are being told? The Negro wants to find out what is happening, in practice, right here in the United States, and what is the hope for the future.
We agree that the Negro must do this because he is being asked, along with other races and people, to close ranks, lend a hand, co-operate. Everybody wants the Negro to answer the call for national unity. This is urged on the ground that the interests of all the people are the same. Everyone is faced with the same danger and the identical peril, rich and poor, white and black.
The Negro, along with others, is being called, upon to sacrifice, not only many of the material things to which people have become accustomed, but many of the so-called rights and privileges to which we have become accustomed. In the face of the demands being made on them, Negroes certainly have the right to inquire and investigate how they are faring.
Negroes are certainly willing to fight for democracy. They have proved in the past that they are willing to die for democracy. For 300 years Negroes have been fighting and dying for democracy right here in the United States! Therefore, the struggle for democracy is nothing new to Negroes. On the day that the first Negroes set foot on American soil in 1619, the struggle for democracy, liberty and freedom began. This struggle has continued without abatement through all the decades and centuries since.
That is really what all the slave rebellions were about. They were struggles for democracy. They were struggles against the concentration camps of that day. That’s what Gabriel, Denmark Vesey, Nat Turner were doing when the organized the black slaves and led them forth to battle against their masters and oppressors. It was her love of democracy that induced that glorious old Negro woman, Harriet Tubman, to take her shotgun in hand, go into the South and lead Negro men and women to freedom. It was love of democracy that caused her to become a spy for the Union army, and be commissioned for some of the most dangerous missions.
It was democracy that Frederick Douglas was talking about in his great anti-slavery speeches. It was his fight for democracy that caused him to be hounded and hunted from place to place. It was in the name of democracy that the free Negro, Walker, thundered his courageous anti-slavery editorials in his paper. It was the struggle for democracy that led John Brown to a gallows at Harpers Ferry in 1859. It was democracy that Julia Ward Howe was calling for when she talked about the “terrible, swift sword,” the “lightning of a hundred circling camps,” and the place where “the grapes of wrath are stored.”
Churchill talks about blood, sweat and tears. Negros know something about this, too. There is nothing that Churchill can teach them here. Negroes have gone through centuries of blood, sweat and tears for democracy: for the right to live and work and play like other people. For the right to be free from insult, discrimination and Jim Crow.
But Negroes haven’t reached the Promised Land yet. There is still segregation and Jim Crow everywhere. The federal government practices Jim Crow, and so does every governmental sub-division in the United States. Negroes are denied jobs in the war industries, and, when they are hired, they are segregated and discriminated against. Negro boys go into the Army and are Jim Crowed and maltreated.
Public places all over the country continue their old practices of insult and discrimination. Lynching and mob rule continue. They’re doing business at the same old stand in the same old way.
All this goes on while the Negro is told that this is a war for democracy and freedom. Freedom for whom, and democracy for whom? Surely not for the Negro!
What did Mr. Churchill mean when he said that he did not take office to sit in at the death of the British Empire? What did Mr. Witherow mean when he said that we are not fighting this war to supply a quart of milk for every Hottentot?
Is Mr. Churchill fighting the war for the perpetuation of the British Empire? If so, what does this mean? It can only mean the perpetuation of the subjugation of the Indians, and the continuation of the slavery of millions of black Africans for the benefit of the British ruling class What does Mr. Witherow want the Hottentots, or the American Negroes, to get out of this war? Only what they have been getting in the past!
Negroes have been fighting for democracy for 300 years here in the United States. Why shouldn’t they continue? What reason is there that white people who believe in democracy should not aid in this struggle: the trade unions, for instance? If it is a war for democracy, then Negroes can really give of their vast experience and demonstrate how it should be done. We can try it out here in the United States; and, if successful here, we can take it to Poland, Czechoslovakia, Africa, Germany, Greece, Italy and all the islands of the Pacific.
How can this be done? What will be the proof? We suggest the following:

Elimination of all Jim Crow, segregation and discrimination by federal, state and city governments. Negroes to hold any and all jobs where qualified. This would apply to the Cabinet and Supreme Court and any state or city post. No Jim Crow of any kind in the Army or Navy. This must mean: no separate Army or Navy units, ships or schools.
 
Elimination of all Jim Crow and discrimination in industry. Negroes to be hired and promoted just like all other workers.
 
No discrimination in federal, state or city housing projects.
 
No discrimination of any kind in public places.
 
These demands to become operative in the South, the same as in the North.

These are modest demands. They are all covered by the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution.
We don’t see how any white man or Negro who believes in democracy can object to them. We fail to understand how any nation that claims to be fighting for democracy can withhold these rights and privileges from fifteen million of its citizens.
 




The latest report of the Senate Truman Committee reveals the fact that industry is repeating the profit-making orgy of the First Imperialist World War. The committee reports that even after the “renegotiation” of war contracts, companies manufacturing war supplies and equipment are being allowed profits of more than 20 per cent.
The reported top profit allowed by the Navy Department is 17.8 per cent. But the War Department is more generous and allows a top profit of 22 per cent.
Determined not to be outdone by the War and Navy Departments, the Maritime Commission permits a top profit of 23.2 per cent. This commission has allowed more than 15 per cent on over half of its renegotiated contracts.
We want to emphasise that these high profits are being allowed after the contracts are “renegotiated”! What must they have been before the process of cutting down on the amount of profit? And what it this “renegotiating” of contracts? It is the carrying out of provisions in an act of Congress that requires the various government departments to make new contracts with manufacturers after a period – and when it is apparent that the original contracts signed were far too high and if allowed to stand would create a public scandal!
Not only this, but “renegotiation” is a ruse to make it appear that the government is cracking down on industry, reducing private profits and making the big corporations toe the mark. It is a nice way to make the Workers believe that the demand of the CIO for “Victory Through Equality of Sacrifice” is being put into effect. The worker sacrifices on wages, meat, shoes and butter. The corporation sacrifices on profits, they are told to reduce their prices to the government: a war is going on and everyone must sacrifice equally.
Of course, the bosses don’t like this “renegotiation” business. They don’t like the act which permits their government prowling around in their private affairs and examining their books. This reduces their opportunity for double bookkeeping, stealing, price fixing pacts and other such pay-triotic practices indulged in by the big industrial and financial patriots.
Furthermore, to have the high per cent of profits exposed retards the anti-labor drives of the bosses. The workers catch them in their BVDs, so to speak, and the halo that surrounds these “industrial statesmen” is changed either into a dunce cap or a money bag.
The bosses would rather the Truman Committee let their profits alone and put in all of its time talking about “absenteeism,” “man hours lost through strikes,” “how the workers are holding up the war effort,” etc., etc. Anything except profits, salaries and dividends. They want 25, 40 and 50 per cent profits. But the government hedges and will meet them half way, the War and Navy Departments and the Maritime Commission will “split the difference.” The boys must be satisfied with a top of around, 17, 22 and 23 per cent!
 
How They Manage
Now we have to examine how the corporations are faring with this meager average little profit of only 20 per cent. What do the stockholders get, and what about the salaries of the top officials of the big companies producing war materials.
There is U.S. Steel. They sold nearly two billion dollars’ worth to the government last year. This was 18 per cent over 1941 and 38 per cent over the highest year during the First World War. Out of this huge sale to the government this company was able to make a net profit of $71,000,000. In 1941 they made 116 million. They paid out 725 million in wages to a half million workers and officers. But the stockholders were not forgotten. The preferred stockholders got 25 million and the common stockholders got 34 million. Each group got the same amount in 1941. That is, this one corporation paid to stockholders 118 millions in two years.
These millions didn’t go to the men who produce the steel. By far the biggest part of it went to men and women who do no useful labor – to people who just sit and wait for the dividend checks to come rolling-in. Of course, these people claim that they had money to “invest” because they or their forefathers “abstained,” they didn’t spend their substance in riotous living like the average worker or the Prodigal Son. They made a pair of shoes last a little longer; they did with a little less meat; they didn’t eat cake for years and years.
And there is Douglas Aircraft Co. Their net profit in 1942 was $11,000,000, or $18.32 a share. In 1941 the net was $18,000,000 and $30 a share. They say that the payroll of $150,000,000 was fifty times the dividends. This means that dividends were around $3,000,000. Of course it would be interesting to know in the case of U.S. Steel, Douglas and all other corporations just how many people collected these dividends and what share went to each person. This information would reveal some startling things about the bosses and bankers and why they are so anxious not to have profits and salaries exposed. No wonder these fellows have Rickenbacker chasing around the country; talking about what grasping and selfish organizations labor unions are. No wonder the bosses keep the air filled with cries of “absenteeism,” “un-Americanism” and the rest of it.
 
Not a Bad “Wage”
Not only do the corporations making war supplies want high profits for dividends, they also want to look out for themselves in the matter of salaries. The officers of the Bethlehem Steel Co. understand this thoroughly, Last year this company paid its top officers and directors a total of $2,037,035. There were fifteen of these. Ten of this group received over $100,000.
Eugene Grace, the president, got $537,724! There were eleven smaller fry getting from fifty to a hundred thousand who received a total of $671,334. There were 105 little fellows getting between twenty and fifty thousand, who got a total of $3,008,779. Altogether 126 officers got over five million dollars in salaries!
These are the fellows who talk about “absenteeism,” “our American. Way of Life,” “this is labor’s war” and about increasing the work week.
Of course they want labor to work and sweat and toil like a mule; they want larger salaries, dividends and profits.
Of course they get mad when a harmless little Truman Committee meekly exposes their high per cent of profit and insists that they take a small cut.
 
See the Contrast
The war for these fellows is just one more opportunity to make money. The workers pay terrific income taxes. The government takes part of this money and builds plants for the bosses. The bosses operate the plants and rake in the profits, huge dividends and fabulous salaries. Of course they howl when they are forced to “renegotiate” contracts.
This is the real picture that labor should look at. That is the real situation. When their leaders come around whining about “Victory Through Equality of Sacrifice,” they should point to the profits, the salaries and the dividends.
Who gets the profits out of the war? The bosses are getting theirs now in hard cash. They give up nothing, but continually grab for more.
Labor is told to wait until the war is over and they’ll get democracy.
Right now, however, we get our wages frozen, our hours increased, taxes made more burdensome.
The price of food goes sky high. We get two pounds of meat a week.
How can we permit this state of affairs to go on? What kind of people are these labor leaders who lie on their backs and tell us not to fight back, who say “Yes” to every proposal made by Roosevelt, who wail and moan that if we don’t behave ourselves the stooges of the bosses on Capitol Hill in Washington will pass some “anti-labor” bills?
HOW MUCH LONGER WILL WE ABIDE BY PROMISES MADE BY THESE “LEADERS”?
 




Donald Nelson’s WPB Management Labor Council met last Saturday to discuss ways and means of establishing what the government and the employers are pleased to call “incentive pay. This is the old-fashioned “merit system” under a new high-sounding name. It is a piece-work, push-’em-up method of getting a lot more production for a little more money.
The “incentive pay” system is a form of rationalization. Rationalization is a nice term for getting higher production without installing new types of tools. Under rationalization, the intention is to get increased production irrespective of any improvement in the machines. Its central aim is to obtain greater production by an improvement in production methods, by a more advantageous division of work, by stricter control .and especially by the introduction of piece work production based on time and motion studies.
The question might be asked: “What objections can be raised to improving methods of production?” The answer is none, provided the “improvement” is one that simultaneously permits a real and substantial improvement in wages, hours and working conditions. Also, the “improvement” in production methods must be such that normal and correct functioning of the union is not interfered with.
The “incentive pay” scheme does not, will not, and cannot produce this result. What is the concrete proposal of the Roosevelt-Nelson War Production Board? They propose to give extra pay for increased output. Bonuses are to be paid for team work. The bonus will be paid to the plant, a department or perhaps to units of a department, and not for individual production.
Under this system the responsibility for increasing production will rest primarily on the workers, whether the bonus is paid for plant, department or unit production. Virtually no responsibility will rest on management or the government bureaus. They will not have to improve in efficiency. The same old skullduggery that has been so prevalent in the past can continue. The same incompetence in the allocation of materials, the same mix-ups in the matter of priorities can prevail as before. The same inefficiency on the part of management may intrude as now to retard production.
But despite these conditions and despite the important fact that labor has no control whatsoever over this situation, the workers will be expected to drive production to the highest limits – or find themselves without the additional wages they have been led to expect.
The “incentive pay” proposal is the revival of an old scheme to get labor to work harder, faster and longer hours. The worker will get a little more money in his pay envelope, but this increased pay will not be a real wage increase and will not be commensurate with the increase in production and profits.
The individual bonus system is vicious enough, but this group bonus system is worse. Under the individual system a worker was paid a little increase for what he did himself. But under the system proposed by the WPB the bonus must be earned by a group – plant, department or unit.
This means, first, individual striving within the unit to raise production. A “fast” man (who might be a company stooge) would set the pace. All others would have to follow or incur the disfavor of fellow workers, because the pay would depend on the production of the group. Then the various units or departments would be hurled into competition with each other. Management or its stooges would attempt to develop unit, plant or departmental “pride.”
No matter why the looked-for increase in wages failed to materialize, management would always be in position to say that the failure to receive a bigger bonus was due to the absence of team work on the part of the workers involved.
 
Why the Scheme?
How does it happen that the bosses and the government are willing to take a chance on this “incentive pay” scheme. The primary reason is that both industry and government know that a pay rise must be granted. They know that the Little Steel formula is finished. They have heard the organized and constant grumbling from labor. They have heard the demands of the miners. They know that the UMWA cannot be waved aside like a Stalinist-dominated United Radio Workers, a Murray-dominated, United Steel Workers, or a Thomas-led UAW.
But they know too that despite the weasel words of Murray, Thomas or the Stalinists, the rank and file of the CIO are not in a mood to continue blindly following these leaders. And so, in an attempt to bottle up the dissatisfaction of the masses of labor, they come out with their “incentive pay” scheme.
But how is it that the government and the bosses can agree to a step which they claim will raise wages? All of them – Roosevelt, Byrnes, Nelson and the employers – have sworn by all that is holy that wages must be “stabilized” in order to ward off INFLATION. Now a very simple question must be asked. If granting the miners a $2.00-a-day increase in wages, or the railroad workers a 30 per cent increase, or the aircraft workers a substantial increase in daily pay will cause inflation, why is it that giving these workers an opportunity to earn the same increase by way of the “incentive pay” scheme will not result in inflation?
The government, in explaining inflation, has said that there is more money than there are consumers’ goods. In relation to what is called inflation, this means that workers have money to spend for the things they want, but that the goods are not present in sufficient quantities. The price of the goods goes up and we have to pay more than we did before. Therefore the value of the dollar is less than before and we can not buy as much meat, bread and potatoes as before.
Right now the scarcity of consumers’ goods is at least in part due to war production. Factories which formerly made radios and electric irons are now making bullets. Canneries and shoe factories are producing for the armed forces. This means reduced production for civilian use. Therefore, since the goods aren’t in the stores, the government wants to restrict the amount of money the worker gets in wages.
But again we ask: if there is a danger of something called inflation being brought about by raising wages, why are the bosses and the government willing to grant a pay rise in any manner whatsoever? The Little Steel formula said that wages would be stabilized as of September 15, 1942, except in such cases where a rise was necessary to correct inequalities. But the WPB announces that the “incentive pay” plan will be tried out in a few aircraft plants and if successful “would be extended to the entire aircraft industry and to all war production.”
WPB officials estimate that their “incentive pay” plan will increase production “at least ten per cent.” What labor will want to know of course is what wage increase will result from a ten per cent increase in production?
There is some question as to whether the WLB will agree with the WPB on the incentive wage. The WLB may decide that the incentive wage is a breach of the Little Steel formula. Of course, it is if the incentive wage really produces higher wages for labor. This is true, despite the nonsense talked by some WLB members about incentive wage proppsals being “anti-inflationary”, because they may mean lower unit cost of production. This is certainly a brazen reversal of position.
The government, as we have pointed out, formerly took the position that inflation, and therefore higher prices, would result from an increase in wages at a time when there was a scarcity of consumers’ goods. This was drummed into everyone’s head
Now we are told that wage increases through incentive pay “can be construed as anti-inflationary rather than the reverse.” And why? Because such a step may mean “lower unit cost of production.” But what has lowering the unit cost of production to do with the fact that the worker has more money in his pocket available for consumers’ goods which are not available? Under these conditions, won’t there be inflation even though the unit cost of production has been reduced? (We do not here enter into a discussion of the relation of wages to the so-called cost of production.)
 
Its Real Meaning
The whole barefaced scheme would add up to nonsense except for one important and significant fact, and that is the fact of the clear intention of the employers and their representatives in the government to intensify the exploitation of labor. This can be the only meaning of the talk about “more goods per dollar invested in labor.” You pay out a little more in wages, work them harder, faster and longer and you get profits all out of proportion to the slight increase in wages.
Whatever their motives, we know enough about the whole business to be against this incentive pay scheme. It means trouble for labor and for the unions. It can only benefit the bosses.
Labor knows a simpler scheme: more money per hour and more money per day. Higher straight wages based on the forty-hour week. Time and a half and double time for over forty hours. Straight wages to meet the rising cost of living and to improve the standard of living. None of the bonus hokus-pokus!
The UMWA is correct. The Murray Body Local is correct. They demand a $2.00-a-day increase for the present working day. That’s simple. Every worker can understand it and every boss can understand it. You don’t have to be a mathematician to find out what your pay is at the end of the week. And above all, when you get a $2.00 boost you know exactly what your envelope is going to contain at the end of the week.
There is only one sensible course for labor: keep the heat on their leaders, make them come across, force them to fight for the interests of the men and women who elect them to office and who pay their their ten and twenty thousand dollar yearly salaries!
 




The “Hold-the-Line” decree issued by Roosevelt last week should serve as a clear and unmistakable notice to the trade union that if labor is to get wages anywhere near what is required to keep pace with the increase in the cost of living, organized labor will have to fight with increased determination. The fight will have to be waged by mass action and through mass formations. Even a hasty reading of this decree on wages and prices should make this clear to any worker.
The decree says that all government bodies having supervision over wages “are directed to authorize no further increase in wages or salaries except such as are clearly necessary to correct substandards of living ...”
An exception is made in cases where wage rises have not been made in accordance with the Little Steel formula.
The most important exception made, however, is the so-called “anti-inflationary” proposal of the WPB discussed in Labor Action last week. This permits Economic Stabilization Director Byrnes to authorize “reasonable adjustment of wages and salaries in case of promotions, reclassifications, merit increases, incentive wages or the like, provided that such adjustments do not increase the level of production costs appreciably or furnish the basis either to increase prices or to resist otherwise justifiable reduction in prices.”
 
The Scheme Behind “Incentive Pay”
It is extremely difficult to determine exactly what this paragraph means. Wages may be increased provided that such rises, however motivated, do not cause prices to rise pr do not interfere with price reductions. Also the wage increase must not increase production costs “appreciably.”
Employers always contend that wages are the chief item in what they call “cost of production.” In attempting to reduce the cost of production they therefore always begin with efforts to cut wages. They don’t include interest due bond holders and banks in the cost of production. They don’t include dividends paid out as part of cost of production. They don’t even include the big salaries paid company officials as part of cost of production. They only bring in the big salaries when they boost the “average wage” by including the big salary along with the lowest wage in arriving at the “average wage.”
The bosses have a very definite idea about this; they know what they are doing. They know, even if the workers do not, that labor is the chief producer of wealth. There are millions of workers. If their wages are raised to higher and higher levels the profits of the corporations will be reduced and dividends will have to be lowered. This is what the bosses are interested in, and this is what Roosevelt is interested in. He is the protector of the profits of the boss.
The position of the government and the bosses is that wages must be raised only after they have worked out a scheme that will increase production out of proportion to the slight increase in wages. To increase production in this way means an increase in profits. An increase in profits means that the corporation can pay bigger dividends and bigger salaries to corporation executives.
This scheme right now is what Roosevelt in his new decree calls “merit increases” and “incentive wages.” Bosses always advocate the “merit system” and “incentive system.” From their point of view they are correct. Their business is to get more profits. If the managers of industry don’t get profits out of the business the owners of the industry – the bondholders and the big stockholders – will kick them out and put in executives who will.
The Roosevelt decree also says that wage increases must not tend to raise prices or interfere with the reduction of prices. Here Roosevelt again intends to make labor bear the main burden. The bosses say that they can’t reduce prices because wages are too high. If the workers demand higher wages the bosses immediately demand an increase in prices. No responsibility at all is placed on the bosses for today’s high prices. Every worker should know that the cause of high prices is not the wages he is paid. And even if this were true that would be no valid reason for the woefully inadequate wages being paid today.
As far as the bosses are concerned, their demand for high prices is similar to their demand for low wages: they want to increase profits. They make all sorts of plans and enter into all manner of agreements and combinations that have no relationship to the wage rate, for the sole purpose of maintaining or increasing prices. Du Pont and General Electric, even after the U.S. entered the war, maintained their agreements with German firms for the purpose of perpetuating a price monopoly.
But under this latest Roosevelt decree all of this is ignored and labor is told in effect that the only way to ward off chaos is to hold wages down – or for the workers to toil harder and longer so that the boss may get more profits.
To make certain that the bosses have their way, the decree virtually chains the workers to their present jobs. The chairman of the War Manpower Commission is authorized “to forbid ... the acceptance of employment by a new employee” except by permission of the government, at “a wage or salary higher than that received by such new employee in his last employment unless the change of employment would aid in the effective prosecution of the war.”
This is simple and direct enough. It means that workers must remain in their present jobs unless the government decides that they should work elsewhere. They can’t leave their present jobs for a new job in another plant or industry unless the government says yes. This is “our system of free enterprise,” 1943 model. This is the labor front, American style for 1943.
It is significant that in this decree Mr. Roosevelt did not discuss profits. He took up this matter in a mild sort of way in his statement on the Public Debt Act of 1943. This was the act to which Congress attached the rider repealing the executive order limiting salaries, to $67,200 flat. In this statement the President said that “practical limitations ought by appropriate taxation to be placed on all income, earned and unearned. I urged and would have welcomed a special tax measure applicable to all excessive incomes from whatever source derived in place of the flat $67,200 salary limitation. ... I still hope and trust that the Congress, at the earliest possible moment, will give consideration to imposing a special war supertax on net income, from whatever source derived, which after the payment of all taxes exceeds $25,000.”
 
Everybody Got Something – But Labor
The act that Roosevelt was discussing was a bill to extend the public debt limit to two hundred and ten billion dollars. This was the act to which Congress attached the salary rider. Roosevelt said that he did not veto the bill but permitted it to become law without his signature because the Treasury had advised him that to veto the bill would interfere with financing of the war. “I am accordingly allowing the bill to become law,” says Roosevelt, “without my signature in order to avoid embarrassment to our war financing program.” He says further, that “it would have obviously been unfair to stabilize wages and yet leave salaries free to rise to $67,200.”
This is a very lame excuse for not vetoing this bill. Congress attempted to kill three birds with one stone. These representatives of the bosses took a general sock at Roosevelt, they raised the salary limit from $25,000 to $67,200 annually and they voted the war credits. Roosevelt put a ceiling on present low wages and tied the workers to their present places of employment. Everybody got something from the deal except labor.
Suppose Roosevelt had vetoed this bill. Would the war financing program have been embarrassed? Of course not. Congress must vote the money to prosecute this war; it can’t, escape this task. The bosses, can’t escape. They must fight the war and try to win. Everything they have and all they hope to gain all over the world would be jeopardized by refusal to supply the necessary money.
All that could possibly have happened would have been passage of the bill by Congress over Roosevelt’s veto. Either they would have done this or the salary rider would have been taken off. Little time would have been lost because Congress must act in this matter of financing the Second Imperialist World War.
It is easier, however, to fight labor than to fight Congress and the bosses. This would not be true if labor would issue its own Hold-the-Line decree. Labor is in the majority, but a working class majority is no good if you don’t use it!
 




The celebration of May Day was instituted by the working class in the United States during the struggle for the eight-hour day. Involved in the fight for the eight-hour day was the broader struggle for better working conditions, higher wages, the right to organize, to bargain collectively and in general to secure for labor greater security and more of the fruits of daily toil in the mines, mills and factories. The spirit of May Day represented the demands of the working class for freedom, security and happiness.
This struggle was a conflict between two classes: the working class and the ruling class of industrialists and financiers. The struggle for the eight-hour day was a political struggle between the bosses and their government en one side and the Arising working class on the other. It was not a fight over simple trade union rights, important as these were, but a struggle of the entire working class for an increased measure of control and greater economic and political power.
Immense organizational gains resulted from this conflict between the bosses and the working class. It was the demonstrations and the strikes that brought gains to the organized workers of the seventies, eighties and nineties. It was the demonstration of their power through mass action that produced the results from which labor benefits today. It was out of this struggle that the American Federation of Labor was born and took its place as the most progressive section of the labor movement of THAT day. Here was the first great national movement of wage earners organized as a class, becoming wage conscious and fighting a class battle against the organized power of the bosses.
 
Another Nationwide Struggle
Today, over a half century later, labor finds itself engaged in another nation-wide struggle against the bosses and the bosses’ government. This struggle takes place in a different period and under different conditions.
The United States has moved away from the relatively simple capitalist economy of the eighties to enormous mass production based on the most advanced scientific and technological discovery and invention that the world has ever seen. On the foundation of this scientific creation and technological invention, industry has been concentrated, huge monopolies have been reared and around it all centralized wealth has fastened itself like hoops of steel.
Furthermore, the United States is no longer a young nation feeling its way toward economic sufficiency and political democracy, isolated from the rest of the world. It is now the world’s greatest producer, hoarder of the earth’s wealth arid resources; the greatest of the capitalist nations. The “American Way of Life” has already triumphed and “Our System of Free Enterprise” has extended its reach to every corner of the earth.
Today the United States is producing for war and spending at the rate of $250,000,000 a day to prosecute that war. Now it is a great imperialist nation engaging in the Second Imperialist World War to determine which nation shall dominate the world and all its people.
As always, the working class finds itself enmeshed in the tangled web of the imperialist conflict. As in all the struggles of the national ruling classes against each other, the workers are called upon to bear the brunt, to toil ceaselessly, to bear arms, to die.
Just as in the May Day struggles of the nineties, the workers forged a new weapon with which to fight their battles against the boss, so today they have called to their aid a new type of trade union organization: the industrial union. And just as in the eighties the new craft unions of the AFL could aid labor only insofar as they tackled the concrete problems of the day, so industrial unionism must lay hold on the concrete and pressing problems before the working class today.
Labor is in a better position to do this now than it was fifty years ago. The working class is approaching maturity. It is stronger numerically and organizationally. It has a better understanding of capitalist society. It is beginning to understand vaguely today, as it did not in the eighties, that the economic struggle is not sufficient but that this struggle must be raised to a political level and from the economic struggle independent class political action and organization must emerge.
 
Many Still to Be Organized
The first big task before the labor movement, especially the industrial union movement, is the completion of the organization of the masses of industrial and agricultural workers. This means to spread the industrial union movement, particularly into the South. The country is not organized. There are millions of agricultural workers virtually unorganized.
The organization of the industrial workers is nowhere near complete. It can be estimated that aircraft is only about 75 per cent organized; aluminum, 75 per cent; iron and steel, 60 per cent; machine tools, 30 per cent; laundries, 30 per cent; metal mining, 35 per cent; electrical, 60 per cent; farm equipment, 35 per cent; chemical industries, 10 per cent; lumber, 15 per cent; petroleum refining, 15 per cent.
There is plenty of work to be done and the surface has only been scratched by the industrial union organizations. The unorganized workers will not care who does it – Murray and the CIO or Lewis and District 50. They want the job done. In these days the organized labor movement should count its membership by tens of millions, and not by the few millions that are organized now.
There are millions of Negro workers to be brought into the organized labor movement. Most of these workers are in the South. Here again it is necessary to emphasize the imperative necessity for the penetration of this section by the industrial union movement. These Negro workers must be integrated into the labor movement. The industrial unions must take it as their especial task to wage a ceaseless battle against Jim Crow, discrimination, disfranchisement and segregation. They must initiate the fight for social, political and economic equality for the Negro; first inside the unions and then in the country.
There are millions of women workers in industry and more going in daily by the thousands. These women workers present new problems lor the unions. They are taking the places of men who have been taken into the armed forces. Serious post-war problems may arise in connection with the employment of millions of women in industry, if the unions do not do their job and make of these women workers the best and most loyal of union members.
 
The Problem of Unification
As important as is the matter of organization, the labor movement cannot win by size alone. It may have its millions and yet be continually pushed back by the bosses and the government. In fact, if the bosses today could be assured that organized labor would be docile, inactive and submissive they would prefer to deal with organized workers. It is far easier, pleasanter and more beneficial to the bosses to come to agreement with Phil Murray and Bill Green than to have to deal with militant shop, plant or industry committees democratically elected by the union membership.
As a means of increasing the striking power of labor it is necessary for the working class to pay attention to the tough problem of the unification of the labor movement. Merging of the AFL, the CIO, the Railway Brotherhoods and the UMWA would mean a national organization of ten millions. A properly conducted organizing drive could increase this membership to 25,000,000 in one year. Such an organization of workers, if correctly led, would be invincible.
Again, however, mere size is not enough. Merely having larger numbers will not automatically produce the results the mass of workers want. Any worthwhile unification must have as its base and dominant force the millions of workers in agriculture, mining and the mass production industries. The principle of industrial unionism must prevail – and there can be no compromise on this point. Even if the AFL should not consent to this, there are enough unorganized workers to make such a mighty force, if organized, that the craft unions would be rendered helpless and impotent except in a very narrow field.
 
Return to Collective Bargaining
Organized labor today has virtually given up the practice of collective bargaining with the employer. This practice, which labor has fought for since the earliest days of the trade union movement, has been almost surrendered right at the moment when labor is numerically stronger than ever before. This surrender has had a most enervating effect on the unions and has given the
ruling class a club which it is using today in a most devastating manner. In the place of collective bargaining between the unions and the employer, government has interposed a host of boards. which claim jurisdiction in all matters for which labor formerly used the procedures of collective bargaining.
Any movement of the unions to regain their former prestige must start with the demand for the restoration of genuine collective bargaining. This should begin in the shop with the shop stewards and go on up to the negotiations which are the province of the higher union committees and representatives.
To restore collective bargaining between the workers, and the boss, organized labor must cease to bend the knee before these government boards: the WLB, the WPB, the OPA and the rest of them. The ranks of organized labor should and must demand that their elected leaders get off the government boards, stay off of them and give their time and attention to the just grievances of the workers who pay them and whom they have been elected to represent.
Connected with the shelving of collective bargaining is the nor strike agreement, sealed and signed by the trade union leaders, without the consent of the membership. Labor can only agree to a no-strike policy for a period if it gets some concessions front the bosses in the course of collective bargaining. As could have been known in advance, the no-strike agreement has worked terrible hardships on labor. As soon as the bosses, with the assistance of Roosevelt, got the promise of Green and Murray to oppose all strikes for the duration of the war, they began to crack down on labor and on the unions. All workers know this story and there is no need to repeat it here. Of course, there have been strikes; the workers had to strike or they would have been far worse off than they are today.
If labor wants to protect itself and its standards, the unions must say that “our agreement not to strike is contingent on your agreeing to our demands about wages, hours, working conditions and union recognition that we will present from time to time, just as we have in the past.” These demands can be discussed and settled in the process of collective bargaining between the union and the employer. In no other way can the integrity and the power of the trade unions be preserved. The unions cannot be and will not be preserved if they bow to the will of. the government boards or submit to the present offensive of the bosses.
These are simple matters that should be understood by every worker in the factories, the mines, the mills and on the farms. They have been through the experience of depending on the WLB and the WPB and they have gotten nowhere. They have seen Roosevelt issue a wage-freezing and job-freezing decree while doing nothing about profits. They have seen Congress and the state legislatures pass anti-labor bills. They have tried to make ends meet while the profiteers push up the price of the necessities of life daily. There ought to be an end to this docility, this turning of the other cheek, somewhere – and soon.
 
Twenty-Five Years of Experience Is Enough
During the First World War the workers were faced with problems similar to those which we face today. It has always been so in capitalist wars and will remain so as long as capitalism exists In the First World War we were told that “this is a workers’ war.” Government officials, just like Bard of the Navy Department today, and employers’ stooges, just like Rickenbacker, were going up and down the country telling labor that the war was for democracy and that the working class had everything to gain by supporting the war. Big labor leaders supported that war also, just as they do today.
Labor was regimented and lined up similarly to the way it is today. Only today matters are worse and with less reason, because the workers have had twenty-five years to learn a lesson. And today there are more industrial workers and their potential strength is far greater.
What is happening to labor in the United States is going on elsewhere; in England, for instance. There too there are promises and the same old speeches. There too the profits pile up and the militancy of the unions decays. American labor must look on the problems faced by labor in Europe, Asia and Africa. They are our kind and suffer the same blows that we do. The struggle for the emancipation of the working class in any one country cannot be separated from the struggle for the emancipation of the working class of the entire world.
Workers in the United States are fully aware that fascism must be defeated. It is the most barbarous form of capitalism. It is the most vicious manifestation of imperialism.
There is only one guarantee that even if there is a military victory over Hitler we will have the opportunity to live in a truly democratic world. That guarantee can only be given by the working class of the world. Whether or not the combined ruling class of England and the United States can gain a military victory ever Hitler, it cannot guarantee a victory over fascism. No capitalist and imperialist ruling class can; neither the American nor the British.
The working class in the United States can take the lead in providing guarantees against the advance and spread of fascism. It is the largest working class in the world. It is the strongest working class in the world also because it has not come under the heel of an oppressive totalitarian government such as the Stalinist regime. It still has a large degree of freedom.
 
Political Action a Prime Need
The first step of the working class to guarantee a victory over fascism is the mass militant, economic organization that we have already been talking about. But as we have said many times before, this is not enough. The all-important step today is the political organization of the working class. The struggle in which labor is engaged today arises out of the political offensive of a capitalist and imperialist government which represents the needs of an imperialist ruling class. It is a struggle of one class against another.
It is urgent that we ask what we mean when we say “the government.” Government in the United States as in all capitalist countries, is party government. That is one political party or another is in power, as they say. It is political parties that run candidates for office: for President and for Congress. These parties seek to control the government; that is, to govern, to rule. In the United States the party in power is always. the Republican or the Democratic Party: It has been demonstrated through successive administrations and in all changes in administration that both of these parties are the political organizations of the ruling class, of the bosses.
Due to the fact that at the time of the coming of the present war the Democratic Party was in power and in control of the government, it was the Democratic Party which made the decision to enter the war. It would have been no different of course if the Republican Party had been running things and controlling the government. This is demonstrated by the fact that this party is in solid support of the war today. There was no fundamental difference between the platforms of the two parties in the last election. This is as it must be because both parties serve the same ruling class, the same bosses.
It is necessary to re-emphasize that decisions are being made today by political parties: by the Republican and Democratic Parties. This is what in practice is meant by “the government,” the rule of a political party. Today it is the Democratic Party. If Willkie defeats Roosevelt in 1944 then “the government” will be the Republican Party.
That will make no essential difference in “the government” because the two parties together form a unified class political organization representing the ruling class. This Democratic-Republican Party has as its main function the protection of: the interests of capitalist society. It makes decisions, issues decrees and passes laws for the minority and against the majority, that is, against the working class. Therefore, “the government,” that is, the President, the Cabinet, government boards, Congress and the courts – are not neutral or impartial: they represent their class.
How can labor, the working class, face this organized political force of the bosses with only their economic organizations – their trade unions? It can’t, and the truth of this is being demonstrated before »our eyes. Labor unions as they are – that is, not politically organized – cannot control the government. This is the function of political organization. Not just any political organization, but a class political party that represents its own class and the class from which it gets its strength.
Every class in history has formed its own political organization or institution and fought for the establishment of its own government. The working class in the United States and in all capitalist countries is confronted with this necessity today. This is the only guarantee for the birth of real democracy, the only guarantee against the extension of fascism: political parties of the working class in control of working Class governments all over the world. And not only is this the only sure way to defeat fascism, it is at the same time the best guarantee for the military defeat of Hitler.
This is a call to the militants in the labor movement. This call comes to us from all of labor’s martyrs of the past: the men, women and children of the labor movement who died for the freedom of their class and the liberation of mankind.
New leaders must step forward. The present leadership is tied body and soul to the capitalist oppressors and the imperialist War makers. They have had their day and have played their puny role. The task of political organization is beyond these labor leaders. They must be replaced by men and women who think in terms of a victorious working class and who know how to: organize for this victory. A working class victorious over hunger and fear, exploitation and oppression. And, above all, a working class victorious over both fascism and imperialist war.
 







Roosevelt has ordered the striking miners back to work. As we go to press, it is uncertain what the reaction will be among the miners. News bulletins report that thousands of miners are still out.



For close to three weeks, thousands of coal miners in the anthracite region of Pennsylvania have been on strike. They have so far resisted the efforts of the union leadership and the WLB to force them back into the mine pits.
Following the refusal of the hard coal miners to obey its “order” to” return to work, the National War Labor Board referred the strike to the President for settlement. At the time this is written there is no indication as to what course Roosevelt will take. He can request the miners to return to work. Under his wartime powers he can order the miners back to the pits; or he can call out the Army to drive them back into the mines as he did in the North American strike.
The WLB procedure in turning the strike over to Roosevelt was accompanied by the usual bluster and billingsgate from the most reactionary members of Congress. Ramspeck, of Georgia, declared that “the government should take whatever action is necessary to open and operate the coal mines.” Andreson, of Minnesota, announced that the strike was close to treason. He wants the Department of Justice to hail the leaders of the strike into court. We presume that he intends that they be tried for treason. Strikes and racketeering are the same thing to Andresen: “Labor leaders responsible for strikes and racketeering are doing more than giving aid and comfort to our enemies. They are the advance invasion army of Hitler and the Japs, primarily engaged in sabotaging war production and in destroying public morale and confidence.”
This wild and ignorant explosion will really just scare the pants off the miners. Andresen perhaps does not know that the coal diggers are accustomed to the real thing in explosions and will be no more perturbed by his gas than they were by the suggestion of Hatton Sumners that they might be frightened by electricity.
 
Outcome Uncertain
We have no way of knowing what the outcome of this strike will be, nor do we know all the facts relating to the causes of the strike.
The papers report that the miners in “The Anthracite” are on strike against the increase in dues voted by the last convention and also for an increase of $2.00 a day in wages. These two demands placed together don’t make sense. One demand is to their own international, and the other to the coal companies. The wage demand involves the government, the union and the coal operators; the dues question is an internal union matter into which the government and the operators cannot enter since neither has any authority there.
It has to be emphasized (as the daily papers have not) that the action of the convention in making the dues $1.50 a month was not an increase in the total amount of monthly payments to tbe union. Before the convention the miners paid $1.00 monthly dues and an assessment of fifty cents a month. The total amount paid now is the same as before. This was explained in the last convention in a speech on this subject by Secretary-Treasurer Kennedy. It was also reported to the convention by the committee on Officers’ Reports that the assessment had been levied by a vote of the membership.
 
Real Issue Is Wages
On the matter of the demand for an increase of $2.00 a day in wages, it is interesting that this demand by the anthracite miners is in line with the sentiment expressed at the last convention. Lewis himself expressed the view that there should be an increase of about $2.00. The handling of the wage increase was turned over to a special committee set up by the convention, but the general opinion was in support of a $2.00 lift in wages.
It is improbable that Lewis and the other international officers are really against the demand for the increase in pay. However, it is difficult to understand why, with Kennedy, a resident of the area, and on the scene, it has been impossible for the international officers to settle the dues controversy, if this is really a factor in the strike. Also, why does this strike against dues come over three months after the convention? Even if these miners are striking against the operators checking off the extra fifty cents, it seems that the strike would have come sooner. It may be true that Lewis is not popular among the hard coal miners, but the $1.50 dues was voted by a convention of 2,800 delegates by an overwhelming majority.
We are of the opinion that Senator Truman was correct when be gave the opinion that the strike was not over dues but about wages. The coal industry as a whole has not been very much excited by the agitation for keeping the mines at work six days a week. One of the complaints at the last miners’ convention was that the government was demanding the six-day week at a time when thousands of miners were not even working five days, as stipulated in the agreement. It seems that the anthracite operators were the worst offenders of all.
Since the United States entered the war the coal industry has averaged only four days a week. Some mines have worked only a day and a half a week. In the face of a greater demand for coal, due to conversion from oil to coal, the mine owners refused to operate the full five days a week.
If there is a shortage in hard coal it has been created by the mine owners. The production of soft coal for 1942 was around 70,000,000 tons over 1941. Now, when the hard coal miners are on strike, there is a howl about lowering production and sabotage – but nothing is said about the contribution of the operators to the situation.
 
Sixth Day Problem



John L. Silent
 


Working six days for the whole industry has been delayed because the international union and the companies cannot come to agreement on the demand of the union for time and a half pay for the sixth day. This is the demand of the union, adopted and approved by the convention. Because of the complexity of the wage structure in the anthracite region it is more difficult to adjust wages than in the bituminous regions. Also, the anthracite operators have demanded an increase in the price if they agree to the wage increase. The union claims that negotiations are being held up by the Office of Price Administration.
All of the procedure of the international in connection with the wage situation, including the old agreement and the proposed amendments containing the demands for pay and a half for the sixth day, have been sent to all districts – including the three anthracite districts. Negotiations were under way but broke down. It is clear, therefore, that this issue is not in the foreground in the present strike.
The question remains, why at the time the international is conducting negotiations for extending the work-week to six days, with the demand for time and a half and weight and a half, the hard coal miners should
strike for a wage increase which a committee has been appointed to negotiate, and against the payment 0f $1.50 dues which represents no increase in the total amount of money paid each month? We don’t pretend to be able to answer this question. Lewis gives no light on the matter. He goes along with his usual silence, acquired the past two years, and simply tells the miners to go back to work, that they are striking in violation of the contract.
 
Union Leaders and the WLB
There is one side of this controversy that deserves especial mention. That is the miserable and impotent role played by the trade union leaders who are serving on the WLB. It must have been quite a spectacle to see Van Bittner of the CIO and Robert Watt of the AFL, labor members of this government-industry board, led up to the White House by William H. Davis. These labor leaders want to tell Roosevelt that they can do nothing and that it is up to him. This is quite a tangle also because these CIO and AFL men are forced to treat with the Lewis union, which recently split from the CIO and remains independent.
Tom Kennedy of the miners is in a more embarrassing position, if that is possible. He is a member of the WLB and it is his union that has defied this government board, which Kennedy praised so highly at the miners’ convention.
Whose side are these fellows on, anyhow? How long do they suppose they will be permitted to run with the wolves and at the same time pretend to represent those whom the wolves seek to destroy?
 



The organized labor movement in the United States is faced with a new and deep-going crisis arising from the effects of the Second Imperialist World War on the entire working class. This crisis reveals the trade union movement faced with severe trials which accompany its efforts to function in the interests of its members, and the working class in general, in a world dominated by a war of vast proportions and charged with potentiality for evil and trade union defeat.
The present crisis began with the retreat of the union bureaucracy when the demand came from the bourgeoisie and the government that the unions must “voluntarily” relinquish their right to strike for the duration of the war. This was the beginning of a planned offensive against the working class by the ruling class. The trade union bureaucracy, however, did not see the matter in this light. To these dull-witted class collaborationists, giving up the “right to strike” meant that both classes were to make important sacrifices and that relinquishing the strike weapon was a simple concession to be made by labor. In turn, the bourgeoisie would yield a few of its cherished “rights.” For instance, big business men would give up, among other things, their right to hundred thousand dollar salaries, a half dozen automobiles, yachts and castles. They were to be satisfied with only one cup of coffee a day, five tires and pants without cuffs. Along with these sacrifices it was evidently assumed that the bourgeoisie would yield its right to insist on the sixty-hour week, the pegging of wages and the demand for higher income taxes on the lower paid workers. In addition to this, it was assumed that business would facilitate the processes of collective bargaining to such degree that it would be unnecessary for workers to even think about the strike and the fact that labor had yielded this precious and time-honored weapon.
Since the proposals had come from the President, it was clear to the trade union leaders that they would be enforced over the protests of any doubting Thomases among the business leaders. It was a tripartite arrangement: business the government and labor, all for the purpose of winning the war. “Victory Through Equality of Sacrifice,” said the United Automobile Workers.
But things did not turn out as the CIO-AFL bureaucrats had hoped and prayed. After the bourgeoisie obtained its no-strike agreement the whole conspiracy against labor began to show itself. The attack was universal. Following the no-strike agreement, which was really negotiated with Roosevelt behind the backs of labor and without the consent of the unions, the bourgeoisie came forward with the demand that labor give up the “premium pay.” The trade union bureaucracy consented to this. Not only did the CIO leaders consent, but they sent a demand to Washington that all companies be ordered to cease paying time and a half for Saturdays and double time for Sundays and holidays. They called on the government to force those companies which for reasons of their own continued the “premium pay,” to cease and desist. It was then that such an order was issued from the White House in favor of a plan for time and a half for the sixth day and double time for the seventh day. This did not place much of a burden on industry because it is very easy to arrange work schedules in such a way that there will be little or no double time under such an arrangement. Saturday and Sunday were clear and definitive and there was no easy way to escape.
It was claimed that the premium pay interfered with production, but none of the production geniuses of business or the unions was ever able to explain just why a man whose pay was $8.00 a day would do less work if he got $16.00 for working on Sunday or on a holiday. There has been a theory in the United States put forth by some leaders of industry and government that high wages are an incentive to increased production and better workmanship. The withdrawal of the premium pay was certainly out of line with this theory and the reasons for the change must be looked for elsewhere than in the field of production.
 
The Principle of Wage Stabilization
The next move was for the “stabilization” of wages. To this day no one knows exactly what this means formally and officially. However, again the trade union bureaucracy was for it. They were against a “ceiling” on wages but were all-out for “stabilization.” Since there had to be a norm of some kind it fell to the lot of the War Labor Board to determine a stabilization formula. This they did in the Little Steel award. The steel workers had asked for a dollar a day increase in pay. A panel of the War Labor Board declared that in order to keep the living standard of steel workers during 1941 up to the 1941 standard, an increase of 21 per cent would have to be granted. A dollar a day advance would mean only an increase of 11 per cent. But the board cut the increase far lower and granted a wage boost of only 44 cents a day!
The vice-chairman of the board, Dr. George W. Taylor, had some interesting and significant things to say in attempting to explain the meaning of this award. What he had to say about the award were known as “principles” and were set forth as follows in Labor Action for July 27, 1942:
“From January 1941 to May 1942 the cost of living increased about 15 per cent. If any workers have received less than a 15 per cent increase in hourly rate of pay for this period ‘their peacetime standards have been broken.’ That is, they can’t eat as much now as they could before January, 1941. But if they have received an average 15 per cent increase than their ‘established peacetime standards have been preserved.’ That is, they can live in the same shack they lived in before, wear the same old clothes and buy the same amount of food, even though it wasn’t enough.
“Any workers ‘whose peacetime standards have been preserved’ can only get an increase from the board if they can prove that there are ‘inequalities’ and sub-standard conditions ‘specifically referred to in the President’s message of April 27, 1942.’”
The leaders of the Steel Workers Union objected to this formula but their objections were based mainly on the size of the increase granted. They did not enter into the real problem, that is, the matter of elevating the low standard of living by insisting on an increase in real wages. Furthermore, the union bureaucracy did not lay sufficient stress on the recommendations which had been made by the WLB panel to the effect that if the steel workers did not receive more than the dollar a day increase demanded by the union, the standard of living in the steel industry for 1942 would be below that of 1941.
These concessions by the trade union leadership are the immediate cause of the present crisis in the labor movement. The procedure of the WLB in the matter of sanctions for wage adjustments combined with the contention of the labor bureaucracy that although the WLB has many “weaknesses” it should be continued, further intensifies the crisis. Since there can be no wage increase without approval from the WLB, it is necessary that all wage contracts and schedules go to this powerful body. It was reported at the CIO convention that 4,000 of these contracts repose in the WLB’s morgue like so many departed derelicts who have been picked up on the city streets.
The Office of Price Administration also enters the picture, for the reason that usually when a manufacturer is faced with the demand for a wage rise he immediately insists that it will be necessary to increase his selling price. Therefore collaboration between the WLB and the OPA is necessary. But in the meantime the workers wait to find out whether their “peacetime standards have been preserved” or whether they are entitled to an increase because of “inequalities and substandard conditions.”
 
Who Dominates in Washington?
Government boards have never been models of speed and efficiency when dealing with labor cases. But now they are slower than ever. The War Labor Board is not the old National Labor Relations Board and it does not function in the era of the New Deal. Nor does it have a free hand. It is subordinated to the general war plans, to the War Production Board, to Byrnes, whatever his function is, and to the organized pressure of “our system of free enterprise” in the form of the National Association of Manufacturers and other pressure groups of the bourgeoisie. This condition was graphically described by a delegate at the recent CIO convention who remarked from the floor that “the same gang that was driven out of Washington in 1932 is back today stronger than ever.”
In a very important sense this is true. While the ruling class was not driven from the capital in 1932, its most reactionary members were pushed into the background for a season. But now the “economic tories” have returned in full force. The bourgeoisie has stationed its biggest guns in Washington: the chairmen of the boards and the presidents of the biggest corporations. They do not rely today on the judgment and the prestige of their junior executives. The big men “resign” their posts as a “patriotic” duty and place their splendid talents and experience at the “service of their government” in its hour of peril.
These men dominate the Washington scene. It is they who determine the policies of the government in relation to labor. It was they who put through the no-strike agreement, the abolition of the “premium pay,” the increase in taxes on the poor and the general slow-down in the settlement of labor cases. They infest every important office and board in Washington; they have crawled into the bureaucratic pile in the capital and lie there working in ways which are hidden from the public gaze.
These men are extremely class-conscious and carry on a consistent struggle in behalf of their class. And those “public servants” who deviate from the line are eliminated, as witness the departure of Henderson.
All of the biggest corporations are represented by their top men in the government boards that determine the conditions under which the proletariat works and lives. United States Steel and General Electric are there; General Motors and Standard Oil, the shipping interests and the machine tool industry. They have the ears of cabinet officers and of their favorite senator or representative. They swarm all over Washington and carry on in the interest of their class. This is really the sort of regime that the labor bureaucracy consented to have when they began their retreat and eventually capitulated to the demands put forth by Roosevelt. The organized labor movement did not understand this, for reasons which we will go into later.
The real internal crisis became visible when labor began to evince dissatisfaction and develop a restlessness that expressed itself in numerous slow-downs and spontaneous strikes. These are the strikes that the labor bureaucrats and the capitalist press call “wildcat strikes.” But they are no more wildcat than any other strikes. That is, they are not wildcat in the sense that they have no sound basis or in the sense that the workers have no genuine grievances. They are wildcat only in the sense that they have not been called and are not approved by the top leadership of the unions. The fact is that this is the only method available to the rank and file of the unions for putting pressure on their leaders to cease and desist from “negotiating with our enemies against us.” This was the expression used by a delegate to the April 1942 conference of the Automobile Workers Union.
The antagonism and the contradiction between the objective and subjective interests of the workers and the 100 per cent pro-war, class collaboration position of the trade union bureaucracy, is the real heart of the crisis in the labor movement. The two do not and cannot go together. They cannot and will not be reconciled. The proletariat is beginning to have some primitive understanding of this fact. To the extent that they develop and increase this understanding, to that same degree will the crisis deepen and broaden.
 
The Influence of the New Deal
In order to get a clear appreciation of the present situation it is necessary to look for its source and examine its history. It is the opinion of this writer that the roots of the contemporary crisis of the proletariat lie in the New Deal set-up and the ideas on capitalist planning that were assumed to be the lifeblood of that ill-fated nostrum of the “liberal” bourgeoisie. The real meaning of the New Deal was and always has been obscured by the hosannas of praise that were heaped on the New Deal by every variety of liberals and by organized labor. They closed their ears and their minds to the very clear and definitive statements made by Roosevelt even when in the midst of a campaign for re-election. The chief protagonist of the New Order of 1933 said again and again in very positive tones that the purpose of the New Deal was to save capitalism. In his Syracuse speech in 1936 Roosevelt told the “economic royalists” that he had saved them, that if it had not been for his administration and the measures he had taken there would have been riots and serious social disorders.
This was the central theme of the New Deal: save the profit system, protect bourgeois rule, keep the social order from collapse or from being overturned by an increasingly militant proletariat. This fact was buried beneath all the paraphernalia of the NIRA, Section 7A, the WPA, PWA, AAA, HOLC., etc. To this should be added the pro-CIO decisions of the NLRB and many other beneficial but temporary aspects of New Deal legislation. All of these labor Magna Cartas rolling from the halls of Congress, like pension bills, served to blind labor to the real meaning of the New Deal. It was here that the present crisis in the labor movement had its beginnings.
The United States, along with the rest of the capitalist world, was in the grip of the severest economic crisis in history. The question was being asked whether it was possible for capitalism to go on for another decade. Those whose business it was to study the course of capitalist development and draw political conclusions therefrom said that capitalism was at least in the next to the last stage of its decline. The proletariat was told that it was now faced with the greatest ordeal of its career: the crisis and the world decline of capitalism. This would be accompanied by mass unemployment, misery and imperialist war.
The central question of the day was put to the ruling class: “Can this system which you so tenaciously defend, feed, clothe and shelter the masses of the people? Can it dispel their misery and grant them peace, security and happiness?” To this question the ruling class had no answer. All one could get from these giants and honored patriarchs of the Republic was incoherent babbling about “the American Way of Life” and “Our System of Free Enterprise.” They were socially bankrupt. The breadlines of every city, the desolation of the farms, the steady wandering of able-bodied men and women from place to place, the fact that garbage cans became the banquet table of countless unemployed, all this attested to the bankruptcy of the bourgeoisie.
Roosevelt, as the representative of the so-called enlightened bourgeoisie, understood all of this but labor did not. Hence he and his New Deal were hailed by labor and its “friends” throughout the land. Roosevelt knew then and he knows today that some concessions had to be made to the working class, to the masses of the people. The steady march and tramp of the unemployed legions had taught him this much: not only must the masses be appeased but they must even be coddled a little. The most stubborn among the bourgeoisie were chastised and made to accept the new program for their own good. Both capital and labor were brought together under a regime of governmental paternalism.
Both capital and labor were to have their “rights.” The Roosevelt government would guarantee this. Labor would have the right to organize and bargain collectively. They must have “good wages” and decent hours. Capital must also have the right to organize and bargain collectively with labor. Capital also must have “good wages,” that is, a “fair profit.” Both capital and labor were forbidden to interfere with the rights of each other. Labor accepted the New Deal and Roosevelt with trust and confidence. The Marxists were unable to stem the reformist tide.
 
New Unionism and the CIO
With this development the trade union movement, notably the CIO, entered upon a new career. A new theory of labor struggle was born and put into practice. It was the theory of government as a non-class institution which would not only mediate between capital and labor but would really be a partisan of organized labor. Labor, as its leaders saw it, entered a new existence: the ward of the federal government.
The bourgeoisie did not accept its new status as partner in the tripartite arrangement that was to exist between government, capital and labor. They remained principled protagonists of class struggle and bided their time: the time when they would be needed and when the New Emancipator would be forced to call on them for help in prosecuting the next war. They knew their place in society and their rôle in history. Above all they knew that their interests lay with the class to which they belonged.
It is necessary to understand and underscore the failure of the trade union movement to perceive what was going on. The bourgeoisie was faced with the steady downward course of capitalist society and bourgeois democracy. The factories were idle, cargo vessels were at anchor, land transport was unused, banks were collapsing, stocks and bonds were far below par, dividends were of the halcyon days of the past and profits were a hope for the future. Therefore the bourgeoisie was faced with the dire necessity to do something “radical” for the salvation of their reign and their system. Their answer was the New Deal. And the proletariat – despite the fact that the objective conditions were ripe for a real New Order, for a workers’ New Order – had no program of its own, no insight and no leadership capable and adequate for the task that history had placed before it.
The working class was propagandized to accept the alleged fact that now it had the “right to organize.” This was supposed to have been provided by Section 7A of the National Labor Relations Act. The labor movement went into rhapsodies over this “fact,” even though it already had this right which on more than one occasion was given legal sanction by the Supreme Court. But the fanfare of trumpets about the “right to organize” was part of the concession that the bourgeoisie was prepared, under pressure, to grant the proletariat. And there was legislation for collective bargaining and the social security program. This, then, was to be the “workers’ century.”
The whole program of the New Deal was aimed at industrial peace in a period of turbulence and of the inability of the bourgeoisie to quell the unrest by satisfying the material needs of the people. Its aim was to neutralize the class struggle and harmonize the interests of the two classes, which was necessary in order to give a wounded and gasping capitalist democracy time in which to repair its broken limbs and to rehabilitate itself.
In this whole development one sees the source and beginnings of the present difficulties in the labor movement. For it was during the New Deal days that labor was tied to the government. In this sense the trade union movement was coralled by the bourgeoisie. Behind this phenomena was the real contributions made by the New Deal to the material welfare of the working class. In a period of mass misery and despair, only the absence of a revolutionary leadership and party prevented the independent political development of the American proletariat. It therefore succumbed to reformism. All it could do was wait for a leader who could tap the federal Treasury and the tremendous accumulated financial reserves of the bourgeoisie. This Roosevelt did. In a sense, therefore, the New Deal was a bribe – a bribe paid to the proletariat in a potentially revolutionary period.
 
The Shock of the War
But this dream of labor was shattered. This vision of an Elysian existence under the benign and paternal glance of the government was decomposed by events over which neither labor nor the New Dealers had any control. Three thousand miles of ocean on one side and 7,000 on the other no longer kept the United States immune from “foreign entanglements.” We were about to get the first real and potent demonstration of the oft-repeated saying that capitalism today is an international economic order. The barbarian invasions under the banner of fascism were covering the whole of Europe with concentration camps and bringing industry and finance under the control of Germany’s ruling class. The bourgeoisie in the United States had maintained its equanimity throughout the period of the destruction of the trade unions, the blood purges, and the hounding, robbing and murder of the Jews. As a matter of fact, they were quite happy over the German experiment. They had gone their profit-seeking way after the sack of Austria and Czechoslovakia. So long as they could convince themselves that the main aim of Hitler was the destruction of the Soviet Union they were undisturbed lovers of the peace. But when the Nazi hordes turned westward, Hitler made it clear that his aims were more elaborate than the subjugation of a Poland or the rescue of his kinsmen in the Sudetenland from Czechoslovakian exploitation.
The New Deal became the War Deal and after a series of political maneuvers extending over a period of three years the bourgeoisie entered the Second Imperialist World War. Just as the labor movement had failed to understand the crisis of capitalist democracy in the days of the “great depression,” it now failed to comprehend this greater crisis that bourgeois democracy faced. While the depression was world-wide it was nevertheless possible for the ruling class, through the New Deal, to use a part of the enormous wealth that had been accumulated for a program of internal welfare work that would alleviate the terrible suffering of the masses. Foreign entanglements could not be a major factor in this program. But the new crisis for the bourgeoisie brought it face to face with a powerfully armed external foe, out for world domination. Its very existence was at stake and there was no time to be concerned with the “socialistic” experiments of the New Dealers.
The labor movement failed to understand that the change over from the New Deal to the War Deal was not a change in the primary aims of the bourgeoisie and the government. Even during the days of the New Deal the chief aim was the preservation of capitalism and the capitalist way of life. While formerly the struggle was against the national proletariat, now with the coming of the Second Imperialist World War the struggle of the bourgeoisie is not only against its own proletariat but also against another imperialist ruling class. The class struggle in the United States continues, but to this is added an inter-bourgeois struggle on an international scale, a war between the German-Japanese-Italian ruling class and the Anglo-American ruling class.
That the class struggle in the United States continues unabated is a fact that the organized proletariat is only beginning to understand in a vague sort of way. The assault on labor is just beginning to reveal the true relationship between the classes, yet the workers believe, because this is what they are taught by their leaders, that big business is concerned with smashing the unions because they don’t like unions, or that big business men are simply concerned with getting their big salaries and dividends.
The situation is not so simple. In the present circumstances the American bourgeoisie fights for its very economic and political life. It fights for its national existence. To fight for national existence means to fight for world domination. In this sense the present war differs from the First Imperialist World War. In that war one could say that it was a war for the redivision of the world. England dominated the world’s trade and protected this domination with the powerful British fleet. Germany wanted a part of this trade and more colonies. But even the colonies which Germany held were taken away from her and turned over to France and England under a mandate arrangement. France organized and financed the armies of the little refurbished “republics” of Central Europe and dreamed of domination over continental Europe.
The war has changed many things. Hitler seeks world domination for the German ruling class. This means to bring world trade, raw materials, agricultural areas, mineral resources, the colonial regions and the “democratic” nations under the domination of the German ruling class. But this is not the aim of the German bourgeoisie alone. The national bourgeoisie of England and the United States is caught in the same vise of necessity. To fight for its life today is to fight for imperialist expansion, for world dominion.
When a ruling class is faced with such a dilemma, it cannot tolerate its government, its executive committee, posing as a friend of labor. This is too dangerous. It demands that its government become the overseer of labor. The ruling class does not always use such harsh language, of course. In the first stages it employs a milder approach. Hence the demand for “national unity.” This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it: “equality of sacrifice.”
The working class does not understand that the demand for national unity, no matter in what soft tones it may be made, is a demand for the subordination of the proletariat to the bourgeoisie. Carried out in practice – and practice is what the ruling class insists on – national unity is a demand for the working class to do all of the sacrificing.
 
“Equality of Sacrifice” and the Workers
The demand of the ruling class for “equality of sacrifice” is only a corollary to the demand for national unity. Some of them couch this demand in very crude terms and say that this is labor’s war, that labor has more to gain by winning the war than any other group. Ralph Bard, Assistant Secretary of the Navy, told the last CIO convention that “it’s largely your war. There are more workers than there are lawyers or bankers or corporation executives.” The fact that the ranks of labor can sit peacefully while such insults are uttered by government officialdom is an indication of the bourgeois poison that has seeped into labor’s ranks.
Militant workers who do not agree with what is taking place in the unions find themselves in a very embarrassing and harassing situation. They are in disagreement with the program of their own leadership. Being unable to untangle the complex web of relationships that exist between the labor bureaucracy, the government and the employers, and the reasons for the actions of their leaders, they either become discouraged or follow in a listless and uninspiring manner. The trade union bureaucracy is responsible for this situation. While no one should expect the present-day trade union leaders to break through the capitalist integument and become proponents of revolutionary thinking and action, it is not necessary for them to bend so far backward that it is difficult to distinguish them from the government and industrial bureaucrats. This is not required for a trade union leadership even in the present wartime situation. The labor leaders today are full-fledged “labor lieutenants of capital” and it is extremely difficult to isolate their thinking and their action on working class problems from that of Roosevelt and the bourgeois “friends of labor.” They merge the interests of labor with the interests of the bourgeoisie, dosing their eyes to the fact of class divisions in society and the realities of class struggle.
The capitulation of the trade union bureaucracy to the government and the ruling class, however, does not resolve the class struggle. This struggle cannot be dissolved by class collaboration on the part of the union leadership. The struggle can be atomized for a period and the proletariat may be subdued for a time, but the problems arising from ownership of the instruments of production and the concomitant problems of private profit, exploitation and wage labor do not vanish simply because trade union leaders go around giving birth to fervid and plaintive utterances about “the people’s war,” “equality of sacrifice” and “total mobilization.”
The proletariat in the factories know this all too well. It is in the plants that the facts of the capitalist encirclement of the working class reveals itself. It is here that the imperialist war-makers are exposed for what they are. It is here that the workers learn, all too slowly to be sure, whose side Roosevelt is on and whose interests he represents. Millions of proletarians working on war orders have seen the employers attempt to push them to the wall since their leaders gave up the right to strike. Above all they notice that Roosevelt and his various boards have not come to then: aid and assistance.
Therefore, when these workers come to one of their conventions they are completely mystified by the proposals, speeches and recommendations of the trade union bureaucrats. They know that what the leaders are saying contradicts their experience in the shops. They also know that their experiences and the accumulated experience of the labor movement during the past two years is nearer the real situation than the representations of the leadership. But they don’t know the meaning of what the leadership is doing and saying. They do not understand that the labor bureaucracy are not only “capital’s labor lieutenants,” but political recruiting sergeants of the bourgeoisie. Hence their conventions, presumably called to discuss the economic problems of the working class, are from opening to adjournment political gatherings of the proletariat to listen to second-hand reports which the bureaucracy has passively imbibed from Roosevelt or his subalterns. It is in these conventions today that the working class is oriented and regimented toward full political and organizational support of the war. This is the point at which the proletariat dwells in a sort of twilight zone between its understanding of its economic requirements and a lack of understanding of the political situation and its own class needs.
 
Political Failings Stand Out
Into this welter of confusion, betrayal and ignorance come the Stalinists, the super-patriots running at the heels of Stalin and supervised by the GPU. They have influence in the labor movement, but this influence is placed whole-heartedly at the service of the bourgeoisie and the government. The trade union bureaucracy, which really hates and fears them, is unable to escape their reach because this bureaucracy, on the main question of the war, has politics which is identical with that of the Stalinists. The Stalinists, therefore are political bedfellows of the erstwhile anti-Stalinist labor leadership and of all the war-mongers among the liberals. They warn the workers to step up production and do the will of the War Production Board or this board will take away the maintenance of membership awards. All those workers who express their resentment at the capitulation of their leadership and the assault of the employers are labelled “irresponsible” and “seditious.” They call on the government to suppress labor papers which oppose the war and every worker who is anti-war is a “Trotskyite.”
This is a dark picture, but the light begins to break through. It comes from the only source that it can come from: the proletariat itself. Those who bear the main burden are dissatisfied and they begin to stir. There is murmuring among the people; that is, among the working class. The leadership feels this pressure of the ranks and they are genuinely concerned. Their concern will increase for there is no good reason to believe that the trade union leadership will alter its course or that the workers will continue their retreat.
While the workers dissent and show their feelings in various practical ways inside the plants, their protests are weak, inchoate and disorganized. Here we see the most militant part of the world’s proletarian forces faced with the highest political task of all time, with the threat of becoming engulfed in world fascism, without a class-conscious leadership, with little or no political understanding and no mass political organization. The political and ideological attack of the bourgeoisie is being answered by outmoded and impotent trade union formulas good for a previous era, the era of direct negotiations with the employer and before the direct and constant intervention of the government.
The trade union movement, ten million strong, with millions more crying for organization, is being pushed back and subordinated to the demands of a tottering imperialist ruling class. These demands are being made by this blundering and senile ruling class right at the time when its only answer to the economic demands of the people is to drench the world in blood and visit terrible destruction on mankind. And this, in order to perpetuate and maintain its rule. It asks the proletariat to come to its aid, to assist it in achieving these aims, which when realized can only mean the perpetuation of the enslavement of that same proletariat.
The bourgeoisie today demands obeisance from the trade union leadership and submission from the proletariat under the pretense that it fights against fascism and for democracy.
This is the banner that the workers are asked to rally to. The leaders of government, industry and finance know that the proletariat is and must be the mortal enemy of fascism. The workers have seen the snarl of the fascist dictator and tasted the misery of his concentration camp. They are eternally against the victory of Hitler and all his works. They are for the complete defeat of Hitler, his military defeat and his ideological defeat. This means that the proletariat is against fascism and for democracy. But the democracy for which the proletariat is willing to lay down its life is not guaranteed by this present ruling class. Their record is bad and their credentials are spurious. Their record is displayed all across the land as plain as day for every worker to see and understand. We have recounted that record in this article and every worker has experienced its meaning in every shop, mill, mine and factory and on the farm.
Fascism is not a geographical, racial or national phenomenon. It is political counter-revolution in a period of economic decay and disintegration and may strike in any country where there is prolonged economic crisis. Fascism is capitalism in an epoch during which the bourgeoisie can no longer satisfy the material wants and demands of the people, when the bourgeoisie democratic social services can no longer be supplied and when bourgeois civil liberties and democratic rights may serve as a weapon of the proletariat against the rule of the bourgeoisie. It is capitalism enervated but confronted by a militant, organized proletariat demanding its place in the sun and a larger portion of the wealth which it produces.
The workers of the whole world today stand in the shadow of fascism, not German fascism alone, but the potential fascization of every capitalist imperialist nation. There is a difference between the military defeat of Germany and the defeat of fascism. A military victory over Germany is not guarantee of the continuation of democracy in the victor nations. In fact, it is admitted by all but the most stubborn among the bourgeois that the status quo ante bellum cannot be maintained, that there must be something better, that is, a far more democratic world order.
 
Political Organization of the Workers Imperative
This is the central problem for this generation for the organized labor movement. It is a problem of political organization to stay the advance of fascism, to improve the economic standards of the working class and to deliver the proletariat finally from the grip of the imperialist exploiters, whether native or “foreign.” As the primary mass organization of the proletariat it is the function of the trade unions today to transform themselves into fighting class bodies with a constant vision of society regenerated and transformed, transformed from capitalist exploitation, imperialist aggression and the danger of fascism into a world of socialist freedom, peace and security.
To carry out this task it will be necessary for the trade unions to proceed in a very practical way. On the basis of their understanding of their needs and the requirements of the period the trade unions must go into action and take the necessary concrete steps. The goal is a practical one: the transformation of the social order and the administration of the new society by the working class, that is, by the majority.
The most obvious practical step required for independent working class political action is political organization. There can be no proletarian class political action unless there is an independent political party of that class. Labor cannot protect its class interests and enforce its political demands in the Democratic-Republican Party or in alliance with this party. Labor should know by now that the Republicans and Democrats do not and cannot in any sense whatsoever represent the trade unions and the workers. If they never learned this before, the course of the war should by now have indelibly fastened this fact in their consciousness.
The formation of a national Labor Party based on the trade union masses would be a tremendous step forward for American labor. This party should have a militant economic program and a class struggle political program. Now is the time to form such a party because it is now that labor is under the severest attack. Such a party is necessary for the protection of the interests of labor, not only right now but to plan for untoward events that may follow any peace or truce entered into by the imperialist belligerents.
The orientation of the trade union movement toward independent class struggle political action and the formation of a workers’ party must be the responsibility of the leading militants in the unions, particularly the militant shop stewards and the union Marxists and revolutionaries. The trade union bureaucracy will not give attention to this task. They are too busy today supporting the war. The militants and the revolutionaries must differentiate themselves from these defenders and deputies of capitalist imperialism. The militants in direct contact with the workers can call on them to stand their ground, halt the retreat, about-face and confront the class enemy. This is the task for today and tomorrow. The militants and the revolutionaries can furthermore point out to the men and women in the shops that labor can start now to prepare for entering the 1944 elections with the first national mass Labor Party in American history.
 



On two successive days, January 6 and 7, the New York Times and other papers carried obituary notices and short biographies of two distinguished and well known scholars, educators and research students. One was A. Lawrence Lowell, former president of Harvard, the other was George W. Carver, member of the faculty of Tuskegee Institute. Both men were: outstanding in their respective fields of investigation: Carver in the field of agricultural chemistry and biology; Lowell in the science of government. Here the parallel, between the two men ends.
Lowell was a Boston Brahman, born to the purple, a resident of “Gold Coast Boston.” The Times says that ‘’after his retirement from Harvard he lived in his austere Marlboro Street home in Boston’s Back Bay or at his summer place on Cape Cod.”
He was a descendant of John Lowell, a member of the convention of 1780 which framed the Massachusetts constitution, and of Francis Cabot Lowell, who established the foundation of the family fortune when he started cotton mills at Waltham and the town of Lowell, named after the family. .His father was Augustus Lowell, a Boston financier. He was a brother of Percival Lowell, the Harvard astronomer, and of Amy Lowell, the poetess. His ancestors were Harvard educated from 1760 to the present day.
Lowell himself was administrator of the Augustus Lowell Trust which held a controlling interest in many profit-making and dividend-paying New England industries. He had inherited enough wealth to be able in 1933 to give $1,000,000 to Harvard for establishing the Harvard Society of Fellows. This was A. Lawrence Lowell, Boston aristocrat, owner of textile mills, professor of government, president of the oldest university in the United States.
 
Fortune Built on Slavery
The Lowell family textile mills in Lowell got their cotton from the fields of the South. They established their mills in the last decade of the eighteenth century in the days of slavery and the slave trade. They were like old Peter Fanuiel, who made his money from the slave trade and then used a part of it to build Fanuiel Hall, which came to be known as the “Cradle of Liberty.”
Not only was the Lowell fortune built on slavery, but on the severest exploitation of native and immigrant labor in Lowell and Waltham. After the overthrow of the slave system in the Civil War, the Second American Revolution, the cotton for the Lowell mills continued to come out of the sweat, blood and tears of white and black labor in the South.
Workers, of course, know little or nothing about this side of the life of A. Lawrence Lowell, scholar, blue-blood and University president. We want to call their attention, however, to another field in which this man Lowell made a name for himself, an altogether infamous name.
 
Lowell – And Vanzetti
Lowell, a man by the name of Stratton, who was head of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and an obscure judge by the name of Grant were named by the Governor to act as an advisory commission in the Governor’s investigation of the Sacco-Vanzetti case. Here all the disdain, the contempt and the hatred of the working class that had been bred in the breasts of this class of Boston Brahmans, came out. Lowell was revealed and exposed not as the impartial and unbiased scholar searching for “truth,” but as the textile mill owner, as a most reactionary protector of the interests of the class to which he belonged.
Vanzetti wrote to a Mrs. Evans from the Charleston prison on July 17, 1927: “But my hunger strike is progressing because I know that both the Governor and the commission have ill-treated our witnesses, wrongly, and that they believe nothing of what our witnesses say. They believe, and treat well those handful of criminals, harlots and degenerated who perjured against us.” In another letter Vanzetti writes of how the commission had “abuse[d] three Italian men because they witnessed the truth. Lately it was found out that the three men had told the truth.”
The Lowell: commission denied the request of defense attorneys for public hearings. They held private interviews with the miserable and reactionary Thayer, who was the trial judge. They held private sessions with eleven of the Dedham trial jurors and the prosecuting attorney. They refused to tell defense counsel what these interviews disclosed. After these star chamber sessions the commission came in with a report that Sacco and Vanzetti had been given a “fair trial” and that there was no reason for the Governor’s intervention. After years of the most brutal kicking around by the whole pack of their capitalist oppressors, these two humble Italians, who nobody but a plain fool could believe guilty, were electrocuted on August 22, 1927. And Lowell lived on in his “austere Marlborough Street home in Boston’s Back Bay ...”
 
Carver’s Background
The other distinguished scholar, George Washington Carver, had no such background as Lowell’s. He was descended from and born of the slaves who picked the cotton that went to Lowell’s mills. His ancestors did not come over on the Mayflower seeking freedom. They were snatched away from a life of freedom, fastened with chains and subjected to the horrors of the Middle Passage. When they arrived in the United. States they were herded on the cotton, rice and tobacco fields.
Dr. Carver could not read nor write before he was twenty. Lowell graduated from Harvard at twenty-one, cum laude with highest honors in mathematics. There was no Exeter, Andover or Groton for Carver. There was not even a public elementary school worth the name. In infancy he was stolen along with his mother and carried into Arkansas. His mother was never heard of again but the boy was bought back from his kidnappers for a race horse worth $300 and returned to his home in Missouri. This was happening to Carver and other Negro boys while Lowell and other sons of the aristocracy were being nurtured by educated and well-placed families.
Carver worked his way through high school and the Iowa State College of Agriculture and Mechanical Arts. Almost immediately he entered upon what was to be his life work at Tuskegee Institute in Alabama. The story of his achievements in the field of scientific agricultural research has been told again and again and need not be repeated here.
 
Worked with Peanut
His best known work was with the peanut, the sweet potato and the common Alabama clays. Here his chemical wizardry produced what to the ordinary man may seem like miracles, beside which the dreams of the old alchemists for the transmutation of the “base metals” into gold appear elementary and primitive. He produced more than one hundred products from the peanut, including wood stains, face creams, milk and an oil useful in the treatment of infantile paralysis. From the sweet potato he produced among others: dyes, coffee and flour. From the red clay of Alabama he got ink, paper and pigments.
Dr. Carver aroused a great deal of discussion over what he claimed was his method of discovery. He said: “My discoveries come like a direct revelation from God.” This statement worried many people. They concluded that while Carver was a genius, he was also a little “backward.” But Carver gave the key to the whole problem when be said that “the idea and the method of working out a new product come all together. In half an hour after the idea was revealed to me, I produced the yolk of an egg from the Puerto Rican sweet potato.”
This is not the time nor the place to enter into this aspect of Dr. Carver’s attitude toward science and scientific method and discovery. Perhaps Carver himself wasn’t clear on many aspects of the question. This is not unusual among great scientists. There is a constant discussion going on today among great scientists on how scientific discovery or invention is made. That is all that can be said on this matter here.
 
“Prove Yourself” Nonsense
We want to emphasize again that here was a Negro of humble ancestry coming out of slavery and oppression who reached the ultimate heights in a highly technical and scientific profession. (He had the unusual distinction of being made a member of the Royal Society of London.) Carver achieved this distinction in the most violently prejudiced environment in the whole world. What might happen in the lives of countless Negro youth living in a different environment – an environment free from race prejudice and Jim Crow? What might happen in the lives of countless white youth if they could live in an environment free from class prejudice and capitalist exploitation and discrimination?
Some nit-wit will perhaps say that the hardships to which George Washington Carver was subjected were good for him, that they brought out the best in him. This, of course is sheer nonsense. The Lowell families would never accept this argument for any of their offspring, but it is such people who think that privation, misery and hardship are excellent training for the “lower classes.”
Finally there are fools in the land who are always yelping that “the Negro must prove himself.” There was the Southern “statesman” who said that if he found a Negro who could conjugate a Greek verb (quite a task) he would believe the Negro was equal to the white man. As if in reply, a Negro wrote a Greek grammar. It was said that Negroes are not skilled mechanics. When they applied for training or apprenticeship they were turned down or given the run-around. When they broke through, like Carver, they were denied employment. And yet the pack kept howling: “Prove yourselves.”
This is all nonsense and worse. It is Jim Crow! It is race exploitation and class exploitation!
No Negro should be beguiled in the least into accepting such puerile Jim Crow clap-trap. They should point to all the distinguished Negro men and women in every field and to the thousands of humble Negro workers in every phase of activity who have already proved themselves.
The proof has been made. All that remains today is the will and the determination on the part of the Negro masses to break through the national policy of Jim Crow that keeps them second-class citizens, even during a war which is presumably a war for democracy.
 




The organized labor movement in the United States is getting together in annual conventions. Two great federations of labor, the AFL and the CIO, will convene in Boston and Philadelphia on October 4 and November 1, respectively. Several of the more important internationals of these two federations are also holding their annual conventions. During September and October the United Electrical, Radio & Machine Workers, the United Automobile Workers and the Industrial Union of Marine & Shipbuilding Workers will have met.
These conventions will be made up of thousands of delegates, representing twelve to fifteen millions of workers. They will come from mine, mill and factory. There will be youth, male and female, attending their first labor convention. There will be grizzled veterans of the picket line and of the class struggle. There will be Negro delegates from the CIO industrial unions. There will be Jew and Gentile, Catholic and Protestant, native born and those born beyond the seas.
These thousands of delegates will assemble to hear the annual reports of their national and international officers. They will listen with attention as the officials report on their stewardship during the past year.
Thousands of worker delegates to the various conventions will discuss and vote on urgent and serious questions that confront them daily in the mines, mills and factories. They will pay close attention and give serious consideration to every major issue. They will do this because they represent millions back home who have elected them to be their representatives; to speak and vote for them, to argue for them and to represent their interests. And, too, these delegates, taking responsibility for their own acts, must report to the millions back home on their stewardship.
What are the main problems that these delegates will be confronted with? We can state them simply and directly. All of the conventions and each delegate will be faced with the problem of the Little Steel formula, this high wall which encloses labor in a concentration camp of low wages, and holds the working man and working woman to a permanent low standard of living as long as the formula is operative.
Each convention and delegate will be confronted with the government’s job stabilization decree, which makes it impossible for labor to improve its economic status, standard of living and working conditions by moving freely about from one employer to another.
Labor is faced with the Smith-Connally Act, which makes it a penal offense for labor to use its most powerful weapon, its numbers, in an organized and militant manner in order to wring concessions from the bosses.
Each convention will be faced with the problem of what to do about the War Labor Board, that monstrosity composed of labor, employers and “the public.” This is the mongrel group of bosses and their cringing stooges, the “public” group, among whom is one Wayne Morse, so-called “liberal,” the board’s “compliance officer” and, in plain language, its chief cop. This is the board that clutches at the throat of labor in full arrogance and malice, aided and abetted by the “protesting labor group” of the AFL and CIO.
 
WLB, Taxes and Profiteers
Labor has one important question to decide in connection with this War Labor Board: should its elected officers continue to sit as members of the WLB? Members of the unions cannot fully control and influence the acts of the employer and “public” members of the board, but labor does have the right and the power to control its own elected officials. It has been demonstrated that the labor group on the board has little or no influence to swing the board to the side of labor in any important way. Labor’s officials can only support the reactionary acts of the employer members and their lieutenants of the “public” group, as they did in the case of the coal miners, or hand in protests and unavailing minority reports.
Taxes have become a burden too heavy for the workers to bear. What position will the conventions take on this matter? How can labor continue to bear the heavy burden of income taxes and at the same time provide the families of the working class with a decent standard of living?
There is the problem of the OPA and its daily and weekly misrepresentations about controlling and rolling back prices. What does it mean to roll back prices a few cents on articles of food, like peanut butter, after prices have advanced from 25 to 100 per cent? And what worker believes that the OPA or any other government agency will really do anything effective in connection with price control? The only effective means of price control is to send the food profiteers to jail. These include the big meat packers, the canners, the big dairy monopolies, the chain stores and other huge food distributing combines. What worker is so stupid or naive as to believe that the government will fill the jails with the profiteers?
The profiteers don’t go to jail. They go to Washington and take over the Roosevelt government boards – the WPB, OPA, WLB, etc.
 
The Labor Draft and Sanctions
What will labor leaders and the conventions do about the semi-fascist Austin-Wadsworth bill, calling for labor conscription? This is a forced-labor bill that can be used to establish peonage all over the United States, similar to the practices indulged in by some of the Southern states.
Will Roosevelt’s vicious decree of August 16, ordering sanctions against labor, come up for free and frank discussion in the various conventions? Or will the union leadership attempt to stifle discussion of this labor-enslaving decree? Is labor prepared and willing to continue voting for a fourth term for Roosevelt after it understands what this man is doing to the unions and the working class?
What does Roosevelt’s decree mean? It says that, in cases where a union refuses to comply with the decisions of the WLB the plant may be taken over, union dues may be impounded by the government where there is a check-off, and other “benefits, privileges or rights accruing to it as such under the agreement or proposed agreement with the employer” may be withheld by the WLB “until the union demonstrates its willingness and capacity to abide by the obligations thereof.”
Further, the decree directs that “in the case of non-complying individuals” with decisions of the WLB, the War Manpower Commission may modify or cancel “draft deferments or employment privileges, or both.” That is, any worker who refuses to permit himself to be shackled by the boss-ridden WLB may be put into the Army immediately, or he may be denied employment! Labor’s Political Tasks
And this from Roosevelt, the “friend of labor,” the “author” of the New Deal, that great experiment in the “four freedoms.”
The United Mine Workers Journal correctly says that government “bureaucrats have the power to make a man work on the job they choose for him. They can keep him from getting the job he wants. They can determine his rights as a union man. They tell him what kind of union he can join. They tell him what part of the country he can work in. They tell him what kind of food he can eat. They can and do regulate what he can spend his money for and how far he can travel in his car. If he strikes he can be indicted for it.”
All of these things are being done to labor by the Democratic Party, the party of the New Deal, the “New Order”, in the United States which seeks to become the “World New Order” under the guidance of Roosevelt.
The Republican Party claims to be all heated up about the “bureaucracy in Washington.” They have some freedoms, too, that they want to spread over the earth. Willkie, the titular head of this band of outs trying to get to the trough after twelve lean years, is all ready for his second start. He too loves labor.
This brings us to another problem that will face the conventions. This is the question of political action by labor. What will the conventions say on this important matter? The CIO has already spoken. Murray, other CIO leaders and the Stalinist “Communist” Party are for the re-election of Roosevelt; for Roosevelt, with his WLB, his OPA and his WMC. Bill Green and the AFL have not changed a bit. They are still for supporting their “friends” and punishing their enemies. But there is a rising tide in the ranks of labor, among the rank and file, for genuine independent political action by labor. Some workers are thinking, rather vaguely, it is true, that, labor should form its own Independent Labor Party, and break away from the Democratic and Republican Parties. These workers begin to understand that neither the Democratic nor the Republican Party is the party of labor.
All of these are most important questions that will come before the conventions. Will the delegates insist on adequate, open and democratic discussion of these questions? Or will they permit a leadership already committed to the support of Roosevelt or Willkie, already promised to one or the other of the two boss parties, to sidetrack the discussion and lead it into “safe” channels?
Will the delegates permit the leadership to woo them away from their desire to rescind the no-strike pledge which was given by the trade union leaders without consultation with the membership of the unions which they claim to represent?
If the conventions give adequate attention to the problems before the labor movement that are raised here, there will be no place on the convention agendas for speeches by government officials, telegrams from Roosevelt, replies thereto and other types of sugar-coated but anti-labor ballyhoo, so highly esteemed by the trade union leadership. And these are the problems which are crucial for the labor movement.
 




Many shipyard workers who were delegates to the ninth convention of the Industrial Union of Marine & Shipbuilding Workers must be asking themselves by now just why this convention was held at all. The delegates have had time to think over their recent convention held in New York last week and the most militant and intelligent of them must be amazed that they sat quietly through four days of indifference, lethargy, futility and bunkum.
The dullness and gloom that pervaded this convention were punctured only by the discussion on the “Velson case:” This “case,” however, which we will report on later in this article, certainly was no credit to either side.
To add to the general dullness of the convention, there was an unusual array of stupid and puerile speeches by government officials. While all of these government officials are attending the conventions for a purpose – to put over the line of more production for less pay, for labor to work longer hours, to admonish the unions to do police duty against “absenteeism,” to harangue the delegates about “this is labor’s war” – their presentation at the shipbuilders’ convention was really a miserable spectacle. It must have been embarrassing to President Green to have to stand there like a master of ceremonies in a night club, asking the audience to give a hand to some ham of a performer.
 
The Zombies Take the Floor
There was Assistant Secretary of the Navy Bard. He is a regular visitor to labor conventions. He always makes the same speech. We remember his speech at the CIO convention last year when he gave as proof that this is a “workers’ war,” the fact that there are more workers in the United States than there are corporation lawyers, corporation presidents or millionaires.
Admiral Land was present to give the delegates some “inspiring remarks,” as President Green put it. The admiral began his remarks by saying that he had “known Johnnie Green for many years.” He had also known the meaning of a dollar for fifty years, because he had come up the hard way. In his youth he had worked from sunrise to sunset. “We have a common purpose and a common future,” said the admiral. “War is hell. Production costs in Canada and England are lower than in the United States. Absenteeism has cost a hundred ships since Pearl Harbor. In some yards there is too much beating the whistle. Team work is needed. We are all interested in the profit motive. That applies to management and it applies to labor. We all wait for payday. We want no profiteers. Labor, management and government must sit down and plan jointly. I have come to the conclusion that labor leaders are smarter than management. Some day this global war will cease. God speed the day. I haven’t told you anything new.”
This was the kind of rubbish that President Green called an “inspiring message.” An inspiring message from the man who a few months back talked about labor organizers like a Southern backwoods deputy sheriff. This was the “inspiring message” delivered to workers who just recently were denied a small increase of nine cents an hour in wages.
A delegate from Local 43 took the floor to say that Admiral Land was interested in “our production record; we wish that he would be just as interested in our health record.” The admiral was invited to visit the Bethlehem-Fairfield yard during the lunch hour to witness the conditions under which workers are forced to eat their lunch.
 
Bull Session Goes On
General DeWitt was present to represent the Army with a speech. It would be difficult to say just what the general was trying to get across. One thing we remember is that he said he didn’t know anything about ships. This seemed to be the high point of the general’s remarks.
A representative of the British Embassy was present to make a speech. There were the usual speeches by Carey and Haywood, representing the CIO. This is formal procedure, of course.
Charlie Irvin, official press agent for Sidney Hillman and unofficial press agent for Franklin D. Roosevelt, was on hand with a few of his best platitudes. Brother Irvin is convinced that the “Declaration of Independence has never been put into practice, and it won’t be until it is put into practice by working men.” According to Irvin, the only way for workingmen to put the Declaration of Independence into practice is to vote for Roosevelt for a fourth term. “I don’t believe that the American people will ever go back on the man that never went back on the working people,” said Irvin with a great deal of fervor and emphasis.
All of this speaking, most of it irrelevant and nonsensical in any labor convention, took place in four short days that the shipbuilding workers had at their disposal to devote to serious problems that vitally concerned the welfare of themselves, their families and their union. About half of the working time available to the convention was consumed by these speeches, waiting for committee reports and other time-wasting devices, some due to inefficiency and others no doubt deliberately planned by the leadership.
 
The “Unanimous” Decisions
The overwhelming majority of resolutions were passed “unanimously.” We say it this way with quotation marks because, although this was what was announced and although no delegate voted against, it was and is clear that the real feelings of the delegates were not expressed in the voting. A fourth term for Roosevelt, reaffirmation of the no-strike pledge, support of Roosevelt on extending the war in Europe and ideas on postwar planning were embodied in resolutions and passed unanimously.
Of course, it isn’t true that all the delegates to this convention favored a fourth term for Roosevelt. We don’t believe that all of the six hundred delegates to this convention are so naive, backward and politically immature as to believe that independent political action means to vote for Roosevelt or a Republican.
Many of the shipyard workers have come to this country from Scotland and England. They know about the labor parties in those countries. They must know that even with the present policies of these labor parties they represent an advance in many respects beyond the point that labor has reached politically in the United States. There must have been hundreds of delegates in that convention who know that they should have voted against the resolution supporting Roosevelt for a fourth term and in favor of an independent working class Labor Party, free from Roosevelt and Willkie.
Also every delegate to that convention, except the most reactionary, is against the no-strike pledge. How can the rank and file of labor be in support of such a union-breaking device? The very fact that numerous strikes take place is proof enough that the workers are in practice against this pledge given to Roosevelt without their consent. One delegate spoke against the no-strike resolution but he did not vote against it.
Perhaps some of the delegates were intimidated by the fear that they would be charged with “aiding the Axis” and perhaps there were some who believed that “adhering to the no-strike pledge brought gains to the unions and raised wages.” But most of the delegates believe no such piece of foolishness and claptrap. After the “vote” was taken on the no-strike resolution, Green announced: “All right then, remember this resolution was passed unanimously. It is not just a token, it means just what it says.”
On the Smith-Connally bill, one delegate said that Roosevelt did not want the bill, that Congress does not support the union and that “our heads are on the chopping block.” In reply to this, Green said that if labor had taken time out to vote there would have been no Smith-Connally bill. No one, not even the Stalinists, told the convention that John L. Lewis was responsible for the passage of the Smith-Connally bill. This is the official line of the Stalinists and of some of the top leaders of the CIO.
After the admirals, generals and others had completed their rounds, and the resolutions had been given a “unanimous” vote, the convention readied the “Velson case,” and the election of officers and a general executive board.
 
The Velson Case
This case concerned one Irving Velson, president of Local 13 and member of the GEB. Velson had been expelled from the GEB by that body for being a member of the Communist Party. Such membership is in violation of the section of the international constitution which provides for the expulsion from the GEB of anyone who is a Communist, Nazi, Bundist, or who holds to these philosophies.
The appeals committee reported to the convention sustaining the action of the GEB. It was presented as evidence that the Daily Worker had carried an interview with Velson’s mother saying that he had told her that he did not go to Russia because it was better that he stay here and work for a Soviet America; that his teacher’s certificate had been lifted by the New York Board of Education; that his real name is not Velson (he had changed his name to Velson legally); that he had run for office in Brooklyn under the name of Velson before his name was legally changed; that the committee hall received information on Velson from a government body. This government body was reported to have put the committee under oath not to reveal the source of the information.
As to whether or not Velson or any other union member is a member of the Communist Party is not the important side to this case. There were some important aspects to this trial, however. One is the exclusion amendment itself. The amendment was included in the constitution in 1941 before the Stalinists had become the howling “patriots” they are today.
It is our opinion that if such an amendment had not been included in the constitution already it would not have been presented to this convention, for instance, unless for reasons entirely different from those which motivated the union’ officers in 1941.
It was declared on all sides that Velson was a “good union man” and a good organizer. He had been given important tasks by the GEB. The case dragged on for eight months and Velson was expelled from the GEB just before the convening of the convention. Velson and the rest of the Stalinists are just as patriotic now as Green. To be sure, the Stalinists will change their line should Stalin, in the course of the war, decide to make another deal with Hitler. The Stalinists are just as rabid supporters of Roosevelt as is Green and the other IUMSW officers. This, too, of course, will change if Stalin and Hitler get together again. Whether or not a change in line by the Stalinists is likely, is beside the point. We are only talking about how the local Stalinists get their line and how they act on orders from the Kremlin bureaucracy.
The fact that Velson is a member of the Communist Party in no way justifies the constitutional provision for expulsion on the ground of such membership. It is a bureaucratic measure that can be and is used in the labor movement against any and all militants. Moreover, it is a substitute for democratic procedures and education. A merciless exposure of the Stalinists an an anti-labor force would have a thousand times more value than the present action. The difficulty the Green administration finds in such democratic and educational methods is that it stands close to the Stalinists on so many issues.
 
What Motivated the Action
What might have been involved in Green’s motivations briiigs us to the second important aspect of the Velson case. That is the fact that in the GEB and in the convention Velson was supported by Van Gelder, secretary-treasurer of the IUMSWA, and by Walter Pollard, Green-appointed dictator of Local 9 in San Pedro, Calif.
Reports had been going around for many months before the convention that the Stalinists would attempt to take over the union at the next convention. If was reported that Van Gelder was their man. It had been known for some weeks that Pollard, out in Local 9 in San Pedro, formed a bloc with the Stalinists in the local. Pollard maintained this bloc in the convention. The sixteen delegates whom Pollard had appointed to sit in the convention, against the instructions of the GEB, voted solidly against Velson’s ouster from the GEB. Pollard, who is a GEB member, and Van Gelder spoke from the convention floor for the retention of Velson on the General Executive Board.
It was clear that although the Stalinists would not attempt to oust Green or to assume the leadership of the International, the reports about their projected plans to acquire greater influence were in large measure true and factual. Whether or not Van Gelder was involved in these maneuvers, we have no way of knowing, but the evidence certainly supports the belief that Pollard was consciously involved in them.
We are of the opinion that Green and other officers knew about this plot of the Stalinists and that Green’s attitude on the ousting of Velson was dictated in part at least by these considerations.
It should be reported right here that the three delegates who were democratically elected to represent the members of Local 9 in San Pedro and who were financed to the convention by contributions made privately by the membership, voted to sustain the GEB on the Velson expulsion. The important aspect of the vote of these three delegates, Bailly, Malloy and Turner, is that they refused to vote with the bloc of sixteen Pollard-Stalinist-appointed delegates. These three real delegates were seated by the convention on recommendation of the appeals committee. We will deal in detail with Pollard, the Stalinists and Local 9 in another article.
 
The Evidence the Union Used
A third aspect of the Velson case is the source from which the evidence against him came and how it was obtained by the GEB. It seems clear from the testimony given that the information came from one of the government’s police agencies, such as the FBI or Naval Intelligence; or that it came from the Dies Committee. Did the unnamed government agency approach the GEB or did the GEB’s investigating committee seek out the unnamed government agency? What is the attitude of Green and others officers’ of the IUMSWA toward information obtained from government agencies about members of the union? Where will they draw the line? Is it to be the policy of the GEB of the IUMSWA to accept uncritically any information about their members given by government agencies? Are Green, the GEB and other union officers ready to accept passively reports on Workers given by government agencies? Is Green ready to proceed summarily against any member of his international that is labelled “subversive” by a government agency? The employers have the same standards as the government. Will Green accept the word of the employers also? Green knows that this is a very handy tool to be used against any militant worker, a club that is poised over the head of the whole labor movement.
 
Where the Convention Failed
All in all, the convention of the ship workers was a sad affair. There was no discussion on the most serious and vital questions facing the ship workers and the labor movement. There was no discussion on wages, taxes, working hours. Not a word on the WLB and, above all, not a word on the Roosevelt work-or-fight decree of August 16.
There was no committee report on wages and working conditions. According to the Shipyard Worker of September 17: “Green declared that this committee’s actions would have been academic, since wage problems today are mainly resolved by the NWLB and the Director of Economic Stabilization.”
It was a cowardly performance by the top officers of the international and the leadership of the local unions. The convention did virtually nothing that will benefit the shipbuilding workers. It got nowhere.
The delegates did not protest at the convention. It is to be hoped that when they make their reports to their own local unions they will at least speak their minds and tell the truth openly and frankly. And then when they come back next year to their national convention they will have learned how to speak in an organized way in the interest of the thousands of working people they are supposed to represent.
 




The eighth convention of the UAW-CIO opened in Buffalo on Monday, October 4, in an atmosphere of tension, conflict of opinions and positions held by the main groups in the convention. This tenseness and struggle between the groups did not abate, but continued throughout the convention to the day of adjournment on October 10.
While the struggle for power, that is, “control of the international,” was a prominent feature of the convention deliberations, only the most superficial observer could say that this was the main aspect of the Buffalo meeting. The struggle for control of the union had its roots in and took its main form from the mood of the UAW membership and the body of 2,000 delegates which represented these million members at the convention.
There was the Reuther group and the Addes group, which had been formed long before the delegates came together at Buffalo. Reuther was the leader of the faction which contained the overwhelming majority of the militants who wanted to maintain an aggressive and independent international union, fighting for the welfare of its members and for a higher standard of living.
There were good American “patriots” in the Reuther group, but in this sense they did not believe in complete surrender to the war-mongers and to the bosses. While the overwhelming majority of them formally supported the war, they could see ho reason why labor should be called upon to make ALL the sacrifices while big business enriched itself off their backs. By the time the convention convened this group or a large section of it had developed some understanding of the experiences they had been through: in their shops, with the WLB, with other government agencies, Congress, the Administration and the employers. This experience and education reflected itself in the program brought forward by the Reuther group and in the tricky and slimy hedging of the Stalinist delegates on all the important questions before the convention.
The Addes-Frankensteen group was definitely the camp of the Stalinist Communist Party. While it was not clear before the convention exactly where these two stood on all the main questions, there could be no doubt about it in anyone’s mind after the sessions got under way and the main issues reached the floor. This was a faction that followed the Stalinist political line with a high degree of consistency under the direct leadership of the Stalinist whips on the floor of the convention.
There was another influence in the convention which might be called tine Murray-Thomas influence. The point of view of this group was complete and unqualified support of Roosevelt and the war. This was the avenue through which the pressure of Roosevelt and his bureaucracy made itself felt in the convention.
The parade of government speakers and pro-war propaganda began on the second day of the convention with the address of Under-Secretary of War Patterson. He initiated the campaign of direct and indirect agitation whose aim was to prepare the delegates to “vote right” on the important issues that were to come up later in the convention.
On the no-strike pledge Patterson told the delegates that “the War Department appreciates full well the fine effort of the patriotic working men who work long hours to keep production going. The no-strike pledge is a measure that is helping our men to win the war. Don’t think for a minute that the effect of that is not appreciated ... We know that we can depend upon the men and women on the production front that you represent right here, in this hall ... We know that you will not fail our soldiers, those men on the fighting front. We cannot and I know we will not.”
Patterson was followed on Tuesday afternoon by Senator Mead. He informed the delegates that “we have as the leader of our government the world’s most powerful and the world’s most popular leader.” And not only this but “we have, in my judgment, in shop and factory, on the railroads and in the mines of America that free worker who in any crisis ... is the best worker and the most durable worker and the worker who will stay in there fighting when the enslaved workers of other countries are all gone.”
The government closed its direct presentation with a report on the state of the war from the production angle and the strength of Germans and Japanese. This report was read by a lieutenant-colonel who had served on the staff of General Patton. He was accompanied by four men who had been in Africa and Italy: a captain and three sergeants. All had been wounded.
The parade of these wounded men across the platform was the most indecent part of the whole sordid show put on mainly for the purpose of “softening up” the delegates so that they would submit to the demands that were coming on reaffirmation of the no-strike pledge and for support of Roosevelt for a fourth term. Working men who had been drafted into the Army and who had been wounded in a war not of their own making were being used in a convention of workers to retard the militant activity of labor.
 
What About Labor’s Problems?
There was one very interesting side to the report made by the lieutenant-colonel. He said: “Deficiencies did exist in the Sicilian campaign, but they existed not because we lacked material, but just because we couldn’t move enough equipment forward in the assault, and we never did get a chance to catch up.”
His whole description of the African and Italian campaigns demonstrated that there was no lack of material on hand but that the problems were mainly those of organization, transportation and overcoming such difficulties as arise from weather conditions, corrosion, etc.
Despite all the ballyhoo and sobbing over production, no one has yet dared to make the statement that any fault in the military operations was due to supplies not being produced in the factories.
Characteristically enough, none of the government speakers had anything to say about wages, working conditions or hours. All they were interested in, of course, was that labor keep its nose to the grindstone and receive its reward, if any, after the end of the war.
The low point in the “more production” propaganda ballyhoo and “don’t let our boys down” tear-jerking was reached in the speech of Philip Murray. Murray closed his speech to the convention with the statement of seven points that the CIO will fight for, but the whole program can have no meaning whatsoever in the light of the main emphases which Murray put forward in connection with support of Roosevelt and the war.
 
Murray’s Pious Speech
Murray’s speech was similar to the rantings of a backwoods evangelist; calling sinners to repentance, dangling them over hellfire, calling on them to mend their ways or be damned, pleading with them to continue in the straight and narrow path lest the devil get them and they descend into hell.
The speech was delivered with all of Murray’s whimpering piousness but, at the same time, with direct thrusts designed to overawe and frighten the delegates into keeping up support of the no-strike pledge and Roosevelt’s program.
He began with the statement that “our primary interest for the moment ... is directed toward the winning of this great, noble struggle.” He wished that the delegates could have the opportunity to took inside the war picture as the officers of the CIO have had the opportunity to do.
The CIO gave a pledge that “it was their firm purpose, no matter what may happen, never to indulge themselves in the so-called pre-war luxuries of strikes for the duration of this war.” Murray felt that the story of the soldier dying from wounds while a worker bent over him saying: “Buddy, Buddy, you are dying because I did not give you the tools to fight with,” should be repeated over and over. And Murray added: “That, I hope and trust in God, will never happen in America.”
 
“Preparing” the Delegates
Then Murray told the story of the death of the son of a member of the staff of the CIO. “He died that the Auto Workers could meet in convention ... He died that you and I could enjoy our freedom ... That is what our boys are fighting for.”
To be sure, this is what this young member of the CIO was fighting and dying for. This is what is in the minds of hundreds of the worker-soldiers. But Phil Murray did not tell the convention that those who started the war, who are responsible for it, who make the policies and who profit from the war, are not fighting the war in order that the Auto Workers may meet in convention, or that labor may be free!
This was the setting of the convention that was to prepare the delegates for continued support of the war and Roosevelt and to hold things in line so that this purpose could be accomplished.
How did the various forces, groups and leaders react to this situation? We have already mentioned, something of the mood of the ranks of the union and the fact that the leadership was compelled to give heed to their pressure.
 
Incentive Pay on the Floor
Probably the clearest expression of rank and file sentiment was on the question of incentive pay. Not even the Stalinists dared propose outright adoption of incentive pay schemes to the convention, despite the fact that they are known to be the foremost proponents and defenders of this system of piecework wages. Although they presented a minority resolution on the question, it was not a direct proposal for incentive pay. They were for “local autonomy” in the establishment of wage payment plans and they approved the action taken at Columbus on March 9 by the International Executive Board.
The position taken by the board, at this meetings, however, was to reaffirm “its traditional opposition to incentive pay plans. In plants where incentive plans have or have not been in existence and the membership of such plants are desirous of having incentive plans, such plans must be approved by the International Union.”
The whole fight of the Stalinists was made around the point of leaving the decision up to the locals with, as they called it, certain safeguards. The point is that they did not dare to come before the convention with their main position on this question as it was expounded for weeks and months in the Daily Worker, in pamphlets and in speeches by Earl Browder. And the reason, of course, was that the sentiment of the workers was overwhelmingly against them.
The majority (Reuther-Leonard) resolution was outspoken against incentive pay. This resolution forbids the signing of incentive pay or piecework agreements by locals. Where they already exist they may be continued. The resolution directs all officers to conform strictly to this policy and it put the UAW squarely on record against the Incentive pay and all piecework schemes. In this the Stalinists suffered a decisive defeat.
*
Consideration of the most important questions that came before the convention will be continued in Labor Action in the next two issues. This will include the resolution for a fourth term for Roosevelt, the resolution on the no-strike pledge, the struggle for control of the International, the resolution on the Negro workers, the role of the Stalinists, the part played by the progressives and militants in the convention and Labor Action’s appraisal of the convention as a whole.
 



CLEVELAND – The convention of the United Steel Workers of America is over and the delegates have returned to their locals to report on what went on while they were legislating for 600,000 organized steel workers. It would be interesting to hear what these 1,700 delegates will report: not only their formal report but what they’ll say “off the record.”
Furthermore, it would be interesting to discover what the rank and file steel workers think of the convention which made rules and regulations for governing them.
Perhaps the mass of the steel workers are not doing much thinking these days. There is reason to believe that the majority of the delegates did not do much serious thinking on the important issues before them. Quite often many of them demonstrated an alarming intolerance toward the bolder delegates who wanted to have a frank discussion on some of the things that press heavily on the steel workers.
 
Difficult for Worker to Dissent
It is difficult for the ordinary worker at the steel convention to get anywhere with a dissenting opinion. The leadership has its plans well organized. They come to the convention with commitments already made to Roosevelt, Donald Nelson and other high government officials. The no-strike agreement; the agreement to give up “premium pay” for Sundays, Saturdays and holidays; the establishment of the management-labor committees had already been agreed to by the top leadership long before the steel workers’ convention.
These commitments were made by Murray, Green and other labor leaders without consulting the workers in their respective organizations. The ranks of labor had no say about these agreements. Theirs was simply to gather in convention and clap their approval of what was really an accomplished fact.
This made the steel convention a dull and stereotyped affair. Aside from the necessity to come together to adopt the new constitution, the convention was a waste of time and money. It was important to get the constitution; it was important to go through the formality of setting up an international. But what happens in the future will depend largely on the rank and file membership.
 
Convention Worse Than That of UAW
The last UAW conference, where the automobile workers adopted the “ten-point program,” was bad enough, but this steel convention was worse. At least at the UAW conference there was spirited discussion on giving up overtime pay for Sundays and the question of labor sacrifice and the bosses’ profit-grabbing, but here most of the talking was done by Murray and the other officials on the platform.
I have never heard Murray make so many “speeches in the period of a short four-day convention. He was always faking the floor to “explain,” to “clear away confusion” and to “clarify the minds of the delegates.” The reason that the steel convention found itself in this dilemma should be clear to any worker who has followed the degeneration of the CIO since its convention last November.. A delegate to the UAW “Victory Through Equality of Sacrifice” conference in April hit the nail on the head when he said: “In Buffalo last August we elected our officers to negotiate for us, but they have been negotiating with oar enemies against us.” This is really what is going, on today throughout the CIO.
 
What Is Phil Murray’s Role
Does this mean that Murray and the other leaders in the CIO and its affiliated internationals are “betrayers” of labor in the sense that the Stalinists used to make this charge, before they climbed on the patriotic bandwagon at. the command of Stalin? No, it doesn’t mean this. It is not so simple as that. What it does mean is that Murray, Thomas and the other CIO leaders have ceased to have any independent position as labor leaders. Today the CIO leadership is indistinguishable from Green, Tobin and the AFL leaders.
It means that the pressing problems of the CIO workers are given second place to matters for which labor has no direct responsibility. For the duration of the war, at least, Murray has abdicated the leadership of labor and turned it over to Roosevelt, Nelson and the War Labor Board. This means that the leadership of labor has been turned over to the bosses; because it is the bosses who man the various government boards, who pull the strings in Congress and who control the government.
 
The Real Issues Before the Steel Workers
This becomes very clear when one considers concretely the deliberations of this convention. What were the important questions that came before the convention or that should have been before the convention? They were: The union shop, the Little Steel cases, the demand for a $1.00 a day increase in wages, completing the organization of the industry and putting the union on a better dues-paying basis, the so-called “premium pay” for Sundays, the adoption of a constitution and election of officers.
This was enough to occupy a convention of 1,700 delegates for two weeks if there was to be adequate discussion from the floor. This convention was in session only four and a half days. But a large part of this time was consumed in speech-making and other ceremonial frippery that one has become accustomed to associate with AFL conventions that usually go on for a minimum of two weeks. There was the usual address of welcome by the mayor and the reply by the chairman. These were speeches that were no more than window dressing.
What is more fundamental, however, is the deeper reasons that this convention could not tackle the main problems in a forthright manner. A channel had already been cut for the convention to operate in. That channel was blind, obedient, unqualified and unquestioning support of the war. Murray again and again impressed on the convention that it was the winning of the war that was put first and all-important. Murray and the CIO leaders, under the blandishments of Roosevelt, say to CIO labor that it is the workers who really have the main responsibility for winning the war. And so they talk about “victory through equality of sacrifice,” and the steel workers promoting winning the war “through the promotion of national unity.”
All of the speeches were concerned with telling labor that we must sacrifice and how much depends on the willingness of labor to sacrifice. There is no need for Murray continually to be saying that he supports the country in the war and he supports Roosevelt. No one can possibly have any doubt on this point. But Murray seems to be afraid that he will be looked upon as one not sufficiently patriotic. And so at one point in his discussion of the demanded wage increase he remarked:
“Now might I have you understand before I sit down and particularly the newspapers understand, that there is no griping, grasping selfish desire prompting the officers of this organization to seek this so-called wage increase. We are merely attempting to acquire for the people that we are privileged to represent a proper, equitable readjustment of their living conditions, having in mind that as we go down the road, the long, weary road of war, that of necessity each of us, all of us, will have to make sacrifices to bring about this expeditious, very speedy winning of the war.”
 
To Whom Is Murray Apologizing?
This is Murray’s round-about way of saying that the steel workers should have an increase in wage’s. He wants a “readjustment” in the living conditions of the workers but he doesn’t want anybody, especially the capitalist press, to get the idea that the officers of the CIO are “griping” or “grasping.”
This is the same fear that has been manifested by these leaders all along. It was evident at the UAW conference. There they wanted to do everything possible to prove to Congress and its bosses in Wall Street and the National Association of Manufacturers that labor will not be unreasonable, that the working class is prepared to take the first step in making sacrifices.
The report of the wage-scale committee was just as apologetic. “The dollar a day is not a wage increase but a wage adjustment,” says the committee. “It is a partial replenishment of the losses in real wages suffered by the steel workers through rising living costs during the last 14 months.” What hifalutin’ nonsense!
The steel workers are miserably underpaid. They have the lowest wages of any of the major groups in in the war industries. This is traditional in the steel industry. What the steel workers want is more money in their pay envelopes. Of course the cost of living has gone up and is still going up. Profits are going up and the salaries of the big shots in steel are being quietly boosted while Murray and the wage-scale committee are talking about “replenishment.”
This was the tone that the leaders set for the convention right at the start. This made it impossible for the convention to come to grips with the real situation, with the real problems of the steel workers. The leaders were afraid that they would be accused of “griping” and “grasping.” Afraid they would be accused of standing up like real labors and fighting for more of the billions in wealth that labor is producing today!
 
A Very Dangerous Resolution
Many of the resolutions could have been written in the White House or in the offices of the big steel companies. The resolution on Labor and the War declared, among other things, that “the United Steel Workers of America pledges itself to the continued drive to rout out of our national life defeatists, disrupters and fomenters of disunity ... and the United Steel Workers of America calls upon the government to take aggressive action against such elements.” There was no word as to whom they are going to “rout out” or just what people they want the government to take “aggressive action against.” Some day this section of this resolution will rise to crucify some steel workers who may try to get “a proper, equitable readjustment of their living conditions”!
There were resolutions on “economic policy,” “political action” and “victory in the peace.” All of these resolutions were weak in that they had almost nothing to say about the way the bosses are conducting themselves. There was no criticism of Roosevelt’s “seven-point program” and his demand for the “stabilization of wages.” There was no vigorous defense of labor and its rights. Everything was pushed into the pro-war, pro-Roosevelt mold that had been fabricated before the convention by the leadership.
It never seemed to occur to anybody that immense profits are being made by the bosses out of the war and that it would be only proper for labor to demand a larger share of this wealth. Every reference to the just demands of labor was couched in weasel words as though the workers were responsible for the “treason” of Standard Oil of New Jersey and the alliance of General Electric with the Hitler electric trust.
 
How They “Honored” Labor’s Martyrs
Grimly ironical was the passing of a resolution’ on “labor martyrs.” The convention was meeting 50 years after the murder of the steel workers by government troops and the connivance of government officials. It was ironical because this convention demonstrated none of the fighting spirit of the Homestead martyrs but complete capitulation: to the bosses and their government.
The convention was a gathering of steel workers but it was Roosevelt’s convention. Philip Murray appeared there as the chief labor lieutenant of Roosevelt. This means in very simple language that Murray was there as the negotiator for the boss class, working in its interests, doing its will, holding labor in check, chaining it to the Second World Imperialist War, piling burdens on the back of labor that the working class will only be able to remove by long, determined and uphill struggles.
 



Philip Murray and other CIO leaders were given a slap in the face last week by the War Labor Board when the employer and “public” members refused to grant the demands of the steel union for a dollar a day increase in pay. This was the reward Murray, Thomas, the Stalinists and others received for their willingness to give up Saturday and Sunday “premium” pay, the strike and other gains that labor had wrested from the bosses over a period of years.
In place of the dollar a day increase the WLB granted the steelworkers 44 cents a day or 5½ cents an hour. They also granted the check-off and a maintenance of membership provision. Bethlehem Steel was instructed to terminate its piecework wage trickery and to institute a minimum hourly wage of 78 cents. It has been the custom of Bethlehem in the past to have an hourly rate and a piece rate which was known as “tonnage.” This system was so complicated and crazy that no one could understand it except the corporation’s accountants and payroll “experts.”
As is usual in such decisions the WLB took a lot of space to give its analysis of the situation and to explain its reasons, motives and ideas. (It is better to say that the eight non-labor members of the board made the decision. The four labor members dissented unanimously.)
The vice-chairman, Dr. George W. Taylor, representing “the public,” rendered the decision. He laid down what he called “principles.” In brief they were:
1. From January 1941 to May 1942 the cost of living increased about 15 per cent. If any workers have received less than a 15 per cent increase in hourly rate of pay for this period “their peacetime standards have been broken.” That is, they can’t eat as much now as they could before January, 1941. But if they have received an average 15 per cent increase then their “established peacetime standards have been preserved.” That is, they can live in the same shack they lived in before, wear the same old clothes and buy the same amount of food, even though it wasn’t enough.
The word “established,” as used by the board, is very interesting. By the use of this word the board attempts to dodge the question of the workers’ peacetime standard of living. No matter how low the wages of the steel workers were in peacetime, this is to be taken as the standard in deciding on an increase. The workers lived in shacks and hovels before January 1941. The board therefore is only concerned that they hold on to these shacks and do not have to move into the streets or into the trees.
2. Any workers “whose peacetime standards have been preserved” can only get an increase from the board if they can prove that there are “inequalities” and sub-standard conditions “specifically referred to in the President’s message of April 21, 1942.”
This of course is extremely vague. What are these “inequalities” and “sub-standard conditions?” The board pointed out one such inequality which it says served as a guide, namely, that the cost of living in steel towns had risen faster than in the country as a whole. That is, if pork chops increased ten cents a pound in New York and twelve cents a pound in Buffalo-Lackawanna, then says the board, it is clear that the workers in Buffalo-Lackawanna should have a greater increase in wages than the workers in New York.
 
Peacetime Standards!
This doesn’t prove of course that the workers in New York or Buffalo will be able to buy pork chops. As far as the WLB is concerned, there is to be no real increase in the standard of living, no increase in REAL wages. The point that guides the board is that the incomes must be about the same in purchasing power. It isn’t fair, says the board, for the workers in New York to be able to buy five pounds of meat a week while the workers in Buffalo-Lackawanna have money only for four and a half pounds. The fact that five pounds may not be enough for the New York worker’s family is beside the point: the aim of the WLB, following Roosevelt, is to stabilize (freeze) wages; to equalize misery and want among the workers.
3. “Those groups whose peacetime standards have been broken are en-titled to have these standards reestablished as a stabilizing factor.” That is, if a Bethlehem or Republic Steel worker is about to be evicted from one of the hovels they occupy in South Buffalo or Lackawanna, the board wants to make it possible for the workers to keep these shacks. They are absolutely against the workers setting up housekeeping in the alleys, the public parks, the relief stations or in the homes of the rich. But on the little matter of getting enough wages to move into a BETTER house, to buy MORE and BETTER food or to get some NEW clothing for the wife and kids, the board is as silent as a graveyard after dark. That is, the board is silent on the “five principles.” Dr. Taylor, however, does have something to say on this question in explaining the “reasons” for the decision.
 
“Equality of Sacrifice”
Dr. Taylor (who, we remind workers, represents something called “the public”) explains that “labor’s sacrifice, necessary for stabilizing our domestic economy, has been clearly set forth. For the duration of the war organized labor is expected to forego its quest for an increasing share of the national income.”
By whom has it been “clearly set forth” that labor should make sacrifices “necessary for the stabilizing of our domestic economy?” This demand on the working class has only been made by the bosses, Roosevelt and the Democratic Party, Willkie and the Republican Party, and a few $20,000 a year labor leaders who are closer to Roosevelt-Willkie and the bosses than they are to the ranks of labor. Why should labor want to stabilize “our domestic economy”? Yes, we are for a “stabilized economy,” but NOT an economy stabilized on the basis of capitalist injustice. To agree to the stabilization of “our domestic economy,” in Taylor’s sense, means to agree to the continuation of capitalism, imperialism and imperialist war. In the words of a Bethlehem Steel worker, any worker who agrees to this “needs to have his head examined.”
To agree to any such stabilization is to agree to low wages, long hours, undernourishment, poverty, disease, ignorance and a tumble-down shack as a permanent dwelling place.
Who expects labor to “forego its quest for an increasing share of the national income” for the “duration of the war”? Roosevelt and Willkie? Naturally; that’s understandable. The bosses? Of course: the more the workers “forego,” the less the bosses will have to “forego.” Murray and Green? Green is difficult to discuss. We agree with John L. Lewis, who said that he explored Bill Green’s mind for ten years and didn’t find anything there. But Murray and Thomas and other CIO leaders want “equality of sacrifice.” The War Labor Board has just given the steel workers a good big dose of the board’s conception of “equality of sacrifice.” Of course that wasn’t what Murray and Thomas meant. They want the bosses to be limited to incomes of not over $25,000 a year. That’s their idea of “equality of sacrifice.”
Tom Girdler got $3,384 a week from Republic Steel last year and Eugene Grace got $7,211 from Bethlehem Steel. The CIO leaders say that Grace, Girdler and the other big bosses should be cut to $480 a week. Then you raise the steel workers’ pay to around $42 a week (which the WLB didn’t do), keep it there, and behold: “equality of sacrifice!”
On far less than $480 a week Grace and Girdler can buy enough steak and potatoes for a family of fifty. They will have a sizable sum left for whiskey, furs and golf. But the steel family of five on $42 a week will have nothing left and will find itself with an increasing burden of debt.
The “stabilization” program of Roosevelt, the bosses and the War Labor Board and the “equality of sacrifice” of Murray and Thomas will produce only equality of misery and poverty among the workers, and higher salaries and dividends for the bosses.
In an article next week we will discuss how this decision affects the workers and the unions and some things that we can do.
 



While the nation’s steel workers toil at a terrific pace in the sweltering heat of the furnaces, coke ovens, rolling and blooming mills, the War Labor Board stumbles along from hearing to hearing but delivers no decision in the “Little Steel” case.
For several months the board has had the brief presented by the United Steel Workers. The demand of the steel workers is for a dollar a day increase in pay and a contract calling for “maintenance of membership” and the checkoff of union dues. The steel workers’ demands are rock-ribbed and airtight. The argument made in their brief is irrefutable.
A fact-finding commission of the War Labor Board, composed of Arthur S. Meyer, representing the “public”; Richard Frankenstein, of the UAW, for labor; and Cyrus Ching of the U.S. Rubber Co., for the employers, has recommended the $1.00 wage increase, the union shop and the check-off.
Not only this, but the WLB commission reported that the four Little. Steel companies in 1941 made the highest profits in their entire history. Furthermore, Tom Girdler, chairman of Republic Steel, had his salary raised from $100,000 in 1940 to $176,000 in 1941. Eugene Grace of Bethlehem Steel was boosted from $371,000 to $375,000. But the owners of these two companies are opposed to giving their workers the small increase of $1.00 a day.
This same WLB commission also had something to say that should close the big mouths of those who are always talking about something known as “inflation.” The commission discovered what the steel workers already knew. They found out that if the steel workers are refused an increase in pay their standard of living for 1942 will drop even lower than for 1941.
There must not only be an increase in pay but that increase must be no less than 21 per cent in order for labor to hold its own. The increase asked by the steel workers is only 11 per cent.
The commission based its findings on an estimated increase of 21 per cent for the national income for 1942 as well as on the rise in the cost of living.
This means that if the national income for 1942 increases 21 per cent and the workers receive only an 11 per cent increase, the bosses and others who can afford to get along without it will get this additional income.
What this means is that if there was $100 to be passed out in wages in 1941, there will be $121 in 1942. According to the proposal, the workers will get $111 of this amount. The bosses will get the other $10. That is, the difference between the $121 available and the $111 which the workers would receive, will go to the bosses. This will make it possible for the bosses to raise their fat salaries again in 1943 and to pay bigger dividends to the stockholders of Little Steel and other corporations.
Furthermore, the commission reported that the buying power of steel wages had declined 13 per cent since the last increase in wages. This means that the 1942 dollar of the steel worker will buy only 87 cents worth of food today. The steel worker therefore can eat less today than a year ago. The dollar will not go as far at the store and the wife of the steel worker will have a tougher time making ends meet.
 
The Cold Facts
This is the situation that faces the country’s million steel workers. They face increasing poverty and misery. This is true even if they get the dollar a day increase demanded. Prices will continue to rise, they will have to pay higher income taxes, their wages will be spread over the purchase of war bonds, USO drives and Red Cross campaigns.
These are the cold facts. No amount of talk about “inflation,” “sacrifice,” and “we must beat Hitler” will feed the steel workers and their families. And it won’t mean much to a steel worker who goes to the grocery store with a dollar and comes out with only 87 cents worth of meat. And it won’t satisfy the steel workers to tell him that Mr. Grace and Mr. Girdler also got only 87 cents’ worth of meat for their dollar.
Mr. Grace, of Bethlehem Steel, has at least $7,000 each week with which to buy the best priced meat. Sam Jones, the steel workers, has only a pitiable $35 to $40 with which to buy that same meat plus other necessities for a family of five to ten.
No one can say now what the decision of the War Labor Board will be. President Roosevelt, “friend of labor,” has come out against the increase. Evidently he and the Republican and Democratic Parties think that it is OK for Mr. Grace to get $7,000 a week while Sam Jones, who makes the steel, gets only $40.
 
Murray’s Dilemma
Philip Murray, leader of the CIO and of the steel workers’ international, is making a fight for the demands of the union. But Murray’s friend Roosevelt has given Murray a slap in the face and a sound, swift kick. And what can poor Murray do?
He has told the steel workers that they must produce, produce, produce, in order to win the war. He turned the steel workers’ convention into a Roosevelt rally and a war rally. He has permitted the War Labor Board to loaf along for months and not grant the steel workers’ demands. He has permitted the steel companies to spit on the workers in the plants.
This has gone on while Murray and other CIO leaders have been putting in their time helping Roosevelt, the Democrats, the Republicans and the bosses run their war. In the meantime the workers at Bethlehem and other Little Steel companies have no contracts and are being kicked around by any little superintendent or foreman in the pay of the steel corporations.
Recently the workers at Bethlehem Steel Co. at Lackawanna, N.Y., made a slight gesture of protest. The open hearth workers of two furnaces walked out. The strike continued for only about 30 hours. Perhaps these workers are smarter than Murray and the other CIO leaders. They know how to make the War Labor Board talk, and talk the kind of language that is beneficial to steel workers.
Perhaps a short holiday would be good for all the steel workers. Also this might make the steel makers, the WLB and Roosevelt understand. Cold open hearth furnaces and deserted coke ovens all over the United States will teach Roosevelt, the WLB and the steel bosses a few things that they may not be able to learn by any other means.
 



(Continued from the last issue)
Next to Roosevelt and the various government speakers, it was really the Stalinists who occupied the center of the stage at the recent CIO convention in Boston. This was not due to any definite plan of the Stalinists themselves, but to the fortunes of war and Attorney General Biddle. The spotlight was on Curran and Bridges, and to a lesser extent on the Stalinists from “white collar” unions.
Curran came into the limelight because he is the head of the National Maritime Union. Two thousand members of this union have been lost at sea since the United States entered the war. Three hundred of them were Negro seamen. It was of course altogether fitting and proper that the CIO, and all the labor movement for that matter, commemorate the sacrifice that these workers have made. None of the things that we have to say about Stalinism is directed at these men or at their comrades among the living on land and sea who have been caught up in the net of the Second Imperialist World War.
 
NMU Gets Plaque
A memorial plaque was presented to the NMU by Murray from the CIO. There was also a “Memorial to the CIO Members in the Merchant Marine Who Have Died in the Service of Our Nation.” In presenting the plaque to Curran, Murray made the presentation address, in which he praised the heroism of the men who man the ships carrying war supplies all over the earth. “They are the boys,” said Murray, “who give of their lives, of their blood and of their limb to help America and its allies win this war.”
While it is true that these “boys” have given their lives, there was nothing said in the resolution or in Murray’s speech to indicate that there is doubt in anybody’s mind that this war may not be exactly the kind of war it is claimed to be. While plenty was said on the convention, even by such a war supporter as Senator Pepper, to create some doubt even in the mind of the most obtuse or enthusiastic, the, resolution and Murray’s speech were completely silent on the question of whether or not this is really a war for democracy.
Pepper seemed to be a little disturbed. In commenting on the statement of Churchill that he had not become Prime Minister to sit in at the funeral of the British Empire, he said: “... If we are not sincere when we say that we fight for democracy, we prepare to betray another generation.” Was the generation that fought and died in the First World War betrayed? If so, what guarantee have the men who fight in this one that their generation is not being betrayed? The workers of the world must answer this question for THEMSELVES.
In the course of Murray’s presentation speech, giving the plaque to Curran, he made the statement “This is what I personally think of you, this is what the CIO thinks of you and your union.” This was of sort of queer remark and of course does not mean that Murray has changed his mind about “communism.” It is, rather, that in their journey around the circle, the Stalinists have met Murray in all-out support of the imperialist war and have found themselves in his embrace. Perhaps it was not accidental, however, that the above quoted statement by Murray to Curran did not find its way into the printed proceedings of the convention.
 
Bridges Gets Spotlight
Harry Bridges also found himself in the spotlight at the convention. He was the subject of glowing praise and sanctimonious approval by Murray and the other big shots, including David MacDonald. Was this praise being bestowed on Bridges because he was AT ONE TIME a militant labor leader who led a couple of militant mass strikes? Nothing of the sort. The CIO leadership was demanding that the deportation warrant against Bridges be lifted, and he be made a citizen because, AND ONLY BECAUSE, he supports the war. His labor record was not mentioned, nor was it even hinted that his deportation may have been decreed because of his PAST militant activity.
Murray said that
“it has not been demonstrated to the satisfaction of labor and many citizens that Harry Bridges has ever been affiliated with or a member of any subversive organization or groups that have for their purpose the overthrow of the government of the United States. Harry Bridges has given loyal support to the government of the United States in support of this war. Australia would welcome Harry Bridges back. They believe that he would be an aid to them in winning the war.”
What did Murray think of Bridges two years ago? What would be his attitude on Bridges if he had supported a resolution in his international against the Roosevelt-Murray “no-strike” agreement that was forced on the CIO? What does Murray think would be the attitude of Australia toward Bridges if he should once again become a militant labor leader during or after the war?
MacDonald said that the way he looked at it is that “Mr. Bridges is even now a good, decent American citizen.” Bittner felt that “the Bridges case is an indictment against the government of the United States.” Of course Bittner did not tell the convention just what the indictment was. This was true of all of them. They are for Bridges now because AND ONLY BECAUSE, he is a supporter of the imperialist war.
They have a hunch, of course, that all is not exactly straight with the Bridges deportation proceedings. They know that the case arose in the days when the Stalinists were not supporting the United Nations in the war. They know also that the bosses feared that Bridges might call another strike, and for this reason wanted to get him out of the country. But they don’t mention this. It might interfere with the “war effort.” They are not concerned now with whether or not Bridges is a Stalinist. They will hold this in reserve until after the war is over.
 
Discussion on Race Discrimination
One of the most interesting discussions in the convention was on the question of the Negro and the CIO. There was a resolution on “discrimination” which said in part that “we of the democracies are fighting fascism at home and abroad by welding all races, all religions and all peoples into a united body of warriors for democracy. Any discriminatory practices within our ranks, against Negroes or other groups, directly aids the enemy by creating division, dissension and confusion.” The resolution resolves that “the CIO now reiterates its firm opposition to any form of racial or religious discrimination and renews its pledge to carry on the fight for protection in law and in fact of the rights of every racial and religious group to participate fully in our social, political and industrial life.”
There was objection to this resolution. The claim was made, notably by some of the Negro delegates, that it was not strong enough. Yancy, of the Transport Service Employees, said that
“we agree that reiteration is necessary, but at the same time we think we ought to get away from platitudes and take out of the framework of words this reiteration of our policies and put it into real and practical action ... We believe this resolution should be recommitted and that it should be strengthened by additional facts, such as are brought forth in the Executive Board’s resolution as submitted and accepted.”
The resolution was discussed by Murray, Brophy, Bittner and many delegates from the floor. Townsend, president of the Transport Service Employees and member of the CIO Executive Council, told the convention that
“it is incumbent upon each and every one of you to recognize how serious this problem is ... We are going to neglect the use of this manpower (Negro) and if you yourselves think more of your prejudices than you do of your freedom you will lose that freedom ... I warn you that unless those of you who make up the Congress of Industrial Organizations don’t do more than give lip service to this burning question then something will happen that will cause all of us to regret.”
Walter Reuther spoke on the resolution to the effect that the resolution and the facts given in Murray’s remarks should get down to the people in the factories, for
“unless they understand the things we talk about in these resolution, they will remain high-sounding, pious resolutions ... I think it is the duty of every delegate here today to go back to their respective organizations and see that they take up the fight against racial discrimination, not as a secondary consideration ... but this fight against racial discrimination must be put on top of the list with union security and other union demands.”
It was clear that this problem of discrimination against the Negro in the unions and in the factories was beginning to worry the leadership along with their worries over Congress, the WLB and other government agencies. Discrimination against the Negro was beginning to interfere with the prosecution of the war. Their attitude is that if Negro support is to be won for the war, then discrimination must be eliminated or at least lessened.
This is the chief motivation today behind their concern over race discrimination: the solidarity of labor, black and white, is necessary to win the war. On the more important matter of the necessity for the solidarity of labor to win greater security, concessions from the bosses and a better life for the American workers as a whole, these leaders were strangely silent.
 



The first constitutional convention of the steel workers’ called for May 19–23 in Cleveland is long overdue. These workers in the basic industry in the United States, dominated by the Morgan controlled United States Steel Corp., have had only an organizing committee for six years, or since the beginning of the CIO.
The whole steel organization of over half a million workers has been controlled from the top by Chairman Murray, MacDonald and a few regional and sub-regional directors. This made the SWOC a strange outfit in the CIO with its mass internationals such as the UMWA and the UAW. This situation in the ranks of the steel workers also has been a source of much dissatisfaction. The continued concentration of authority in the top leadership, the use of the appointive power, the manner of negotiating contracts, made for bureaucracy within the union and tended to smother the development of internal democratic procedure and practices.
 
Lack of Democracy
The steel workers simply did not and could not feel that the SWOC was their union in the sense that the automobile workers could feel that the UAW was theirs. In the SWOC it was the appointed organizers who directed all operations. It was they, along with the higher officials and approved union officers who comprised the bulk of the delegates to. SWOC conventions. Furthermore, these conventions were operated in a most bureaucratic manner: the usual democratic procedure of a UAW convention, for example, was always absent from a gathering of the SWOC.
There has been little or no educational work carried on and developed by the SWOC. Here again one can point out the vast gulf between the SWOC and the UAW. The trade union educational level of the SWOC is therefore woefully low. Now that a convention is being held to set up a real international union it is presumed that ail of these defects and delinquencies will be corrected: that the delegates will leave the convention feeling that now they have a real powerful, democratic union that can do the job for them.
Whether or not this occurs will depend on several considerations. First, the quality of the delegates to the convention. Will the majority of the delegates really come from and be representative of the ranks of the organization? Just how far has the leadership gone in order to assure themselves that “safe” people are delegates to this convention?
 
Issue of Democracy
Next, will the convention be run in a democratic manner so that the real sentiment of all or any group of delegates will have proper and adequate chance to be expressed? This has not been the practice at former SWOC conventions.
Of course if the delegates are steel workers who really have their roots in the mills and among the workers, they will probably not be so easily turned away from insistence on their democratic rights. They will know that what is done at this convention will require the utmost attention and scrutiny. This is a constitutional convention in a very important sense: it is a NEW BEGINNING for the steel workers and is of tremendous significance. A new constitution will be adopted at this time.
The constitution will be the fundamental law of the international. It will set forth the provisions for operating this large international union from top to bottom: duties and powers of the officers, how often conventions will be held, how delegates to conventions will be elected, the duties and authority of shop committeemen and shop stewards, salaries, joining fees and monthly dues. What measure of control the national officers will have over the affairs of the locals, what amount of autonomy the locals will have will be written into the new constitution.
And then there are such important matters as negotiations, the signing of contracts and the matter of strike procedure. Just how much will the locals and the membership of the international have to say in determining their course in these matters?
The answer to all these questions will be written into the union’s constitution and by-laws.
National officers will be elected at this convention and a national board. There will be a provision for regional directors and international organizers. The question may arise as to whether or not individual locals will have their own local organizers and what their relation will be to the representatives of the national organization.
These questions should consume a considerable part of the five days of the convention. They are not secondary matters and the delegates should not permit them to be treated as such. The way these matters are handled will determine what kind of international union the steel workers will have up to the time of the next convention. The kind of precedent set in this first convention will determine in large measure what .it will be possible to do at subsequent conventions and in between conventions.
Aside from these organizational problems this convention will be confronted with other most serious situations that the delegates will have to face. What is to be the real program of the convention? Will it be a convention of steel workers assembled primarily for the purpose of establishing an international union to fight for better living conditions for steel labor or is it designed primarily as a Roosevelt pro-war rally?
Will Philip Murray, in his opening address, present the representatives of the workers at Bethlehem, Big Steel and Little Steel with a dish of sacrifices they will be expected to swallow whole without choking? Will Murray and the other officers of the SWOC have the effrontery and the audacity to come before this convention of steel workers and begin orating about the necessity for sacrifices on the part of labor?
 
Boss Profiteering
This convention of the toilers in the steel mills will meet at a time when the reports of the large corporations are appearing in the papers telling the world about the millions in profits, that are .rolling in from war orders. These workers have just read the story of Standard Oil and General Electric: how these two vast companies connived and conspired with the Nazi trusts, even after the United States entered the war, to control the production of war materials in such a way as to benefit Hitler and American millionaires. These workers have read that the officers of Standard Oil were called traitors by a United States senator.
The steel workers have read that Eugene Grace of Bethlehem Steel received special remuneration of $298,144 in 1940 and $357,724 in 1941. And this exclusive of his large salary from the company! They know that the unspeakable Tom Girdler of Republic Steel had a salary of $176,000 in 1940 and $275,000 in 1941. They know that right down the line the heads of the big corporations have had their salaries raised often as much as 100 per cent.
This is not all. These workers know that millions on millions in dividends and interest are being distributed every three months to rich parasites and loafers, known as stockholders and creditors. Also these workers know that there are all manner of little parasites, fixers, contract jugglers, middle men and others who have or claim to have “influence” in the right place in Washington. These too are well paid, they too have both feet in the trough along with the big shots who run and control the country.
 
What Happened in Auto
The steel workers have read about the convention of the automobile workers where the leadership by tear-jerking, pleading, distortion and demagogy got its “equality of sacrifice” proposals adopted. Some of the steel workers have heard what happened in the automobile plants after the auto workers had been sold down the river by their leadership. The automobile manufacturers licked their chops and grinned. Now they had the UAW nailed down, the union had been strangled by its own leadership and delivered to the bosses.
This capitulation, following the no-strike promise made to Roosevelt, did not appease the labor-haters in Congress nor the bosses. The CIO was on the ran, they had tasted blood and the whole pack was out for a killing. They wanted a ceiling on wages and their man Henderson is ready to give it to them.
Does Roosevelt want a ceiling on wages? He uses another word, not so harsh, for he is a “friend of labor.” He calls it “stabilization.” Don’t put a ceiling on wages, for ceilings are of various heights and sometimes ceilings are raised. Roosevelt wants wages stabilized. That is the sure way of keeping wages right where they are now.
What else do the bosses want? They and their deputies in Congress want forcible deductions from the workers’ pay envelope to go for war bonds.
Next they want the 48-hour, 54-hour, 60-hour week and the elimination, if possible, of all overtime pay.
This is not enough: the bosses also demand a sales tax. And do they stop there? Of course not. They urge that as a patriotic duty the workers in the lower income brackets should be willing to have their income taxes increased.
With this formidable roster of immediate demands one would think that the bosses would be satisfied for a season. But they are possessed of other tricks. There is one other little matter to be attended to. That is the unions themselves.
 
Bosses Aim at Unions
After the bosses have stripped labor of everything but its shirt, they will try to put a ceiling on, or better still, stabilize the situation. To do this the must get at the unions, at the locals in each plant, mill and factory. There must be no signed contracts if they can possibly get out of signing. If a contract is signed then the next step is to harass, ignore and dodge the bargaining and grievance committees.
This is the program of the bosses and their stooges in Congress. Their patriotism is at fever heat. They are prepared any day to return millions to the government in profits after they get caught cheating and after their books have been subpoenaed. But Standard Oil and General Electric, both agents of Hitler, have never been prosecuted. They go right on their patriotic way, piling up the profits.
The bosses are fighting one of their numerous and constantly recurring imperialist wars but they demand that workers foot the bill.
“Let them go into the Army and die; into our factories, mines and mills to slave like hell. We’ll peg their wages, increase their hours of labor, give them the speed-up. We’ll increase their income taxes, clamp on a sales tax, take a day’s wages for the Red Cross and another for the USO. We’ll raise the price of their food and clothing and find some way to skin them on the rent. And just to be sure that we don’t have to feed them when our war is ended we’ll have our government deduct a few dollars from their pay each week to feed them when our war is ended and we close down our factories and put them into the street.”
This is an imaginary statement that almost any boss could make. Because these are their plans for labor, for steel labor and all other labor. This is what the convention of the steel workers will be faced with; just this concrete situation. Therefore we say that any leader, Murray or anyone else. Who gets up in that convention talking about “equality of sacrifice” is a scoundrel and a traitor to labor. Furthermore, the convention should not permit itself to be stampeded into a frenzy of forgetfulness by a sugared telegram from Roosevelt, as was the case at the UAW convention. The convention should reject all such demagogy as was poured out there by Walter Reuther and Richard Frankensteen.
 
For the Steel Workers
These steel workers are not meeting to listen to exhortations on sacrifice by their leaders or honeyed words from Roosevelt or that other “friend of labor,” Donald Nelson. They will be there to do a job for the underpaid toiling thousands in the steel mills.
These delegates and the men whom they represent have already made their sacrifices. They and their fathers and grandfathers have already made untold sacrifices. They sacrifice every day, every hour, every minute. Every worker in the United States has already paid his share and more for a war that is not his war.
No boss, no congressman, no top government official has made any sacrifice and will make none in any way comparable to the sacrifices that labor has already made in the course of this bloody imperialist conflict. The very nature of capitalist society makes it so. No amount of pleading, brow-beating, pressure, exhorting, explaining or demagogy from whatever source it comes; from . the bosses, Roosevelt, Murray, Green or anyone else can change this fact.
The delegates to the steel convention therefore have this main task before them: to set up the steel workers international union with a thoroughly democratic convention; an international controlled by the steel workers, a militant union, a mass organization of all steel workers in every plant in the country.
 
Dollar a Day Increase
The workers should stick to their demands for the $1.00 a day increase in wages and the union shop. To ask only for $1.00 a day increase in wages is modest enough. They must fight for the union shop or the bosses will be in position to wreck their union.
The steel workers, like all other workers, must stand prepared to fight against wage stabilization, against any increase in hours, against higher taxes on workers’ incomes, against a sales tax, against payroll deductions for war bonds.
This convention should repudiate the agreement made by the CIO leadership not to call strikes for the duration of the war. Labor must retain this weapon, in good condition, sharpened and at all times ready for use against the boss. The strike or the threat of strike is the only protection that labor has. The workers, the unions, must not surrender this weapon.
These are the important questions that should take up the time of the delegates to this convention. To deal with these questions adequately and in a democratic manner will consume all five days of the convention. The delegates should come out of this convention able to hold their heads high and face the men in the mills. They can do this if they will insist that the convention stick to the main issues; if they establish a real democratic international, if they take a strong position against betrayal and sell-out.
 



In opening the “War Emergency Conference” of the UAW in Detroit, President Thomas remarked that the conference was ‘called “to consider the role we are to play in the prosecution of the War.” The leadership of the UAW following the CIO leadership had a program to present to the “conference” on this vital question. There were 1,400 delegates present to hear what their leaders had to say.
The “main point is the winning of the war,” said Thomas. “We all have to make sacrifices, labor must make sacrifices,” Thomas continued. “I can stand here and say that labor must not give up a damn thing in this war. You might applaud me today but tomorrow in the day of defeat you would curse me as a betrayer of our country.”
This was the keynote speech of the conference so far as the international board was concerned. The “program for the nation” was then taken up. It is called Victory Through Equality of Sacrifice. It is this program that I wish to consider briefly.
It should be clearly understood by all of us that this “program” and the method of its adoption were really based on the decision of the leadership to capitulate to the bosses and Roosevelt. Furthermore the “program’’ is based on a false conception of the independent role of the unions and the relation of the working class to imperialist war. (To be sure Thomas and the CIO-AFL leaders do not say that it is an imperialist war. Some of them know that it is but for reasons which I will discuss later they befuddle the workers with claptrap such as we reported in last week’s Labor Action in the article on the conference.)
 
Becoming Sacrifice-Conscious
The CIO-AFL leaders, Murray, Green, Thomas and others, want the workers to become sacrifice-conscious. A Program for the Nation says: “within this war effort there can be no room for special privilege or gain by any group or individual. Labor has recognized this from the outset of the war.”
What does this really mean coming from the leadership of a great militant international union? When we read such sentiments last year and this, in the capitalist press, when we read such statements made by the reactionaries in Congress we know exactly what they are talking about. We know because we know whom they represent. We know that when the bosses, their press and their congressmen talk in this manner they are trying to fool and mislead labor. The bosses and their stooges know that industry is not going to make any real sacrifices. They intend to go right on with their “special privilege” and their tremendous financial gains and profits.
What would Thomas and Murray consider “special privilege or gain” by labor? Was time and a half and double time on Sunday “special privilege and gain” for labor? Is the demand of the steel workers for a dollar a day increase in pay “special privilege and gain”? Is this what labor has recognized ... from the outset of the war”?
When Thomas and the UAW leadership use the exact language and take the same position on this question as the bosses and the capitalist press, whom are they bargaining for; for labor or for the bosses? When Thomas, Addes, Reuther, Leonard, Frankensteen, Kerrigan and the rest talk just like Witherow, Ford, Sloan and Wilson; then we say that they are no longer bargaining for labor but for the bosses and a boss government conducting the second word imperialist war.
 
Thomas Wants Labor to Retreat
Thomas and Murray call on labor to give up more, to do more sacrificing while at the same time they parade before labor all the sacrifices that the working class has already made. They not only admit that labor has made tremendous sacrifices but they also admit that only labor has made any sacrifice at all. The Program for the Nation says: “the men and women of labor have cheerfully paid their share of steeply increased taxes; their contribution in this respect is altogether out of proportion to their comparative ability to pay. Labor has voluntarily foregone its priceless freedom of economic action, its right to strike.” (It should be remarked right here that labor did not “voluntarily” forego its “right to strike.” Murray and Thomas, under pressure from the bosses and Roosevelt, gave up labor’s right to strike without asking labor’s opinion on the matter.)
Who says that labor pays these outrageous taxes “cheerfully;” this is nonsense and Thomas knows this. Labor knows who should be paying the taxes for the support of this war even if Thomas and the CIO leadership don’t.
“Labor has made sacrifices and will continue to make them without complaint.” No one who stayed awake during the six hours discussion at the Detroit conference could draw any such conclusion as this. How does Thomas know that labor will continue to permit itself to be sold down the river for the duration of the war?
Where did Thomas, the “socialist” Reuthers and Addes get the idea from for their “equality of sacrifice” slogan? From Donald Nelson, the $70,000 a year Sears Roebuck executive and head of the War Production Board? “Before a congressional committee several months ago” says the “program,” “Mr. Nelson called for ‘equality of sacrifice’ in the war effort. The time is overdue to make this slogan a reality.”
And how do Thomas, Addes and Reuther precede to make “this slogan a reality?” They come into the “conference” with the proposal that labor sacrifice more right at the time the bosses are grabbing more and more and sacrificing absolutely nothing.
 
Contrast This with Standard Oil
This conference was held just a few days after the officers of Standard Oil of New Jersey had been called traitors by a United States Senator and at a time when the large corporations were brazenly reporting big increases for 1941 over the already huge blood profits of 1940.
“In furtherance of these principles the UAW-CIO asserts its adherence to the following commitments.” First what principles are Thomas, Addes, the Reuthers and the others talking about? All they have talked about is the things that labor has given up. Labor has “cheerfully paid ... increased taxes ... out of proportion to their comparative ability to pay. Labor has foregone ... its right to strike. Labor has waived its contractual rights to double pay for Sundays and holidays ... the foregoing of this right by labor ... means the acceptance of substantial wage cuts.”
Therefore in the “furtherance of these principles” the UAW leadership proposed that labor do some more sacrificing. Sundays and holidays shall be treated as ordinary working days. The pledge not to strike is reaffirmed. They agree on a 24-hour day, seven day week with a swing shift schedule. “To the above conditions we commit ourselves without conditions.”
After giving up everything the UAW leadership gets down to the business of “equality of sacrifice.” They submit their “program for the nation.” They want all profiteering ended with all earning over 3 per cent going to the government. They insist on “no war-time millionaires. During the war salaries and incomes should be no higher than $25,000 a year. Wages should be adjusted to meet living costs.” They don’t say how the workers will get this since the leaders have given up the right to strike for the workers. There are other points in the 10 point program but these are the main points aside from the last.
 
Should Labor Give Up Overtime Pay?
When industry consents to the above “we agree that all wages for time over 40 hours per week shall be paid in the form of non-negotiable SPECIAL DEFENSE BONDS. This will mean a tremendous source of income for our government for financing the war effort. It will at the same time relieve the existing pressure toward rising prices, and will create a cushion of purchasing power for the post-war period.”
Could any group of slaves make a more miserable, cowardly and abject proposal? Thomas and his board talk in point 5 about adjusting wages to meet the increased cost of living and then in point ten say that all our wages over 40 hours per week the government should take and save it for us. Then when our present bosses kick us out when the war is over, the government will have something to feed us on for a while. Then the government will not have to tax our bosses for unemployed relief. They will be able to keep all the millions they have piled up during the war. We will sacrifice now and go hungry so that the bosses will not have to pay for feeding us after the war is over.
It is no small wonder that this “program for the nation” created such a furor at the “War Emergency Conference.” It is no wonder that Thomas and the board kept the “program” concealed until the morning the conference opened. It is easy to understand why they did not submit it to the locals in advance for discussion. They knew that this sell-out would be kicked over by the UAW membership if they got a fair crack at it.
It is a fact, the Murrays, Greens and Thomases are willing to strip labor and leave us naked. They are bargaining for the bosses, for the war-mongers, for the National Association of Manufacturers and the Automobile Chamber of Commerce. If labor wants to come out of this war with even its shirt left it will have to assert its rights, it will have to ignore the “bargains” the Greens, Murrays and Thomases are getting for the working class.
Labor can do nothing if the strike is given up. Not the “right to strike” but the strike in fact when it is necessary. The picket line is the only weapon that will guarantee “adjustment of wages to meet increased living costs.”
It is only the mass economic and political organization, swelling ever larger, becoming political and more militant that can “end all war profiteering.” It is only the mass organization of the working class that will bring us through this war with a shirt left.
It is only the mass economic and political organization of the working class now, in every capitalist country that can “win the peace” for the working class and establish that “post-war planning” that is working class planning and a working class victory.
 



(Continued from last week)
The presence of high government officials at the recent CIO convention helped to decide the tone of the convention, give it its real meaning, and make clear the real reason why the convention was being held. Last week we commented on the speeches of Bard and Pepper. It should be reported also that on the first day Under Secretary of War Patterson addressed the convention. All that was necessary to have the three branches of the government represented was to have some justice of the Supreme Court present and making a speech.
This Convention, probably to a greater degree than preceding ones, was devoted almost wholly to support of the imperialist war and devising suggestions as to how the government might more efficiently and effectively prosecute its war. All was not clear sailing for the leadership, however. Although the delegates were not from the rank and file, they were people in close contact with the rank and file, and people faced with serious questions arising in the shops.
Furthermore, the leadership itself knew that its policy of retreat and capitulation had not succeeded in accomplishing those things which had been claimed for such a policy. For instance, it was clear even to the most obtuse of the bureaucrats that their famous slogan of “Victory Through Equality of Sacrifice” had been made applicable only to the workers and had not touched in any appreciable way the profits and income of the bosses.
 
Wages and the War
The longest discussion in the convention revolved around the resolutions on manpower, total war mobilization, and stabilization of national economy. These were the chief resolutions relating to the conduct of the war with which the convention was concerned.
The resolution on stabilization pointed out that (a) wages had been stabilized; (b) cost has not been controlled; (c) overall and democratic rationing has not been accomplished; (d) the 1942 tax legislation actually takes away from the low income groups money which they need to pay the bare necessities of life. Then this resolution resolves that “labor does not seek any special privileges. we merely seek the adoption of policies which will assure the maximum utilization of all our manpower and all our resources in a manner that will guarantee an early victory in this war.” After which it calls for a “win-the-war tax program.”
The resolution closes with, the contention that “wages should continue to be stabilized but not frozen. The wage program should be measured in terms of what will best assure the most efficient, workers for production ... wage freezing must be condemned as a blow against the fullest prosecution of our war effort.”
 
A Feeble Distinction
It is very difficult for anybody to discover and understand what exactly is the distinction that the CIO leadership makes between what is called “wage stabilization” and “wage freezing.” The resolution and the leading speakers in the convention ignored completely the fact that the policy of the War Labor Board, which was laid down in the Little Steel decision, is a policy which ties the workers to their standard of living as of January 1, 1941.
Labor Action has already pointed out that this decision and procedure simply mean the stabilization and freezing of a low standard of living. It provides no opportunity for an improved standard of living and for increased real economic benefits. Furthermore, the vague language of the resolution about paying wages that will create the highest production is really nonsense. It is significant that nothing is said in this resolution about a demand for higher wages to limit the tremendous profits of the bosses. All these bureaucrats are concerned with is wages high enough to guarantee maximum production. This for the reason that they are concerned primarily with support of the imperialist war.
The resolution on total war mobilization says in part that
“total war mobilization cannot operate or be organized except through the direct and fullest participation of labor – not through any advisory committee, but with labor given the highest responsibility in the formulation and execution of all the policies and activities. This full and equal representation of labor has not been achieved ... the CIO therefore demands the participation of labor in all the administrative agencies which make and execute our war policies – and at every level.”
 
Source of Difficulty
This is really a demand not only for the placing of labor representatives in the administrative agencies, but also a demand for the placing of labor in responsible cabinet positions. This must be true because the formulation and execution of policies and activities is a political function. The tragic and naive incompetence of the CIO leadership to think clearly on this question is really the source of the difficulties that the CIO and its membership face today.
This was further illustrated in the discussion of the resolution on the recent elections. This resolution said that “with the forces of labor and other supporters of the leadership of our Commander-in-Chief not always united, and with the finger not accurately pointed to the conveyors of confusion and of internal opposition, the candidates qualified for membership in a true win-the-war Congress went down to defeat.”
In the discussion of the resolution, one delegate said that in Michigan from 25 to 35 per cent of “our people were not even registered to vote. They don’t even think that it is important to register, and then when election day comes around they do not get out and cast their ballots ... Although we haven’t got any form of socialism or technocracy or anything else, collective bargaining as we have come to know it has probably been taken over by the government.”
In the discussion of this resolution there were many things said about the necessity of labor being represented in the government. Comparison was made with the situation in England, but nobody seemed to! be aware of the fact that in England it is not the trade unions as such that are represented in the government, but the British Labor Party. They talked in this convention as though the problems of labor can be solved simply by placing a dozen or so trade union leaders, as trade union leaders, on the administrative board.
There was a great deal of shooting at the mark, but everybody missed. The real question that was posed before the convention was independent political action, a break from the Democratic and Republican Parties, and the establishment of an Independent Labor Party, national in extent. But the convention and its leadership steered clear of that logical conclusion.
The resolution on manpower called for the full utilization of all workers, Negro, alien and women, and a demand that every restriction on their use be broken down and eliminated. [line of text missing] drafting of labor. It was urged that a national mobilization plan be adopted “with full participation of all elements in our population” in order to “bring about the integration of our war machinery.”
 
Reuther Approaches Genuine Point
At the request of Murray, Reuther made a long speech during the discussion on the total war mobilization resolution. In the course of his speech he remarked that
“Mr. Nelson is not a New Dealer, and if you check the people who make up the War Production Board you will find for every New Dealer there are two hundred rock-ribbed reactionary Republicans. They are making the policy in Washington ... I came back from Washington about three weeks ago in a plane. There were two representatives of the War Production Board in front of me ... They were reading the news about Stalingrad. One fellow said: ‘All we have to do is just give the Russians enough so they can hang on, and they will destroy each other.’”
Reuther also told the convention about a document being circulated in Washington by one of Nelson’s closest advisers “which proves beyond doubt that Mr. Weinberg is using material put out by a notorious strike-breaker, labor-baiter and Jew-baiter in the city of Chicago, one Harry Jung, who has been carrying on a vicious campaign against labor. Mr. Weinberg is using material from this fellow’s agency in his fight inside the War Production Board against organized labor.”
It is interesting that in the course of this speech Reuther approached the heart of the difficulties that the workers in the shops face today; that is the problem of getting their grievances settled. He said: “We go to management and they say take it to Washington. We know that we can’t take shop grievances to Washington.” Reuther’s solution for this difficulty, however is not to make a demand for the restoration of genuine collective bargaining between the workers and the bosses. Instead he suggested that the regional offices of the War Labor Board appoint arbitrators to handle grievances.
The whole discussion revealed that the entire course of the CIO during the past year has been one which has and could only lead to defeat for the membership. Time and again leading speakers emphasized the point that the course pursued during past months has not produced the results that the leadership evidently expected.
What we want to emphasize is the fact, known to every militant member of the CIO, that defeat was guaranteed when the right to strike was surrendered. It is known in every shop and factory that when the threat of strike was removed the whole management, from plant owner down to the smallest foreman, began a planned policy of riding the workers and refusing to discuss grievances. It is also known by every worker that there is one way and only one way to correct this situation and that is to go back to the time-honored methods that have proved effective in forcing management to settle grievances. All the talk about supporting our Commander-in-Chief will have absolutely no influence on hard-headed corporation executives.
Next week we will resume this report, dealing with the Stalinists, the United Mine Workers, unity, and the resolution on discrimination.
 



Next to the break from the CIO, perhaps the most far-reaching decision made at the recent United Mine Workers’ convention was that relating to the further expansion of the organizing activities of District 50. This district, which was known formerly as the Gas, By-Product, Coke and Chemical Workers, District 50, but now known as District 50, UMWA, was given organizational powers by the convention. By resolution it is permitted to “adopt bylaws and rules not inconsistent with this constitution.” It was placed under the “jurisdiction and regulation” of the international executive board of the UMWA.
The amendment to the constitution and the resolution broadening the field from which the UMWA may select members opens the way for taking in workers from variegated types of employment. Because of the very large number of unorganized workers in the country, and with District 50 as a new organizing center, it may be possible for Lewis for the second time in ten years to become the leader of a third national labor federation. In his closing speech to the convention Lewis emphasized that there would be no raiding of other organizations. He said that there were millions of unorganized in the United States that are crying to be organized.
 
Millions Unorganized
This of course is a fact. When it is considered that the combined membership of the AFL and the CIO does not exceed twelve million, it is clear that there is room for an all-out intensive organization drive. In fact, the new movement can grow to even larger size than either the AFL or CIO should a persistent, intensive and determined effort be made.
In the South alone it is possible to organize a million unorganized workers, including thousands of sharecroppers, tenant farmers and agricultural day laborers. These agricultural workers are at present partially organized into the United Cannery, Agricultural, Packinghouse and Allied Workers of America and in the Southern Tenant Farmers Union. The former organization is controlled by the Stalinists and the latter is under the influence of Socialist Party people. Both are quiescent, passive union groups and have within their ranks only a fraction of the potential membership.
In sections of the UCAPAWA there is great dissatisfaction with the Stalinist leadership. Locals are dropping away. These workers would welcome aid from a militant organization with the record of accomplishment of the UMWA.
 
Unity Question
The break from the CIO further complicates the question of unity between the CIO and the AFL. There is a desire, of course, on the part of the officers of both federations to exclude Lewis from any important role in any unity discussions and decisions. Neither Murray nor Green would want to give Lewis an opportunity to assume a position of prominent leadership in a united organization. However, it would be difficult to stop this with Lewis solidly backed by the 600,000 miners of an international in such a strong strategical position as the UMWA.
The leadership of the CIO and the AFL, however, is between the devil and the sea. Lewis would be a threat to their leadership and influence inside the merged organization while at the same time he could become just as great a threat on the outside expanding into another large national federation.
The whole question has been further complicated by the constant and direct intervention of Roosevelt in the affairs of the labor movement in the interest of the Second Imperialist World .War. Murray and Green, especially Murray, so far as public statements go, are solidly at the beck and call of Roosevelt, Whatever he suggests or orders they jump to carry out.
When Lewis made his unity proposal last winter, Murray was immediately summoned to the White House by Roosevelt, who let it be known that he would support Murray in any conflict with Lewis. The fact that Roosevelt and Lewis were on the outs and the fact that Roosevelt was “supporting” Murray emboldened all the little fellows in the CIO, like Walter Reuther and John Riffe, to snipe at Lewis. This was a most potent supplementary factor in widening the rift between the CIO and the UMWA.
It seems as though Roosevelt has burned his fingers in his anxiety to isolate Lewis and bring the whole labor movement under his control through the docile acceptance of his plans by the AFL and the CIO. A unified labor movement with the miners on the outside organizing the millions of unemployed workers and getting results for them will not keep the unity for long.
The CIO group is still too fluid and plastic to remain content to be tied to Roosevelt, Green, Hutchinson and Tobin, getting nothing but talk of sacrifice and more sacrifice, while a third group under Lewis might be improving its standards of wages and hours. After all, it is not the rank and file in the CIO who are on the outs with Lewis, but Roosevelt and the CIO leadership.
The question that is being asked over and over, of course, is: “What will Lewis do now? Will he join the AFL or remain independent?” It is my guess that the UMWA will remain independent and wait to see what will happen. In the meantime they wall proceed with an expanded organizing campaign. This seems to be the real meaning of the resolution granting wider powers to District 50.
 



The fifth constitutional convention of the CIO held in Boston last week was a political convention. Not, however, a working class political convention, despite the fact that all of the delegates were working people and all represented working class organizations.
It was a political convention in that the overwhelming majority of questions which came before the convention and on which discussion was held and position taken were political questions. They were, most of them, questions involving decisions by the government because they were matters that have to do primarily with the prosecution of the war.
Labor is obviously involved, but the way that this convention proceeded, was just about the same way the Democratic Party or any group of employers would have approached the questions under consideration. This isn’t completely true, of course, because a group of employers would have put their private business interests first, war or no war. This was brought out again and again in the convention when the various resolutions were under discussion.
One delegate emphasized the fact that the convention was really a political convention when he pointed out, in the discussion of the resolution on “Recent Elections,” that the majority of the resolutions to come before the convention dealt with “politics.” They dealt with questions in which the government was involved and which the government by act of Congress or by decree has taken under its control. They were matters, therefore, that throw the trade union movement not so much into relationship with the employers but with the federal government. Furthermore, it was clear from the discussion that many of the delegates had come to the convention with the feeling that the government had not done so well. The employers were doing pretty much as they pleased, and it was only labor that was being controlled by the government.
This was the situation that faced this fifth annual convention. The leadership of the CIO had given up the right to strike. They had yielded to the employers and Roosevelt on the “premium pay.” They had tried to set up Nelson’s labor-management committees as a substitute for Murray’s industrial councils. They had subordinated the entire struggle of the mass production workers for greater security to the demand of Roosevelt and the bosses that labor sacrifice for the war. That is, the leadership had said that labor must wait until the war is won and over before the CIO can make any further advances or even hold its own.
We have said that it was a political convention. Here are the main resolutions of a distinctly political nature that were acted on favorably: a resolution commending Murray for his support of Roosevelt and the war, total war mobilization, manpower, labor unity, United Mine Workers of America, labor-management production committees, recent elections, stabilization of national economy, the second front, Atlantic Charter and India, poll-tax, Hitler’s puppet state, agriculture and the war, farm workers and the war, war program for federal workers.
Not only was the convention given its political nature by the content of these resolutions but also by the presence of government representatives, notably Assistant Secretary Bard of the Navy Department and Senator Pepper. To these one must add Sidney Hillman, who was present to make a come-back and to whoop it up for unconditional unity with the AFL in the interest of the “war effort.”
Hillman consumed the time of the convention with a long speech trying to vindicate his record in the OPM. The only impression that one could possibly draw from Hillman’s remarks was that here was a labor leader who had been discarded and kicked out by Roosevelt and the bosses when they had no further use for him.
The speech made by Bard was a very crude and dull affair. The only things that made it possible to listen to it without falling asleep were his demand that the workers produce more per man and his remarks about the second front.
“We can increase the output per man in our war industries,” said Bard, “and labor can carry the ball and furnish the leadership in doing so ... There is a limit to the manpower even in this great country, and the time has come to talk about more production from the manpower available ... Our big chance to increase production is to increase it with the same force that we now have. We must, therefore, direct our efforts to the increasing of our per capita production, which I know can be done.”
And then Bard got off a real gem: “It’s largely your war. There are more workers than there are lawyers or bankers or corporation executives.” We don’t know whom Bard was representing at the convention. It was clear, however, that he was saying just the things that the private shipbuilders and other large employers of labor like to hear: more per capita production, more work, more production from each man. No more hours of work for which more wages would have to be paid, but more production for the time yon ALREADY work and for the wage yon are ALREADY being paid.
On the second front Bard said that he understood
“many of you have been demanding the immediate opening of a second front. Well, you’ve got it. And I am sure that you now realize your increasing obligation in producing the necessary war equipment to maintain this second front. This adds another area ... which requires tanks, guns, planes and ammunition. This is your responsibility You asked for it. You’ve got it.”
When Bard had finished Murray felicitated him on such a wonderful and cooperative address by saying: “So again, Mr. Bard, let us express to your our appreciation for your words of inspiration and encouragement.”
 
Pepper Speaks
Senator Pepper also made a speech to the convention. His speech was important mainly for what he revealed about the manner in which the bosses are running the war. Pepper, for example, read a letter which he had received from a prominent lawyer in Florida, protesting against the quartering of WAACS in the hotel where he is living because he was “thus inconvenienced” and threatening to beat Pepper in the next election if he and the other tenants were disturbed.
Pepper also reported to the convention some of the anti-group-medicine practices of the American Medical Association, which has charge of the procurement and assignment of doctors for the armed services. In the state of Washington, the head of the Medical Association is head of the procurement of doctors for that state. In the Kaiser Shipyards, hospital facilities had been set up.
“The head of the procurement and assignment services of the state of Washington,” said Pepper, “told these doctors in Kaiser’s hospital that if those doctors treat the wives and children of these workers that is ‘offensive group medicine to us,’ and we will see to it that they, are, through Selective Service, inducted into the armed services of the country.”
It was also in this speech that Pepper referred to the remarks of Churchill to the effect that he did not become Prime Minister in order to sit in at the burial of the British Empire. Pepper said that
“the leader of a great nation said something that indicated that considerations of empire had not been eliminated from the objectives of war ... If we haven’t learned that humility and humbleness of spirit which transcends all material considerations, if we are not sincere when we say we fight for democracy, we prepare to betray another generation.”
As we listened to Pepper we wondered just what OTHER generation “we” had betrayed. Possibly the generation that had fought the First Imperialist World War. And does Pepper himself have some vague doubt that this war is being fought for democracy? If he does – and we know that Pepper knows that this is not a war for democracy in the sense that the ranks of labor mean it – then he is far in front of Murray. Murray probably honestly believes that the United States and England and fighting for democracy and that when the war is over all the promises that have been made by Roosevelt and the bosses will be kept. Of course, Pepper knows better than this; he is not so infantile and stupid as Murray.
In future articles in Labor Action we will discuss the most important resolutions passed at the convention and the effect of the convention on the labor movement.
 



Some of us who sat through the two days of demagogy, hollow “patriotism,” distortions, cheap maneuverings, whining and capitulation of the leadership of the United Automobile Workers, at the “conference” in Detroit last week, came away with at least the satisfaction that the membership are not the full-fledged ninnies the leaders evidently thought they were when they called this conference.
The International Board had taken great pains to have a select group of delegates at this “War Emergency Conference.” The call for the conference, on the recommendation of the board, said that delegates should be selected by executive boards and the bargaining committees of the locals and that in so far as possible the delegates should be chosen from these two groups.
Thomas said in his opening address that there was not time for the election of the delegates by the locals. This explanation of course is plainly fraudulent. Every local could have held a special meeting if necessary to elect delegates to the conference. Furthermore, the issues before this conference were precisely the sort that should be decided only by delegates freely and democratically elected by the whole membership.
 
How Can Thomas Justify Procedure?
How can Thomas and the international board of the UAW justify such a procedure? Why was it necessary to depart from the thoroughly democratic practice of the organization in this matter of selecting delegates to a “conference” or convention?
What difference does it make whether the board called the gathering a “conference” or a convention? It was a deliberative body, a decision-making body and, as I shall show later, it was the intention of the leadership to make these decisions final.
Thomas said that there wasn’t time enough to have the delegates elected by the locals. But what was the rush in holding the “conference”? Why couldn’t it have been postponed for a few weeks so that the locals could have had the Victory Through Equality of Sacrifice Program for the Nation to study and discuss in the locals before the election of delegates?
 
What Was Thomas Afraid Of?
Why was this program tucked away and not delivered to the delegates until the morning the conference opened? The people back home, in the shops and the locals had no idea what was in this Program for the Nation. One prominent delegate remarked on the floor that he tried to get hold of the program the night before the conference opened and finally succeeded in stealing one at about ten o’clock at night!
What were Thomas and the board afraid of? What were they running away from? They confessed again and again what it was they were afraid of. To be sure there was a great deal of dishonesty and hypocrisy mixed up with some real fears on the part of these leaders. They were fleeing from Smith of Virginia, Cox of Georgia, the capitalist press, the National Association of Manufacturers, something they called “public opinion” and that best of all fakes, the Gallup Poll.
Furthermore, as Thomas explained in his last tearful effort before the vote was taken, the Roosevelt-Murray-Green board of labor overseers was to meet a week hence. Thomas said that he wanted to go into this meeting and say to the President that the UAW had agreed to go along with his request to give up the Saturday and Sunday “premium pay.”
There is the story and the explanation. They are after us, said those who favored the “program.” We’ve just got to do this to get them off our backs.
 
The Speeches of the Retreaters
“Let’s come out of this war with a union,” said Linwood Smith of the international board. “Congress is going to shove this thing down our throats.”
“Not one of you has said what to do in place of this program. Congress is already on the warpath,” said the “socialist” Victor Reuther. “You are not bargaining with the manufacturers, you are bargaining with Congress. I sat in meetings just like this in France. It did happen there.”
“If we don’t give up present Saturday and Sunday pay, they’ll take it away from us anyhow,” said DiLorenzo of the Brewster local.
“We don’t choose at this time to take on more than one opponent,” said Leonard of the board.
John Anderson, of Local 155, Detroit, wanted to know: “Shall the selfishness of General Motors, Aluminum and Standard Oil have a counterpart in the selfishness of labor?” Anderson was worried that “a year from now we may be saluting some slant-eyed Jap.”
Delegate Watt, of the Ford Local, said that “the paramount thing is not our union, but our country. We know that Roosevelt is pro-labor.”
 
Frankensteen’s Tear-Jerking Speech
Frankensteen, strike-breaker of the North American strike, delivered a real tear-jerker. This is also the same Frankensteen who was willing to make a deal at the convention last August to go easy on the Stalinists if they would support him for vice-president of the UAW. Frankensteen said that “the best way to lose the 40-hour week is to drive our friends together with our enemies. Are we going to tell the President to go to hell in the first request that he has made to us? Where would Russia be today if they sat back and said well do nothing until we get all that yon promised us? Read about the men dying at Bataan. You are going to line up our friends against us.”
This was only a small part of the rubbish dished out to the delegates by the members of the international board to the 1,400 delegates on the floor. They battered, begged and pleaded. It was clear that they were quite surprised at the opposition to their “program for the nation.” The delegates were really against the program. They wanted a program for the union and for labor and they said so, many of them in such strong and direct language that even the slow-thinking Thomas could understand.
Shipley of the Dodge Local said that some of the speakers from the international board were “trying to mislead the conference. They’re not country bumpkins.” Then Shipley went on to ridicule and blast the speakers who had made statements to the effect that the opposition wanted to see the boys die on the battlefield without a gun in their hand. “We’re not afraid of Congress,” said Shipley. “They talk about defeating Hitler; I don’t hear anybody talking about defeating Hitlerism.”
Lloyd Jones, president of Murray Body Local, said that he was against the ten-point program. “It doesn’t look like equal sacrifice,” said Jones. He said that Point 5 calling for the adjustment of wages to meet increased living costs was not sincere. Jones asked how the board could talk about increasing the pay to meet the rising cost of living and at the same time write Point 10 of the program that upon the “adoption of the foregoing measures, we agree that all wages for time over 40 hours per week shall be paid in the form of non-negotiable SPECIAL DEFENSE BONDS.” Jones said that the conference should vote against Point 10.
One delegate said that he was willing to sacrifice and he had. He was against this program. “Let those who have not sacrificed do it first.”
Another delegate said that “Last August we elected our officers to negotiate for us. Now it seems like they are negotiating with our enemies against us.”
One delegate said that he knew of no manufacturer that had sacrificed anything “and neither do you,” speaking to the members of the board; This fitting delegate added: “You’ll have to hand us something more than a lot of flowery speeches.”
 
Leadership Attacked by Buick Delegate
Case of Buick Local 599 said that he was not convinced that the international board had not been taken in. He said that not one thing had been offered by the leadership to tell “what we are going to do after we sacrifice.”
Delegate Manning in a stinging reference to the Stalinists and former socialists said: “There are people here supporting this program who built a political reputation in 1917 cursing the AFL for doing just what we are doing here today. We would look stupid in six months if we give up overtime and the manufacturers give it back in six months because they can’t get workers.”
I said in the first paragraph that some of us came away from this conference still convinced that the UAW is a first-rate fighting labor organization. They proved it to their leaders last week at this “War Emergency Conference.” The leadership was really surprised. Thomas was alternating the speakers, for and against, until he discovered that there was no end to the determination of the opposition. Every time Thomas called: “I want one who is against,” two dozen hands went up. But after six hours of the struggle and under the final barrage from the international board with their tears and pleas, the opposition retreated and the vote was taken. The rising vote wag about 1,200 to 200.
 
Not Really a Representative Vote
I am convinced that nobody believes that this vote represented the real sentiment of the delegates. Surely Thomas, the “socialist” Reuthers, Frankensteen and Addes know better. They know how they got that vote. They thought that things were safe in the manner in which the delegates were picked, but that didn’t prove true. It was clear in the first hours of the debate that the majority of the delegates were definitely against the “program’’ of the international board.
The board had the greatest difficulty in presenting its case convincingly. It had just two arguments; both weak, as I shall demonstrate in an article in Labor Action next week. Their first argument was that the union must agree to this program in order to appease Congress. This second argument was that the program should be adopted as a tribute to President Roosevelt, who had promised in his letter to the conference that none of the wages that would be given up would go to increase the profits of the corporations.
When these very flimsy arguments and the program were attacked the leaders had no reply that made any sense at all. They could only resort to tear-jerking, cajoling, pleading and the most scoundrelly forms of fraudulent “patriotic” appeals and threats.
 
Reuther’s Demagogic Reply
For instance, when Mullens of Local 174 said that the leadership was “bargaining against us,” Walter Reuther replied that when Mullins made such a statement he was making accusations against not only Thomas, but Murray and the President of the United States.
This was the sort of thing that subdued the militants in the conference. They were not organized and they did not have a program. It was perhaps too much to expect that they would reply to Reuther, asking what was wrong with criticizing the President of the United States? Far more, none of the delegates in the opposition seemed competent to untangle the net that the leaders had fastened the conference in.
What was this continual linking of Murray and Roosevelt together and making them both representatives of labor? Some of the delegates seemed vaguely aware that something was wrong in this picture, but they couldn’t formulate it and bring it out in an organized manner.
 
“While We’ve Got a Shirt Left”
McGill of Flint really expressed the sentiment of the overwhelming majority of the delegates when he said that the situation was that of the spider and the fly and when he said on the second day that he was inclined to move for adjournment “while we’ve got a shirt left.”
The fact is that the leadership was ready to give away the shirt and anything else. The delegates to this conference knew that the manufacturers have sacrificed nothing and that they don’t intend to. They saw the Rockefeller Standard Oil Co. accused of treason and yet nothing has been done. One of the Rockefellers, Nelson, holds a big job in the Roosevelt war government. But the leadership of the CIO and the UAW walks boldly into a conference of 1,400 delegates and insists that they give and give and give until nothing is left, not even a shirt.
The leadership had many tricks up its sleeves. At the opening of the conference Thomas announced that the conference had no legislative authority and that its decisions must be submitted to the locals and the international board. After the vote was taken, however, and the program had been approved by the conference a resolution was quickly introduced and read by Addes, instructing the locals to revise their contracts in line with the vote just taken by the conference. If the conference had no legislative authority, then how could it instruct locals to revise their contracts before a majority of. the locals had voted to accept the action of the conference? The vote of the conference could only be a recommendation to the locals.
But immediately after the vote is taken and there is a majority for the “program” the international officers twist the conference from a body with power to make recommendations only to one with binding legislative functions!
To add insult to injury, organizers went back to their posts and informed locals that they may as well vote to support the conference vote because “it’s going through, anyway.” This can only mean that the international board will carry the program through itself, should it be faced with such an alternative.
Next week I will take up a discussion of the “program” and the following week an analysis of the “Labor-Management Production Committees.”
 



American Negroes must have been amused about one piece of news that was carried in the daily press recently. This was the report that American whites in Manila were terribly shocked and indignant over rumored or actual race discrimination against them by the Japanese, When Negroes in the United States read the press accounts of how good American white folk (some of them from Georgia and Mississippi) were being kicked around and discriminated against and “Jim Crowed” because they were white, the blood of these Negro Americans must have boiled. How dare these “Japs” bring race prejudice, discrimination and segregation into the United States or its “possessions.”
Why, everybody knows that these American whites have a spotless record with regard to race prejudice and Jim Crow! Everyone knows that Negroes aren’t discriminated against in Frank Knox’s Navy – they’re even allowed to advance to the lordly posts of messboys, where they can wash the officers’ dishes, and valets, where they can shine the officers’ shoes. Could anyone ask for more?
And everybody knows that America is a country where there are NEVER any lynchings. Negroes in the South live a life of complete equality and freedom. Ask that well known friend of freedom, Georgia’s Governor Gene Talmadge, about that. He’ll tell you how the South “takes care” of its Negro people!
And if once in a while – say, every day – there is a report like the one from Fort Bragge, where white military police assault Negro soldiers, or from Arkansas, where white police drive Negro troops in military formation off the road – nobody would hold that against the Southern white folks, would they? Why, it would be rank ingratitude if they did! And everyone knows about how Negroes are permitted to work on an equal footing with white workers. Why, just look at the Glenn Martin factory in Baltimore, for example, where there are about a half dozen Negroes employed as porters in the factory of thousands of men. There’s American equality and fair play for you!
Truly, it must have been an awful shock to those American white people when they discovered that there is such a thing in the world as race prejudice and discrimination! Why, the word “Jim Crow” isn’t even in American dictionaries; no one ever heard of it in this country until those Japs started it in Manila! Negroes who claim that such evils exist in the United. States must certainly have distorted minds and most vivid imaginations. They must know that this is a war for democracy. Just look at the 13th, 14th and 15th amendments. Yes, look at them!
Yes, we say, Negroes have a right to laugh. They also have the right to get mad when they read of such brazen “indignation” on the part of American white people who run into race prejudice against them. Perfidy and hypocrisy can reach no lower depths. Negroes read of the great indignation of the white people in Manila against the Japanese because the Japanese are resorting to race prejudice and discrimination.
On another page they read that the Red Cross will not take Negro blood. On still another page they read that the White officers of a Negro regiment near Philadelphia have posted a notice on the regimental bulletin board that cohabitation between Negro soldiers and White women, even with the consent of the women, is considered “rape” and that in time of war is punishable by death.
Negroes are Jim Crowed, pushed to the bottom of the heap, mobbed and lynched all over the United States. They have no more share in democracy now than before the great and holy crusade for “democracy” began.
Think of it! The Red Cross announces that there is no difference in the blood of the various groups of humankind but still they will not permit Negroes to give their blood to a blood bank. Negroes will only be permitted to feed their blood to the earth after being run through by a Japanese or German bayonet. Negroes will only be permitted to give their blood to the mob and the lynchers. They will only be allowed to give their blood under the lash of the plantation overseer in the cotton fields.
Negro soldiers can guard the factories, bridges, highways and homes of white people but they must not accept any courtesies from white people. They are treated like a faithful dog; praised for their “loyalty and courage” but never permitted to do more than serve the master. These white Americans who perpetrate these savage acts against the Negro, even the Negro soldier in uniform, are the same white people who grow indignant over Japanese race prejudice against the white people in Manila.
We don’t pretend to know what all the Negroes think about all this; we don’t know what kind of stomachs they have; but as for us, our stomachs are not strong enough to hold this brew of lies, deceit, hypocrisy and Hitlerism.
 



The most significant occurrences of the recent United Auto Workers’ convention demonstrate anew the woefully inadequate political preparation of the American workers for playing a class role in the Second Imperialist World War. Despite the fact that the new industrial union movement and organization is now seven years old, that it arose in the course of the severest economic crisis in the whole span of American and world capitalism, accompanied by the imminence of world fascism, the movement remains today politically illiterate, naïve and other-worldly. This is expressed in its continued trust in Roosevelt and its failure to achieve even the most elementary understanding of what Roosevelt is, what he really stands for and whom he represents.
We say that the American proletariat is not yet prepared to play a class political rôle in the present world drama. It is important to emphasize this lack of proletarian class consciousness today because it is in the period of imperialist war that the class consciousness of the bourgeoisie reaches its highest point and can be dearly seen, no matter how thick the covering layers of patriotic, chauvinist propaganda. In this period of the death agony of capitalism, the bourgeoisie is in continual crisis. From its class point of view it is urgently necessary to close ranks and act in a consistently class conscious manner. The leaders of the bourgeoisie know that the wars waged today by the capitalist states are in fact a struggle between the ruling classes of these states, fought for what is conceived to be the predominant national interest of each group. On a world scale, therefore, the present war is an intra-class struggle, i.e., a struggle taking place between the world bourgeoisies.
The leaders among the bourgeoisie know this to be a fact; they know what their aims are and what their goal is. They conceal these aims and their goal from the proletariat because this is indispensable if they are to have what is necessary to fight the war, namely, manpower in the armies and an unceasing flow of war material in the largest quantities possible. They also know that the mere physical presence of the proletariat at the guns and at the factory machines is not enough. There is a qualitative aspect to the question of war efficiency; the workers must not only be there in millions but they must have high “morale,” they must believe in what they are doing and be induced finally to replace their interests with the interests of the ruling class. The attempt is made of course to effect this replacement peacefully but if this cannot be done, the bourgeoisie does not hesitate for an instant to produce it by force. To be sure, this only means that the effort is made, by “education,” to bring the proletariat to acceptance of the “defense of the fatherland” concept and if this is not successful, to suppress the militancy of the unions by legislation or by military force.
This is the standardized procedure of the bourgeoisie in every capitalist country. They operate consciously and deliberately. They fight cooperatively on a class basis and always for what they think are their class interests. Do they want to win the war? Do they want to defeat Germany? Of course they do. But what the proletariat does not understand is that this is not the simple matter that the ruling class pretends it is when it seeks to win the working class to its side.
In this instance the bourgeoisie talks in simple terms and puts forth very simple formulas: This is a workers’ war. Hitler is a barbarian. The Japanese unleash a brutal anti-white terror in the conquered areas. Our democratic way of life is endangered. This is a war of democracy against fascist barbarism. Should Hitler win, the trade unions will be destroyed.
One or two of these sayings are totally true, others are partially true, while others of the bourgeois slogans are totally false. The trade unions will surely be destroyed if Hitler wins, but the war is not a workers’ war. It is an imperialist war waged by the imperialists of the several nations for the consolidation of imperialist gains and interests. (It must be remembered also that there is a concerted drive by the ruling class to destroy the unions now, before the arrival of fascism.)
The financiers and big industrialists want to win the war, it is true, but winning the war to them means not only the defeat of Hitler but also the maintenance of their class dominance in the United States. They are against Hitler and the German bourgeoisie because they threaten the class power and domination of the bourgeoisie in the United States. Hitler threatens to force the American bourgeoisie into the position of subordination to the German bourgeoisie. The war is truly a war between German and American capitalism for world mastery.
 
Nature of Bourgeois Aims
Class dominance and world power to the bourgeoisie have solid economic roots. They are based on the need for markets, raw materials, labor power (domestic and colonial) and above all, on profits with which to pay salaries, dividends and interest. The conflict between the necessity for defeating the German imperialists and their internal class needs and demands create certain contradictions for the native bourgeoisie. They want to defeat the German bourgeoisie but not at the expense of their rule at home. And thus they face a dilemma. If Hitler wins they will at least be partially stripped of their power and profits. But to make concessions to the unions and the working class in general is, in their opinion, also to be partially stripped of power and profits. Consequently, they attempt not only to maintain but to increase their profits, to “pacify” the working class and thereby increase its exploitation while attempting to gain a military victory against the enemy. In the long run, a victory for Hitler would be preferable to them than a victory for the proletariat in the United States.
Workers or their leaders may object that this is therefore not a consideration at the present; that the ruling class can well afford to bargain collectively with the unions and pay higher wages. It is their contention that, in the circumstances, this is the only decent, patriotic and American course for the bourgeoisie to follow. This will promote “national unity” and enhance the country’s “war effort.” But the bourgeoisie, being extremely class conscious, especially in wartime, knows more about these matters than the proletariat. It is suspicious of the working class and its organizations, particularly the industrial unions. It is even suspicious of its labor lieutenants. It says openly that Murray’s industrial councils will be an entering wedge for the unions to encroach on ownership.
The labor-management committees are a kind of “socialistic” experiment. The bourgeois leaders know well that the strength of the proletariat is in its numbers and that these numbers organized in the industrial unions such as the DAW and led by revolutionists can become an irresistible force.
Furthermore, the bourgeoisie has its own ideas of decency, patriotism and Americanism. In its own thinking and acting, it proceeds from a class basis. It knows that it is its class which prosecutes the war against the German and Japanese ruling classes for its own class ends. It knows that the German and Japanese ruling classes on their part wage the struggle for their own class needs. It knows that there is a Japanese patriotism and a German patriotism as well as an American pa-tirotism. It knows that it is all cut from the same piece of cloth: world capitalism, world imperialism. Therefore the bourgeoisie in the United States practices its own decency, class decency; its own patriotism, class patriotism; its own Americanism, class Americanism. It seeks to win the proletariat over to its ideas of decency, patriotism and Americanism and to hurl the working class ideologically and physically not against the German, Italian and Japanese ruling classes, but against the German, Italian and Japanese nations and their people.
 
“Good” and “Bad” Capitalists
The “exposure” of the Standard Oil Co. of New Jersey and the General Electric Co., the charges that the big steel companies are selling steel to a “black market,” the hijacking operations of the meat packers, the refusal of the airplane companies to produce for less than an eight per cent profit – all these things are traditional and typical of bourgeois decency, patriotism and Americanism. This has been true from the days of Valley Forge, when Washington’s army was left to starve by the food brokers of Philadelphia because they could get “good” money from the British in place of the continental script of dubious value. The decent and patriotic bankers mulcted the federal government during the 1860 rebellion; the meat men sold rotten supplies to the government during the Spanish-American War; Morgan patriotically led the country in the First Imperialist World War in order to protect his investments in Europe. The contemporary bourgeoisie acts no differently.
The workers and their leaders can see what the “bad” capitalists do. But they do not see what the capitalists as a whole do. That is their main weakness. They do not understand that capitalism is an indissoluble unity, that it is not a matter of their private opinions but of men functioning as a class and in the interests of their class. The workers and their leaders complain about Henderson, Nelson, Smith of Virginia, Cox of Georgia, Ford and the dollar-a-year men in the government. These are terrible men and should be replaced, they say. But the proletariat does not realize that it is just at the time that capitalism is in crisis that dollar-a-year men come forward to take the reins of government. In times of calm and peace there is no need for the big bourgeoisie to place their strong key men in the government. The little men can then handle the team: the college professors, the theoreticians, the dreamers and experimenters.
 
The Social Order or “Bad” Capitalists?
During the past eight years they have gone back to the Middle Ages and beyond for their philosophy: to the paternalistic conceptions of the medieval manor, the Catholic Church and the benign paternalism of Augustus Caesar. Roosevelt is their Augustus, their kind lord of the manor. What they do not grasp though is that the Rooseveltian rôle is not to promote the basic interests, that is, the class interests, of the workers but to erect a bridge over which the proletariat can pass, be led or driven into the camp of the bourgeoisie. First Roosevelt must establish unity, even though temporarily, inside the ruling class. They must be unified behind the war effort. The national interest, that is, the class interests of the bourgeoisie as a whole, dictates this. The fact that some sections of the bourgeoisie do not always see this is beside the point; it is the business of Roosevelt to create harmony and make them work as a team. Roosevelt came to save American capitalism and not to fight for collective bargaining for American workers except to the degree that this was necessary to save and perpetuate capitalism. If the workers could get this in their heads then they would be able to understand Roosevelt and his rôle. They would understand why Roosevelt sent the army to the North American Aviation Co. strike, why he demanded the giving up of the strike and of double-time pay.
 
Confusion of the Workers
It is through their allegiance to Roosevelt that the workers succumb to the “spiritual” paraphernalia of capitalist society today. They are led to believe that this imperialist war is a “workers’” war, they come to accept “our way of life.” They come under complete domination of the bourgeoisie. They think and believe that they carry on the fight against fascism, not realizing that to the bourgeoisie the “fight against fascism” is basically a struggle to save and perpetuate the American brand of capitalism. They and their leaders act as though they believed that Roosevelt and the ruling class were at war with Hitler because he destroyed the trade unions.
The proletariat is impressed with the tremendous power of the capitalist state. This power is not something to be ignored because it is real and terrible, oppressive and cruel. What workers seem to forget is that they are part of this power, in a sense the main part. The capitalist state would be nothing more than little Switzerland without its main prop – the proletariat, the chief of the productive forces of capitalism and the bulk of its military forces. Also, the proletariat does not yet understand that a workers’ state would be still more powerful and infinitely more productive. The energies of the people that could be unleashed by the workers’ government: their productive capacities and spontaneity, their proletarian patriotism and the ensuing military might, would sweep Adolph Hitler and every other Hitler from the seats of power.
The proletariat has some vague and wandering feeling that all is not well. They see the drive against the unions and against their living standards. They behold the National War Labor Board tie them tp their shacks and poverty as of January 1, 1941. They listen to the shout of dissent that went up from the bourgeoisie when the steel workers got a small increase in pay. And while their wages are “stabilized,” they read about rising prices, soaring profits and the doubling of the big salaries. They do not catch on because they do not know and understand what we have been discussing above.
Occasionally some union convention will pass some fleeting resolution calling for the formation of a Labor Party. This is only an old-fashioned longing for a change of some sort. But this is not enough. The offensive of the bourgeoisie is political in nature and the unions reply with the simplest of age-old economic demands and the intention of winning them with routine collective bargaining, all within the framework of rampant, predatory, exploitive and imperialist capitalism. Hence Roosevelt represents neither the economic nor the political interests of the proletariat. Just as in the case of the bourgeoisie, with its Democratic-Republican Party, the proletariat must have its own political party to formulate its program, fight its political battles and lead it to victory. The Republican-Democratic Party does this for the ruling class and for this class alone. The day that the proletariat grasps and understands this elementary political idea it will break with the bourgeois parties and form its own class political instrument. The break with the bourgeois parties is the beginning of a definitive break with the ruling class; a casting out of the bourgeoisie with all its anti-proletarian baggage and ideas. This is the first and fundamental political and organizational task confronting the working class, the gulf between the economic militancy of the American proletariat and their political class consciousness is still very wide.
* * *
These observations are prompted by the procedure of the recent UAW convention and the antics of the leadership at that convention. Every question raised and discussed here is pertinent for an understanding of the deliberations of that convention and all the other labor conventions that take place today. Each of the labor conventions is used by the bourgeoisie as a forum for the propagation of ruling class ideas. Today these conventions are only formally a gathering of labor. Specific economic problems of the labor movement are always on the agenda but they are distorted, crowded out or passed through the hopper like pension bills going through the House of Representatives.
The main part of the program is devoted to deliberation on proposals on the war coming from Roosevelt or from some other representative of the ruling class. These bourgeois ideas and resolutions are brought into the convention by the union leadership. This leadership today functions exclusively as the labor lieutenants of the bourgeoisie. As discussed above they seek to cover this up by placing Roosevelt outside the bourgeoisie, by giving him a sort of no-class status. Objectively this is the chief rôle played today by Murray, Thomas, Addes, the Reuthers and all the rest of the trade union leaders. They virtually have no other function. Their pro-imperialist war, class-collaborationist politics makes them the ideal persons to represent Roosevelt and his class in the ranks of the proletariat. They are the leaders of the workers and have or had their confidence. By the time that this confidence had begun to wane the workers had already been chained to the war drive.
 
The CIO and Roosevelt
Murray made the deal with Roosevelt which resulted in halting the advance of the CIO at least for the duration of the war. The membership was not consulted for the reason that the leadership of the CIO did not trust the membership to go along. This leadership is experienced and wise enough to know that the agreements they have made are in conflict with the interests of the workers. It also acquiesces in the plans of Roosevelt and the bourgeoisie for the unions because it does not have the courage to resist these powerful leaders of American capitalism. Murray, Thomas, Reuther and the others know that in order to stand out against Roosevelt they must have the mass support of the proletariat. The proletariat is willing and anxious to give this mass support even to the point of mass strikes, but Murray & Co. are afraid of the spontaneity of the masses. They draw back from the picture of the masses in motion. They know that the proletariat marching is a dangerous working class. The movement will get out from under their control and they will not be able to carry out the commitments they have made to Roosevelt and the bourgeoisie.
This is one reason why the organizing drives of the CIO have been halted, especially the drive to organize the airplane industry. This is the chief and the biggest war industry today. The workers there are young and militant. They are not what the New York Times calls “responsible” old-time trade unionists.
The CIO has a resolution for beginning the organization of the South. It is safe to predict that this organizing campaign will not begin until after the war is over. The organization of the white and Negro paupers of the South into fighting industrial unions would be like placing a stick of dynamite under the seat of every bourgeois in the nation. Murray, Thomas & Co. will not do this.
Not only do Murray, Thomas and the rest not have the courage, but also they do not feel that a militant mass movement of the proletariat is in their interest today. As class-collaborationist trade union leaders, they are of the working class but their thinking is not directed by the class interests of the proletariat but objectively by the class interests of the bourgeoisie. Hence they become the deputies of the bourgeoisie in the organizations of the workers. For the reason that the core of their political philosophy is class collaboration it is especially in war time, the period of greatest crisis for the bourgeoisie, that they succumb completely to bourgeois ideology and therefore fail to resist the plans of the ruling class for the proletariat.
 
Explanations by the Leadership
In what way did these factors manifest themselves at the UAW convention? The UAW is an excellent example because not only is it the largest of the CIO internationals, but, aside from the miners, the most militant, the one in the key war industry and the one with the youngest workers. Their recent convention in Chicago was a first-rate illustration of what we have been saying.
The leadership knew that they faced a rank and file revolt and had made plans to control the situation and to direct the convention to the “proper” goal. The bureaucracy had two types of proposals for the delegates: political and organizational. The political proposals concerned the relationship of the international to the government and therefore to the bourgeoisie. The main resolution and the one around which a real revolt threatened was that presented by the War Policy Committee on overtime pay. This resolution illustrated the complete dependence of the union leadership on the Roosevelt Administration; its complete trust in Roosevelt, its repudiation of class struggle methods and its refusal to invoke the mass power of the 600,000 UAW members. The resolution complained that whereas both the AFL and CIO had made a pledge to Roosevelt to give up the overtime pay, the AFL had not abided by the promise. The claim is made that the loss of the Curtiss-Wright election by the CIO could be attributed to the repudiation of the agreement by the AFL. The resolution called this a repudiation of the President. It went even further and said that : “Many employers approached by the UAW-CIO local unions for the purpose of revising their contracts to conform to the policy enunciated by the President of the United States have flatly refused to do so and have insisted upon payment of premium time.” The resolution demanded that the giving up of “premium” pay be made “universal” within thirty days or the UAW will demand return to the former status.
 
Pawns of the Administration
Here was a demand by a labor union for the government to enforce a wage cut for workers in plants where the bourgeoisie had refused to make the cut. They admit in the resolution that this is a policy put forward by Roosevelt. It was not a demand of the union. There is no claim that the demand is in the union interest. The bureaucracy does not even pretend to claim that the giving up of the “premium” pay will increase production. It only says that the workers must make sacrifices and that this is a sacrifice that Roosevelt desires. That the workers it is supposed to lead do not desire it is of no consequence; they must make sacrifices! How giving up premium pay will support the war is not explained, only that the President says so. Perhaps Thomas, Addes, Reuther and Frankensteen thought that the explanation would be too technical for the UAW membership to understand. Also, it did not occur to them to look into Roosevelt’s motives. Was Roosevelt by this move attempting to pacify the bourgeoisie, which was against the “premium” pay? Was there any connection between Roosevelt and this bourgeoisie? The leadership was silent on all these questions; all it knew was that the workers must sacrifice.
 
The Open Letter
The leadership acted as though it was operating, not under capitalism, but in a workers’ state which was at war with an imperialist state. In such a situation the delegates would have understood and there would not have been the tremendous outcry against the resolution and all the talk of the leaders about “sacrifice.” But this was not the case; the delegates new that there was something out of joint. What it was about they had only the vaguest proletarian notions.
The bourgeoisie, however, is not so stupid as Murray and Thomas, nor so dishonest as Addes, Frankensteen and Reuther. It knows it can afford to give the overtime pay, that it has nothing to do with the winning of the war. Those who do so keep up the overtime pay because they believe that it is in their class interests to continue the “premium” pay. They of course are not philanthropists, they are hard-headed capitalists. It could be true and probably is, that some of the capitalists who continue the overtime pay do so in the hope of disrupting the UAW. The union must do something about this but the proper approach is not that of the UAW officers. They want the government to punish the recalcitrant employers, to use its might to make the President’s policy “universal.” They do not appeal to their own class but to the enemy class, that is, to Roosevelt, for action in behalf of the proletariat.
One other illustration of the blundering class collaborationism of the Murray-Thomas leadership was the Open Letter to the German workers. Here again was revealed not only the crass and criminal stupidity of this leadership but also the political backwardness of the rank and file.
This obnoxious and windy Open Letter to the German workers said in part:
“You have two clear alternatives. The one is to continue what you are doing now sacrificing yourselves and your children, dragging Germany and the whole of Europe with you into an ever-deepening brutality, until Germany and all the German hopes will lie buried upon the battlefields of the world; and ... A workers’ alternative to make your inevitable suffering and sacrifices meaningful to the ultimate realization of a free and decent world ... for the workers anywhere there is but one side in this war ... in this fateful hour we call upon you workers of Germany to join us – the workers of the world – in our struggle for a workers’ victory and a workers’ peace.”
This Open Letter ignores every political consideration that is important in the situation both here and in Germany. In the first place, in their haste to advise the German workers to join with Roosevelt, Churchill and the Anglo-American bourgeoisie, the UAW bureaucrats ignore the history of the development of fascism in Germany. They speak as though the German workers were responsible for Hitler and fascism. They forget that the German labor movement had its Murray and its Thomas, class collaborationists and capitulators, who advised “sacrifice” and trust in “the President.” And doesn’t the “socialist” Reuther know that there was a Social-Democracy in Germany and that it had its Reuthers in the labor movement? Have these bureaucrats forgotten that it was the Murrays, Thomases and Reuthers that tied the German working class to the bourgeois war chariot in 1914? They and all the other trade union and socialist leaders in the United States today are playing the identical rôle as that of the German trade union and socialist leaders in 1914. In Germany the political capitulation of the trade union and political leaders to the bourgeoisie led straight down the road to HitJer and fascism. How will the CIO leaders explain this to the working class?
The Open Letter says that for the workers there is only one side in the war. To these bureaucrats, there are only two sides: “The Axis” and “the United Nations.” Which side shall the German workers choose? Thomas wants them to join the side of the United States and England. But is there no other alternative?
 
Political Clarity Is Indispensable
The German workers have been forced to serve the side of Hitler. But Thomas & Co. have no right to condemn them for this. Murray, Thomas and Reuther are voluntarily supporting their own ruling class, their own imperialists.
We say too that “for the workers anywhere there is but one side in this war.” But it is not the side that Murray and Thomas have taken, for the side they have taken is the position of the bourgeoisie: the side of death, misery and destruction; the side which in Germany and under similar conditions led to fascism and the complete destruction of the labor movement.
There is a “workers’ alternative,” the way of the class struggle. This means to break from the bourgeoisie and from support of its wars; independent political action by and for the working class; a party of workers to educate the proletariat politically, to lead its battles and to organize its victory.
Fully 95 per cent of the delegates to the UAW convention disagreed with the antics and the proposals of the leadership. Yet this leadership came away with the victory. The militants among the delegates talked and talked and pounded. But their fury and militancy accomplished comparatively little. The reason is easy to see. These militants had no political or organizational program. They do not understand capitalism and bourgeois-democratic society. They confuse politics with parliamentarianism. They do not think in terms of working class politics and of the urgent need for militant and independent working class political action.
The Open Letter calls for a “workers’ victory and a workers’ peace.” Who can organize this victory and this peace? Only the most militant, class conscious political party of the proletariat can organize and lead the working class to such a victory and such a peace. It can never be accomplished in a million years by the Murrays, Thomases, Reuthers and their kind. They fight for the victory of the bourgeoisie; they lead to the defeat of the proletariat. The trade union militants don’t yet understand this. But these lessons must be learned, and learned quickly – else the fascist deluge.
 



One year after holding a great convention with 1,000 delegates in Buffalo, N.Y., the United Automobile Workers are in session again, this time in Chicago.
The main labor theme of the Buffalo convention was the organization of the hundreds of thousands of workers in the rapidly expanding aircraft industry. The delegates were insistent on this. This was the insistent and persistent refrain from the convention floor.
There were Curtiss-Wright, Glen Martin, Douglas, Consolidated and many smaller airplane plants to be brought under the banner of the CIO. There was the matter of completing the organization of plants where something had already been done. There was the important matter of getting all the workers into the union in plants where contracts had already been signed. There was plenty of work to be done that would take all the time, ability and energy of the high command of the UAW and of every single organizer, both paid and volunteer.
It was during this convention that the demonstration at the Buffalo plants of Curtiss-Wright took place. During the year this company was to be the focal point of the organizing attack of the UAW shock troops. There was also Glen Martin, where a rather desultory organizing campaign had been in progress and the Douglas Aircraft Co., perhaps the toughest nut of all to crack.
There was the problem of building up and strengthening the locals in plants such as Bell, where things were going from bad to worse; where in a local of about 5,000 members, less than 200 vote in an election for local union officers.
These were some of the pressing problems that the UAW faced even before the United States entered the war and before the conversion efforts in the automobile industry had been decreed.
How well have these tasks been carried out in the past year by the leadership of the CIO and the UAW? What have Thomas, Addes, Frankensteen and the UAW regional directors been doing since the last convention? This question must be answered at this convention. The delegates should insist on an answer and on full and frank discussion.
 
During the Past Year
Let us look at the past year and see just what has been going on. About three months after the UAW convention last August, the CIO convention was held in Detroit. It was at this convention that the CIO first came out in full support of the war. At the previous convention in Atlantic City the organization had stuck to its own business and devoted its time to the problems of labor in the United States. If one throws out all the ballyhoo of the Stalinists at the Atlantic City convention for the re-election of Lewis and their campaign against Murray, one can say without qualification that it was an excellent convention of labor.
However, one year later Murray announced that it was his opinion that the CIO should take a definite stand on the war. To Murray this meant support of the war. This opinion took form in the main convention resolution in the expression, “support of the foreign policy of the President.” At the close of the convention it was clear that the CIO had moved a long way from the militant attitude of the Atlantic City convention that the first consideration of the CIO was the militant defense of the rights of labor.
Murray and the CIO leaders made some very subtle distinction between the right to strike and the promise not to strike. They adopted the formula: “We have the right to strike but we promise not to use this right for the duration of the war.” This of course was satisfactory to the bosses. They have no objection even to wage raises “in principle.” They object only when the workers demand the application of the principle.
The next retreat was on the matter of “premium pay” for Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. Under the lashing of the National Association of Manufacturers and their deputies in Congress, the CIO leadership agreed to give up time and a half and double time for Sundays and holidays.
Here too, as in the case of giving up the right to strike, Murray and the CIO leadership acted bureaucratically. The membership of the CIO was NOT CONSULTED. There was a reason for this bureaucratic procedure, of course. Murray knew that the membership of the CIO was opposed to yielding the right to strike and to giving up the overtime pay for weekends and holidays.
Democratic Tradition
All of this had its effect on Thomas and the UAW leadership. Thomas is perhaps Murray’s chief lieutenant and his most powerful support aside from the Murray-MacDonald steel Union. But the UAW is not so thoroughly bureaucratized as the United Steel Workers. Thomas is younger in the game and less experienced than Murray. He has not had the advantage, as has Murray, of years of training under such a consummate master as John L. Lewis. Furthermore, even if he is so inclined, it is doubtful if Thomas can ever become the old-line bureaucrat because he really hasn’t the ability.
There are other and more important reasons for the difference between the UAW and some of the other CIO internationals. For one reason it is not in the grip of the Stalinists. Therefore it has not been harassed and plagued with the intricacies, complexities and mysteries of Kremlin politics. Furthermore, the UAW has a tradition of internal democracy and militancy, its conventions have been somewhat of a model of democratic procedure in the trade union movement. The members have refused to let the leadership be the whole show.
This tradition and this independence and militancy in the membership no doubt had much to do with the decision of the UAW leadership a call a special conference to consider the question of giving up the “premium pay.” Thomas knew that it was necessary at least to go through the motions of a democratic procedure on this question. It turned out that this was all it was: the motions of democratic procedure. At the opening of the conference it was announced that the conference had no legislative function, that its acts would have to be approved by the locals. At the close of the convention a resolution was introduced instructing the locals to renegotiate their contracts, eliminating the “premium pay.”
Not only this, but the organizers were told to go back and put it over. One organizer told a local union that it might as well accept because it was going to get it anyhow.
 
The Brute Facts
These are some of the things that have been happening in the CIO and the UAW since the last great convention of the UAW in Buffalo.

The UAW leadership gave up the right to strike for the duration of the war.
 
The UAW leadership gave up overtime pay for Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
 
The UAW leadership supported the army attack at North American.
 
The aircraft organizing drive WAS NOT carried through.
 
The UAW lost the important and Strategic Curtiss-Wright election to the AFL.

These are the brute facts that Thomas, Addes, Ffankensteen, Reuther and others must face at this convention. This is what the UAW gave up.
What did the automobile and aircraft workers get in return for these concessions to the bosses? Well, for one thing they got a nice slogan: “VICTORY THROUGH EQUALITY OF SACRIFICE.” According to the CIO-UAW slogan-makers this meant that labor and management were to sacrifice equally! Concretely they said that management was to be limited to annual incomes of $25,000. This is equality of sacrifice!
On the heels of the emblazoning of this great slogan on the CIO-UAW banner the corporation reports began rolling in. These showed that General Motors and other vast combines were raking in the profits in undreamed of amounts. So much so that it is reported that the UAW paper now refrains from publishing profit figures for fear of inflaming the workers.
Next the workers were treated to the spectacle of management doubling and tripling its own salaries. Here again was the working out in practice of the equality of sacrifice slogan.
Labor was confronted with the fact that Standard Oil of New Jersey was practicing equality of sacrifice by maintaining a relation with Germany that was called “treason.” Even those workers who support the war must realize by now that they have been cheated; that the sacrifices they have made have absolutely nothing to do with winning: the war. These workers must know by now that this was not an effort to win the war but a concerted and well organized drive against labor: by the bosses, in Congress and by Roosevelt. Murray, Thomas and the other CIO leaders were caught in the net of the bosses. A delegate to the Special UAW conference in April said: “Last August in Buffalo we elected officers to negotiate for us. Now they are negotiating with our enemies against us.” What this worker said is substantially correct.
What Are the Plans?
What are the plans of Thomas and the other UAW leaders for this convention? Do they have plans for halting the retreat and ordering an advance of the UAW? This is not probable unless the mass of the delegates stand their ground (as they did not at the special April conference) and demand an about-face.
It is probable that the leadership will come in with proposals to increase the dues and their own salaries! This will be a miserable spectacle in the light of the actual situation. Increase dues! For what? A leadership does not need more money in order to continue a retreat. It is not retreat that costs money but in order to repair the damages and devastation of retreat.
If there is to be an about-face, a command for double-time forward, then the membership should be willing to make any sacrifice. But they must be sure about this. They cannot afford to vote an increase in dues to a leadership which rides along with Roosevelt and the bosses at the very time they are expected to be marching at the front of the columns of labor.
What about the increase in the pay of the officials which this convention will be asked to grant? Why should the pay be increased? Are the wages of Thomas, Addes and the regional directors sub-standard?
They are not. Thomas’ pay is $5,500 and Addes’ is $5,000. The Heller Committee of the University of California says that an annual wage of $2,589.87 is required to maintain a family of four: man, wife and two children, in health, decency and moral well-being. Granted that this is low, these brothers have around 100 per cent more and that is enough. They are the leaders of workers, not capitalist corporation officials.
What have these leaders done to warrant an increase in pay? Do they seek reward for leading a retreat, and a disorderly retreat at that? Do they want to be paid for the rout of the UAW by the bosses?
In the light of all the facts known to every member of the UAW, this convention, in our opinion, has the task of calling a halt on retreat and capitulation. It might be well for the UAW members to remember that the steel workers asked for a dollar-a-day increase and got forty-four cents, The miners demanded a dollar-a-day increase and got it. Not only did the miners get a dollar-a-day increase but they wiped out the differential between the North and the South. This meant for the Southern miners an increase of more than a dollar a day.
The miners didn’t get their dollar-a-day increase, however, with any such slogan as “Victory through equality of sacrifice.”
 



The seventh annual convention of the United Automobile Workers of America closed last Sunday. On the whole the convention was a victory for the bosses, Roosevelt and the war-comes-first top bureaucrats of the international: Thomas, Addes, Frankensteen and Walter Reuther.
The chief role of this quartet was to attempt keeping the brakes on so tightt that nothing could be done to halt the plunge of the UAW into complete capitulation to Roosevelt and the bosses. They were, there, all four of them, sweating, cajoling, pleading and maneuvering against any action that might be taken to rescind their beloved “equality of sacrifice” slogan, their “no-strike” promises and their double-time pay surrender.
This wasn’t all that the Thomas-Addes-Reuther-Frankensteen quartet had in mind for the convention. There were such matters as creating two new posts in the international: two vice-presidencies to be filled by Walter Reuther and Frankensteen. Also the little matter of biennial conventions which they tried last year at Buffalo. Next these, bureaucrats were present to push up the dues in the international from $1.00 a month to $1.50. And lastly they came to Chicago with a well-oiled scheme to boost the pay of Thomas, and Addes nearly 100 per cent.
 
Rival Duets Form Harmony Quartet
These leaders, some of whom were not friendly to each other at the Buffalo convention a year ago, have now kissed and made up. At Buffalo, Reuther organized a bloc, comprising the most reactionary delegates, to support Leonard against Addes for secretary-treasurer. At this same convention Frankensteen, fresh from the North American sell-out, maneuvered between the Reuther and the Stalinist cliques to become vice-president. Addes, very cautiously, blew hot and cold, pro-Stalinist or anti-Stalinist, depending on the needs of the moment, to assure his re-election. Thomas announced his support of the war but came out against an AEF and voted for Addes.
After the convention the maneuvering continued. President Thomas and Frankensteen nestled together and Addes and his erstwhile enemy Reuther cuddled over to each other.
By the time of the Chicago convention, however, all was sweetness and light and what might have become two discordant duets was turned into a quartet of harmony and cooperation. At Chicago, Walter Reuther seconded the nomination of Addes for secretary-treasurer and Addes urged the delegates “assembled here to cast a unanimous ballot for the nominee, Brother Walter Reuther.” Thomas, in a few well chosen words, urged the convention to, “support my good friend, Dick Frankensteen.” Previously Frankensteen had seconded the nomination of Thomas for president.
This accord, of course, was imperative if the leadership was to have any chance at all to control the convention and keep the UAW tied to Roosevelt, the bosses, and the war. They knew that the membership was fighting mad. That grim joke about “equality of sacrifice” which the Thomas-Addes-Reuther-Frankensteen quartet had put over at the April conference had served only to throw the UAW for a loss. The “no-strike” capitulation of Murray-Thomas had made the UAW locals the prey of every plant manager and every little foreman. The double pay surrender of Murray-Thomas had not only resulted in the loss of income for UAW workers but also had worked to the advantage of the AFL, notably the IAM in the Curtiss-Wright elections in Buffalo.
 
Officers Face a Hostile Convention
These bureaucrats knew they would face a hostile convention that would be difficult to control and keep tied to Roosevelt and the automobile-aircraft bosses. They wanted to consolidate their domination of the international. They wanted to be sure that they would be in position to deliver the international to Roosevelt and the bosses whenever Roosevelt called Thomas and Murray in for a conference.
Therefore it was necessary to do away with annual conventions. This is an ancient trick of all bureaucrats who want to hold on to their jobs, salaries and to continue to wield influence and exercise power. Annual conventions give the rank and file the opportunity each year to review the stewardship of the leaders and to question them as to their delinquencies and failures. If you can postpone this for two years it may be possible later to postpone it for thirty years, as in the case of the. common laborers’ union.
Also it was necessary to have unity in the leadership and the international board if new posts with fat salaries were to be created and if the two leading officers were to get their’ increase in pay. The scheme was to increase Thomas from $5,500 to $10,000, Addes from $5,000 to $9,500, IEB members from $3,500 to $6,000 and to create two new posts of vice-president, for Frankensteen and Reuther, at $8,000 per year each.
The opposition was so strong that, faced with a minority report calling for lower pay, the committee withdrew and clipped $1,000 from each amount. This was approved by the delegates.
All of what we have been discussing could only be effected by constitutional amendment: raising the salaries, creating the two vice-presidents, biennial conventions and raising the dues from $1.00 to $1.50 a month. These matters, therefore, would be handled by the constitution committee.
 
What the Stalinists Did at Chicago
It is interesting that Lindahl, a Stalinist, was chairman of this important and powerful committee. It is difficult to believe that this was not done deliberately. And it wasn’t done to neutralize the Stalinists. If this were necessary, which it wasn’t, there were other ways of doing this. (In fact, the introduction and passage of the second front resolution the first day of the convention took care of the Stalinists for the rest of the week. They only made one feeble effort after that, which we will mention later.) The fine hand of Brother Walter Reuther sticks out in this.
Since the Stalinists were already in line on all the serious pro-war political resolutions that were to come before the convention – in what better way could they be used than in the necessary maneuvers to push through the organizational and constitutional changes the bureaucrats had in mind. That is, they let the Stalinists take the rap and make the proposals for all changes that the membership was known to be violently opposed to. This would save the inner circle from embarrassment. and let the blow fall on the Stalinists. As we remember it, the chairman of the constitution committee last year was, Victor Reuther, but this year it was Lindahl, the Stalinist.
While we are on the subject of the Stalinists we may as well complete the report. We said above that they were appeased, if this was necessary, when the second front resolution was passed. They came back once again, however, in the attempt to split Region 4 and establish, a new region. Nordstrom is director of Region 4, which includes Wisconsin and Chicago. The biggest war industries are in the Chicago sub-region. The Stalinists planned to leave Nordstrom with Wisconsin and the agricultural areas westward and establish a new region with Chicago as the center. This would have given them control of an important region. The move was defeated and Region 4 remains intact.
The only other remarks necessary on the Stalinists is to say that they were the most blatant patriots in the. convention. They have all reformed and corrected their past “errors.” There were Bridges, Michener and Board Member Montgomery. In a long speech Bridges told the convention how hard he is working to tie his international to the bosses and their war, despite the fact that these same bosses have moved heaven and earth to frame him and railroad him out of the country. Montgomery, once a very militant West Coast aircraft worker, closed a short speech with the following:
“We are coming again, not only with our tanks and our guns, but with our men, the sons of our men who fought at Chateau Thierry, Belleau Wood and won the last war. We are coming again. Don’t make any mistake about that. That is our pledge and it is people like Brother Bridges who are going to make that possible.”
 
What Was Mayor Kelly Doing There?
The convention was greeted by Edward Kelly, the same Kelly who was mayor of Chicago during the Little Steel massacre and whose cops formed the murder squads. In the course of his harangue, Kelly said: “As I sat here I wondered why we could not have more audiences such as this ... I only wish that every city in the country could have this same kind of convention.” The obvious reply to Butcher Kelly, of course, is that if he had his way there would be no militant workers anywhere to hold a convention. For the clear reason that Kelly and his cops would by this time have murdered all the workers who dared fight for a decent standard of living. Of course the chairman, Nordstrom, IEB member, did not make this reply. Nordstrom told this man Kelly that “I think you can count on the UAW-CIO as being a friend of yours.” Of course this is a lie, but Nordstrom said it. In fact there was some protest heard around against Kelly speaking.
 
Central Debate on “Premium Pay”
Perhaps the most important items to come before the convention were the resolutions on overtime pay and on the WLB, presented by the War Policy Committee. This resolution was presented to the convention on the second day but in the face of very strong opposition the resolution was withdrawn. On the third day the War Policy Committee came in with a revised resolution on overtime pay and a resolution dealing with the National War Labor Board.
The longest and most acrimonious debate of the convention revolved around these two resolutions. There was such violent opposition to the original draft of the resolution on overtime pay that it was withdrawn in the face of defeat and presented the next day in revised form. The wording of these two resolutions made it clear that what motivated them was the sting and the rebuke that the UAW leadership felt at the loss of various elections to the AFL. This was especially true in the case of the election at the Buffalo Curliss-Wright Plant.
The resolution on premium pay was centered on the fact that while both the AFL and the CIO had concurred in the giving up of premium pay, only the CIO had attempted to carry out this promise made to Roosevelt. Not only were the UAW bureaucrats sore at the AFL, particularly the International Association of Machinists, but they were also fighting mad at the employers who persisted in the practice of giving the workers double time for Sundays and time and a half for Saturdays.
They whine and whimper as follows:
“In the case of the Curtiss-Wright plant at Buffalo, by reason of the adherence by the UAW-CIO to its determination to sacrifice and the refusal by the IAM to make such sacrifice and its repudiation of the President of the United States and of the announced policy of the AFL, the workers within the plant were prevailed upon to select the International Association of Machinists as their bargaining agent.”
Also, the resolution says that there are some independent unions and company unions which have refused to follow the UAW and the President. These company unions, says the resolution, are holding out for the premium pay.
But worst of all: “Many employers approached by the UAW-CIO local unions for the purpose of revising their contracts to conform to the policy enunciated by the President of the United States have flatly refused to do so and have insisted upon payment of premium time.”
These practices, says the resolution, have resulted in “dangerous demoralization” in the local unions of the UAW. They have “virtually paralyzed the UAW-CIO in its effort to bring organization to the unorganized workers of the industry.” The resolution complains that the UAW is “penalized” for its compliance with the President’s request. Not only this, but those who have repudiated the policy and defied the President are “being rewarded for their repudiation and defiance.”
 
Kittenish Resolve Won’t Scare Bosses
Then the resolution resolves that the “no premium pay” policy should be of “universal application” and furthermore, “unless the policy of relinquishing premium pay for Saturdays, Sundays and holidays is universally applied throughout industry within the next thirty days, the UAW-CIO shall deem itself released from its commitment and shall demand and insist upon the abandonment of this policy and the reversion to the payment of premium pay as previously practiced.” This was the first draft of this section.
There was so much objection to the effect that the whole resolution was too weak that it was revised. It was changed to read that unless there is industry-wide application in thirty days, “local unions” will be “legally and morally justified in refusing to recognize as valid any contractual provisions by which such premium pay was relinquished in pursuance of the action of the War Emergency Conference.”
Addes is to notify all employers of this action by the convention. Murray is asked to call the CIO board to consider the matter. Not only this, but the international officers are to initiate a campaign for the putting over of Roosevelt’s seven-point program.
This of course is all just so much twaddle and nonsense. It was presented to the delegates who were prepared to kick the whole thing in the teeth along with two-year conventions, increases in dues and vice-presidents and increases in salaries. The bureaucrats knew this, squirmed in their pants and threw in a few militant but harmless “resolves.”
Not a single manufacturer will be scared by this kittenish 30-day threat of the UAW leaders. The WLB and Nelson will not move an inch. Roosevelt will flick the ashes from his cigarette and soothe the troubled spirits of Murray and poor Thomas. Rounds one, two and three were his and the future rounds will be his. That is – if the UAW rank and file leave the organizing of the fight to Murray and Thomas. The rank and file lost at the April conference and they lost at the Chicago convention.
 
Pass Whimpering Resolution on WLB
As a further sop to the clamor of the convention delegates, the bureaucrats brought in a resolution condemning the War Labor Board “for its continued failure and refusal to set up such regional boards and such machinery as may be necessary to effect the speedy adjustment of disputes without loss to the workers involved.”
This resolution whimpers around also, because after
“the CIO and its affiliate organizations have voluntarily given up their right to strike for the duration of the war to insure speedy and complete defeat of the Axis aggressors ... in an ever-increasing number of cases there exists a refusal on the part of employers to treat in good faith with the workers ... and it is being made very clear that this attitude on the employers’ part is prompted by their knowledge that labor has committed itself to refrain from resorting to strikes.”
All of the positive representations made by these bureaucrats of course are all too true. The employers and the WLB are doing just as they say. But didn’t these flunkies of Roosevelt, Nelson and the bosses know this when they “patriotically” sold labor down the river in giving up the strike and the premium pay for the duration of the war? At the April conference Manning made the remark that the UAW would be in a queer position if six months later the bosses were forced back to the premium pay by a labor shortage.
 
Opposition Delegates Leaderless
The tragedy and the pity of the whole situation is not the stupidity, the whimpering of the UAW leadership or their rank betrayals – but the leaderless strivings of the UAW membership. They were against everything that happened at this convention, just as they were in April. They really wanted to repudiate the whole line of capitulations of the leaders. They wanted to withdraw the no-strike agreement which was made for them behind their backs and without their consent by Murray and Thomas. They wanted to take back the premium pay they had been cajoled and tricked into giving up by the same bureaucrats who sneaked into the Chicago convention with a demand for “premium pay” for themselves.
But the mass opposition which really existed was leaderless. It was not organized and it had no program adequate to deal with the real situation.
The real situation was that the leadership very cunningly has, been exploiting the anti-fascist patriotism of the UAW membership in order to chain them to the Roosevelt government in its prosecution of the Second World Imperialist War.
This is the main job today of the “socialist” Reuthers, the “communist” Addes, the shyster Frankensteen, the “democrat” Thomas and the pious but bureaucratic simpleton Murray.
This will go on until there is such a wave of resentment, such determination to go through with a program for the protection of the rights of labor that the bureaucrats will fear to oppose it. The membership of the UAW has not done so well by itself this year. Perhaps between now and the next convention they will learn what a boss is, the meaning of capitalism and its imperialist wars and how to devise a program for labor that will not only defeat Hitler fascism but also uproot their own misery at home.
(Another article on the UAW convention will appear in the next issue of Labor Action. – Editor)
 



The leadership of the CIO and the UAW are slipping farther and farther into the ways of thinking of Roosevelt and the bosses. Thomas had the brass to say in this UAW convention that “the people of the country are going to look toward you and wonder what sacrifice we are willing to make for the war effort.”
This to delegates representing workers who have consented while their leaders gave up the right to strike for the period of the war, who have given up their double pay for Sundays and holidays, who have been given the run-around by Roosevelt and the various government boards, who have just seen the WLB render a decision in the Little Steel case welding the standard of living to January 1941, while corporations profits go higher and higher and who are members of a union that has just lost an important election to the AFL.
 
Murray Takes the Floor
Murray announced again that “this is labor’s war” in the same speech that he informed the delegates that “we find the almost terrifying debacle in the standard of living conditions in the United States during the past fifteen months ... I have consistently contended that the only kind of rationing which we now have in the United States is the rationing which enables the fellow with the most money to buy the most goods.” Murray then went on to talk at length about a “derelict Congress,” the “swollen war profits” and the big increases in salaries that have been voted corporation executives.
Fearing that some delegates might get the wrong impression, Murray explained that “we may have our misunderstandings, we direct our shafts of criticism at certain of the leaders in the Administration, but want the nation to distinctly understand that no matter what shafts of criticism may be directed against certain individuals in government or in industry, that American labor stands shoulder to shoulder behind the President of the United States of America.
Thus Murray is completely satisfied with Roosevelt. Roosevelt was opposed to the steel workers having the $1.00-a-day increase, Roosevelt sent the Army to break the North American strike, it was Roosevelt who demanded the no-strike agreement and it was Roosevelt who insisted on the workers giving up the “premium pay.” But Murray is satisfied. It is not Roosevelt who must be opposed – but Henderson, and a few members of Congress.
The CIO workers accept this twaddle from Murray and Thomas and fail completely to understand that this is the source of much of the difficulty they face. It is Roosevelt who is the head of the government, not the underlings, Henderson, Nelson, Davis, McNutt, Knox and Stimson.
What do Murray and Thomas mean when they whine that the WLB is not carrying out Roosevelt’s seven-point program? The WLB says that it is and that the Little Steel and the subsequent wage decisions have been based oh this program. The latest CIO News proudly announces that the national headquarters has been moved and that now it is “ONE BLOCK FROM THE, WHITE HOUSE.” Why doesn’t Murray go over and ask Roosevelt for clarification oh this point? Why did he not do this before he came to the UAW convention? Was he afraid that Roosevelt would win this round also?
 
On the Second Front
An interesting point in connection with the “second front” resolution were the speeches of Walter Reuther and Frankensteen in support of the resolution. The resolution itself was very cautiously and innocuously worded. The resolution said that the timing must be determined by the military and government leaders but that preparations must begin at once for launching such a front.
The resolution was a little too tame for “Socialist” Walter Reuther. He wants a second front right now. That is, he wants the boys who feel that they already have too many fronts to be ordered to begin dying on another front. And not only this, Reuther is ready for the speed-up in the plants. He says:
“We must go back into our shops and there we can do more than pass resolutions; we can help build those guns, ships, planes and tanks that will do the job; and the sooner we build them the sooner that second front will be opened.”
Brother Frankensteen was even more positive than Brother Reuther. He doesn’t believe that the question of the second front is one to be determined by the military experts. That is true; the question of when to open the western front will be decided by the political leaders, Roosevelt and Churchill. But this wasn’t what Frankensteen meant when he said:
“First of all, we did, not ask for military experts or production experts when we came out in favor of conversion of our industry. The industrialists and leaders of this nation were way behind labor, way behind labor’s thinking when labor said it was necessary to convert our industry.”
What does this mean? Only that Frankensteen’s opinion is that it is the business of labor to decide the political questions in connection with the prosecution of the war. The leaders were behind on conversion and labor had to take the lead. The political leaders are behind on the question of the second front and labor must show the way.
But Frankensteen and Reuther, are not so hot for labor making political decisions on the questions that are really the concern of labor. On the matter of the strike, double time pay, arbitration, wage stabilization, on breaking the workers away from the Republican and Democratic Parties and leading them on the road to independent working class political action, Reuther and Frankensteen are totally silent.
Reuther closed his second front oration with these stirring words: “And a lot of us here are going to have to do some hard working, and dying before that second front and that victory can be won.” But not Reuther and Frankensteen. These two $7,000-a-year UAW vice-presidents are going to do their hard work trying to keep the UAW workers chained to the boss war machine. The convention addressed an Open Letter to the German workers. In this letter the UAW officers said to the German workers:
“You have two clear alternatives. The one is to continue what you are doing now, sacrificing yourselves and your children, dragging Germany and the whole of Europe with you into an ever-deepening brutality, until Germany and all of German hopes will lie buried upon the battlefields of the world.”
This is what the German, workers are doing, say these self-righteous and stupid bureaucrats. The German capitalists, the German political shysters of the Stalinist and the Social-Democratic Parties evidently had no part in bringing about the present plight of the German masses.
But the German workers have another alternative:
“A worker’s alternative – to make your inevitable suffering and sacrifices meaningful to the ultimate realization of a free and decent world for yourselves, for your children and for the workers of the world ... for the workers anywhere there is but one side in this war ... we are sending you this message to ask you to rejoin the ranks of the workers of the free nations of the world ... even when workers have been stripped of their political power and deprived of their organizations, they still have their overwhelming and crucial power at the point of production ... in this fateful hour we call upon you workers of Germany to join us – the workers of the world – in our struggle for a workers’ victory and a workers’ peace.”
Yes, properly meant and understood this appeal for a workers’ victory would be fine. But, in the intentions of the UAW bureaucrats, this so-called message to the German workers reaches, the height of stupidity, brazenness and insult. When they speak of “one side in the war”, they do not mean the side of independent working class action.
Has it occurred to these people that one of the reasons that Hitler holds the German masses in line is that they fear another Versailles peace? Do the writers of this disgraceful “open letter” expect the German workers to rush out joyfully with song and roses to welcome the victorious imperialists of the First Imperialist World War?
What are the German workers doing different from what Murray, Thomas, Frankensteen, Addes and the Reuthers are doing? The German workers did not submit willingly to Hitler. They were willing to fight against Hitler and destroy him and all his black shirts. They were sold down the river by the Murrays, the Thomases, Reuthers, and Browders of Germany. That’s why today they are under the yoke of Hitler. The UAW bureaucrats would do well to keep quiet altogether, rather than talk the way they do.
The German workers will rise and they will fight for democracy and for workers’ freedom. And so will the American workers and all other workers. No worker, German, American, English or French, can fight to victory under a trade union or political leadership that in every crisis capitulates to the bosses. This is a lesson for us, the American workers, to learn.
 
Labor Needs Leadership
We have gone through the proposals of the leadership at this convention to demonstrate and emphasize the complete incompetence of this leadership in the present situation. They were fairly good men for a certain period in the development of the CIO. That period has passed.
Labor today needs a leadership at least as advanced as the rank and file: politically and from the standpoint of trade union militancy. Labor needs a leadership that will reflect the correct desires of American as well as world labor for power, freedom and security. The workers know instinctively and in a primitive way that freedom and security can be secured only in determined and persistent struggle against the boss and the boss class. The workers know that they cannot gain their freedom and security by one capitulation after the other. They have learned this in the factory, the mine and the mill. They have learned it on the picket line. Every shop steward knows this and every man and woman in the ranks above the intelligence of a beetle knows it.
The delegates to the UAW convention demonstrated every single day that what was going on was not to their liking. They did not know what to do. They spoke and spoke and spoke. They protested and protested. But when the smoke had cleared away they could show few victories against the bureaucrats.
They will have to learn. They will have to learn to organize against the bureaucrats and to oppose them with a program, not merely with speeches. They will have to learn to come to conventions with a working class program, organize around that program just as the leaders organize around their program. They must put up candidates who accept their program and support those candidates right through to the end, even though they are defeated. They might be surprised some day at what they can do if they adopt this procedure.
 



The National Association of Manufacturers has climaxed its underground campaign against “union security” and for a national sales tax by coming out into the open with the demand for a 10 per cent sales tax.
The NAM is the union of the bosses, big and small. It is dominated of course by the big bosses. The little bosses are in there looking for hints and ideas on, how to become big bosses. While the NAM is busy trying to see to it that the workers and the poor get squeezed, by increased taxes, they have nothing to say on a little matter of tax dodging that was the subject of some remarks by the Secretary of the Treasury before a joint congressional committee on internal revenue.
The reason of course, is clear: the tax dodgers are members or potential members of the NAM; that is, they are bosses and exploiters. If the government can get larger sums from the workers then the Treasury Department might not become so nosey in connection with tax dodging by the bosses.
 
Uses Various Methods
Secretary Morgenthau testified that “the method used by the taxpayer was to inflate expenses with the evident purpose of avoiding normal and excess profits taxes on corporation earnings. The devices used include the payment of excessive salaries, the distribution of unearned bonuses and the payment of unreasonable sums for the purported services to persons closely connected with the management of the companies involved.” He cited seven cases without revealing the names of the companies. He said that Congress should decide the question of revealing the names. The seven cases cited by the Secretary follow:
”Company A makes an important airplane part. This corporation is owned by one man, who hired himself as its sales representative. His compensation in 1941 was $1,656,000. By consolidating these earnings with those of the corporation, we have blocked this obvious attempt to divert profits and we have increased the corporation’s income tax by $1,117,000.
“Company B makes steel. All stock in this corporation is held by three families. Excessive salaries, were paid to officers who were also stockholders. The revenue agent has recommended disallowance of $82,000 in salaries, and the company has already agreed to a disallowance of $58,000.
“Company C makes vital equipment for airplane pilots. This corporation paid $31,104 in rent in one year to the wife of the president for using property which had cost her $45,412. A brother of the principal stockholder, without special training or ability, drew a salary of $15,000 a year and a son and daughter, just out of school, got $7,500 a year each.
“Company D makes tools and dies. This company is owned by two brothers and their wives. It paid dividends of $40,000 in 1940 and $100,000 in 1941, while salaries totaling $128,000 were paid in 1941 to the president, his wife and his brother.
“Company E makes forgings. The stock is owned by three families. From 1938 to 1941 the salaries of employees who were stockholders and relatives of stockholders increased 523 per cent. Excessive salaries for 1941 have been disallowed to the amount of $568,000.
“Company F makes equipment for airplanes. Three principal officers of this corporation took salaries of $100,000 each and the corporation claimed it had set aside over $575,000 in bonuses. Salary and bonus payments totaling $516,000 were found to be excessive. Other disallowed deductions included $16,000 paid for watches given to employees, $14,000 for banquets and picnics, $4,000 for photographs taken at banquets and picnics, and $1,900 for tickets to football games. Other important deficiencies were found in the tax return.
“Company G makes a device important to aviation. This corporation is owned almost entirely by one man, his wife and his brother. The two men increased their salaries from $12,000 and $15,000 in 1939 to $72,000 and $90,000 in 1941. The royalty rate on the patent jointly held by them, was increased, with the result that with, expanded sales for war purposes the royalties paid to them increased from $87,000 in 1939 to $1,179,000 in 1941.”
 
Typical of the Whole Boss Class
It would be interesting but it is not especially important that we know the names of these companies. It is significant, however, that Congress does not make public the names of the “pay-triots.” It is net especially important to know their names because they are only typical of the whole boss class. Furthermore, the instances cited are all probably comparatively little fellows who are only aping the big boys like Standard Oil, General Electric and U.S. Steel. Right at the time when they are making a drive against the workers, their liberties and living standards, the bosses feather their own nests and the nests of their relatives and closest stooges.
It is literally true that the bosses look on the CIO, slogan of “equality of sacrifice” as having nothing to do with them. For them it means equality of misery and want for the workers, and equality of opportunity to increase profits, dividends and salaries for the bosses.
 



CINCINNATI – As this is being written, the thirty-seventh constitutional convention of the United Mine Workers of America is drawing to a close. The 2,800 delegates from the nineteen states and Canada where coal is mined have been sitting in the large Music Hall here for ten days now, giving attention to the most important questions that have ever come before their international.
The great majority of the delegates to this convention have had years of experience with the business at hand, They have been going to UMWA conventions; for ten, twenty and forty years. They are not young men, but scarred and seasoned veterans of the trade union movement. They have been and are today the hardened and disciplined vanguard of the organized labor movement in the United States.
When the convention opened with the address of welcome by John Owens, president of District 6, it was clear what the course of the UMWA would be on the all-important matter of the relationship of this international to the CIO. In his opening address Owens set the tone of the convention. The speech of Owens was, of course, the expression of the opinion of the international officers, Lewis, O’Leary and Kennedy.
Owens reviewed the history of the founding of the CIO, the aid and assistance given by the miners’ organization, reserving however the bulk of the praise for the personal leadership of John L. Lewis. It was a Lewis convention right from the start. From the opening day on there was left only the: smallest crack for any Murray adherents to squeeze through. This held of course in far greater degree for the Stalinists. If there were any of their hatchet men present they succeeded in maintaining the most impenetrable disguise.
In the course of his speech, Owens said that
“I want to say to this delegation that if it had not been for John L. Lewis there would not have been any organization in the steel industry ... what is true of steel is true of rubber ... if it had not been for John L. Lewis there would not be any United Rubber Workers’ organization in America ... so it was with auto ...”
When Lewis took over to reply to the various addresses of welcome to the convention, he followed and elaborated the line by Owens. He however emphasized that it was the mine workers, who had accomplished all the organizational feats that had been attributed to him personally by Owens.
Lewis of course understands these questions and situations far better than Owens. He knows that there existed, long before the formal organization of the CIO, an objective situation in American industry that called for the organization of the mass production workers into industrial unions and a break from the craft-ridden and impotent AFL. Lewis knows that even though he had never been born there would have been a successful industrial union movement; answering the call of the mass production workers and fulfilling their requirements. If not this one, then there would have been another John L. Lewis called by another name.
In the course of his speech, Owens dug up a bit of history that he might as well have left buried. He brought up his leadership of the Little Steel strike in Ohio. Said Owens: “A lot of so-called labor leaders are going around over this country sticking out their chests pointing to accomplishments of what they did in steel. I led the Little Steel strike in the state of Ohio ...” As we remember that strike, it wasn’t anything for any labor leader to be bragging about today. Owen did in that strike – because he was ordered to, we suppose – exactly what Murray and his friends are doing today: depending on the government to win the workers’ battles for them.
 
Perspectives of UMWA
Not only did Lewis go over the matters that were to come before the convention in his first speech but he gave a resumé of where he and the other international officers stood in his discussion of the officers’ report. In the course of the convention he made many allusions to the perspectives of the organization and to his intention to attempt to keep the UMWA on the same track that it has pursued for the many decades of its existence. For instance, on the organization of the chemical industries and the attitude of the miners he said: “I know no reason why the coal miners in this country, after this emergency is over, should use non-union explosives, and neither do the members of District No. 50.”
On the matter of the demand for a $2.00 a day increase in wages, Lewis said that the basic coal wage can be raised under the recent stabilization legislation and the executive order of October 3. This position intimated that Lewis will contend that the base pay of the miners, $35 a week, is sub-standard and can be raised without violating either the wage stabilization act or the executive order.
Furthermore, according to Lewis, the miners will not depart from their old ways: “Our membership have no thought of changing their ways or their methods or their thoughts to meet the temporary policies of any segment of the American labor movement which might for reasons of expediency depart from those tried and true policies which have made this union great.”
Now, what and whom could Lewis be talking about here except the present retreat of the CIO and the complete capitulation of Murray and the other CIO leaders. He could not be talking about the AFL and Bill Green. There has been no retreat on their part; they stand today where they have stood for half a century. The miners, says Lewis, “are the vanguard of the American labor movement, the shock troops of our economic establishment.”
The most far-reaching action of the present convention, of course, was the vote to withdraw from the CIO. The split was prepared, it is now clear, long before the convention convened. It must be said, too, that the split did not take place because the CIO owes the UMWA $1,650,000 and refuses to pay. The split did not take place because – in the words of John Owens, speaking of certain CIO leaders – “out of their hypocritical lips come sentimental mouthings about the members of our union, then they puke up from their foul stomachs asinine statements about the president of our union.” Nor did it occur because the CIO distributed the following document among the UMWA locals:
“The officers and members of the United Mine Workers of America, representing more than ______ thousand employees of the ______ company, wish to express our sincere thanks for the recognition and voice in the national affairs which you have given labor in our country by setting up the combined War Labor Board stop We want you to know that we stand with you and our Vice-President Philip Murray to the fullest extent of our ability in the prosecution of the war to defeat Hitlerism and all it stands for stop Again we find ourselves in disagreement with John L. Lewis in his refusal to enoperate with you and our government during these critical times stop Carry on we are with you without limitations.
“Signed: Local ______ UMWA
President:
Secretary:
“Note: District Directors: Have your local unions send this telegram via night letter to the President of the United States just as soon as possible. Mail copies of the telegram, after it has been sent, to ... (Murray and Lewis).



 


“Fraternally yours,
JOHN V. RIFFE
Assistant Director.”



The split is not due to a personal quarrel between Lewis and Murray or for the reason that “Lewis is a power-crazed czar.” A Negro delegate to whom I talked penetrated right to the heart of the situation when he said: “If you ask me, it’s Roosevelt.” That is, at the bottom of this split is the hand of Franklin D. Roosevelt. Beneath all the window dressing and the anti-CIO fireworks that exploded in the convention is the Second World Imperialist War.
The split between the AFL and the CIO was a clear and unmistakable (to everyone except Bill Green) revolt against craft unionism and for industrial unionism. The causes of the present split in the CIO are somewhat obscure but they can be discovered. They go back to the fall of 1940, when Lewis made the speech for Willkie. The rift widened when Lewis joined Hoover and America First.
The point is that the split was really consummated when Lewis did not go along with Murray in blind support of the imperialist war and knee-bending submission to Roosevelt. And, of course, Roosevelt was always behind the scenes with Murray pouring oil on the flames.
Lewis’ Report
It was necessary in the convention for Lewis to cleanse himself of some of the charges that had been made against him in connection with his isolationism, anti-patriotism, etc. He attended to this on the first day of the convention. After giving a report of the amount of war bonds that have been purchased by the international, the districts and the members of the UMWA, Lewis said: “Let any other union show a record as good.”
On the question of his attitude toward the war, Lewis said:
“The United Mine Workers of America abhor the necessity of war, and throughout the years, in times of peace, have expressly, by resolution from time to time ... declared against war as long as war could be avoided, and as long as our nation was not attacked ..., it is known that for some years past I have urged non-participation in foreign, wars if that could be avoided. That was my position, and I understood it to be the position of the United Mine Workers of America, until the time came when it was evident that our nation was to be attacked by foreign enemies. When that time came, like millions of other citizens and like hundreds of thousands of our members, I abandoned every other consideration and stated purposely and acted according, in support of our government, of our institutions, of our policies, of the integrity of our nation and the well-being, not alone of the members of the United Mine Workers of America, but the well-being of every American.”
Lewis continued with:
“It is true that there have been individuals abroad in this land who for reasons of their own, have seen fit to question the loyalty of the president of the United Mine Workers of America to the principles of his government and sometimes have questioned the loyalty of the United Mine Workers of America, There can be no greater misrepresentation and there can be no greater distortion of the truth. But because men may misrepresent and distort and sometimes seek to defame an individual or an organisation is no reason for that individual or that organization to be influenced in its policies by such considerations, or to abate one whit of its efforts to ever hew to the line, in proper participation, proper support, in unyielding determination to carry on to a point where the armed forces of our nation will triumph, when our free institutions will be preserved and where the minimum inconvenience and suffering to the population may be brought about.”
Lewis read this to the convention as part of the statement he made at a. meeting of the UMWA international policy committee in Washington on June 3.
I won’t go into what’s wrong with this statement at this time, but surely no stronger statement in support of the Second World Imperialist War has been made by Murray, Thomas, the Reuthers, any other CIO leaders or by the Stalinists. There is a difference, of course: Lewis has little to say about supporting Roosevelt; be talks about “our country,” “our government” and the “armed forces.” Murray, Thomas and the others are simple supporters of Roosevelt, while Lewis speaks more or less generally of the country and the government.
 
Discuss Union Problems
At the last steel workers’ convention the platform was adorned with a large-sized portrait of Roosevelt and MacArthur. There is nothing of this kind at the miners’ convention. There is a portrait of Lewis on the stage and one of “our officers,” Lewis, O’Leary and Kennedy, at one end of the hall.
Furthermore, the time of the convention is consumed almost entirely with the working class problems that the miners face. There has been no telegram from Roosevelt, no addresses by big-shot federal officials and no executive flag-waving, such as one sees from time to time in CIO conventions. This convention is mope like the CIO convention of 1940 at Atlantic City.
The motion to disaffiliate from the CIO reads as follows:
“Your committee, therefore, recommends to this convention that the United Mine Workers of America now officially withdraw from the CIO, and direct its subordinate units and members to withdraw from any official participation in the affairs, or affiliation with any unit of the CIO, until such time as the CIO sees fit to correct its errors, desist from its policy of denunciation and antagonistic attitude toward the United Mine Workers of America and recognize its valid financial obligations.”
There were a few delegates and numerous resolutions advocating remaining in the CIO. But it was clear from the beginning that could not be. The speech of Lewis in support of the recommendation was the climax of the debate and assured that the resolution would carry with only a handful of dissenting votes.
Lewis introduced a powerful argument when he brought in the attitude of some CIO leaders toward the captive mine strike.
“I could have criticized the leadership in the CIO,” he said, “when they were attempting to sell the United Mine Workers of America down the river in the captive mine fight. I could name names and give dates and quote the text of these things, but life is too short for me to answer the yappings of every cur that follows at my heels. I hear the pack in my rear at time, I can turn my head and see the lap dogs and the kept dogs and the yellow dogs in pursuit. But I am serene in the knowledge that they won’t come too close. They are not very close now. Some of them could have come here but they did not come ... If you don’t want to adopt this report, then you don’t want a man like me to be your president. You will want a man with more rabbit in him than I have got. You want a man who will lay down on his back and put his arms and legs in the air while somebody kicks him in the ribs and stomps upon his face, and I am not that kind of a man.”
This speech of Lewis ended all opposition from the floor and the second great split in the American labor movement in seven years had been consummated.

(David Coolidge will continue his report on the momentous mine workers’ convention in next week’s issue.)
 




Reports coming to The New York Times from its correspondents in “key centers,” reveal the fact that labor’s drive led by the UAW (CIO) against the price gouging of the big capitalists, is beginning to bring results.
This isn’t the way the Times puts it of course. This big capitalist daily, like less pretentious organs of big business around the country, is more subtle. In a two-column head for July 21 the Times admits that “Consumers Fight Price Rise, but adds Not in ‘Buyers’ Strikes.” According to the Times, its own survey shows that the public is merely “more selective,” “hoarding is absent,” but “organized resistance is negligible.”
 
Why No “Hoarding” Now?
According to the “corner grocers” interviewed by the Times buyers have become more “insistent on quality standards and less inclined to buy for hoarding purposes.” That is to say housewives and others are mainly concerned with quality and not with prices. They believe that business is entitled to a fair profit and of course ground meat at 75 cents a pound gives only a “fair profit.” There is some falling off in sales due, not to any buyers strike, but to the fact that housewives are not “hoarding.”
And why aren’t they hoarding? The answer is implicit in the Times story and very simple. Housewives are not “hoarding” because there is no need for hoarding. There is plenty of butter in the stores, so why hoard? From reading the Times story one would be led to believe that the price of butter and meat, and very low real wages have no relation to what the Times calls “hoarding.”
It is all very simple according to the Times. The OPA is out and the country has returned to normalcy. Free competition is with us again since the government at Washington took its bureaucratic hands off. Overnight the big capitalist manufacturers and processors began to produce. The Times would have not believed that all of the beef, butter, shirts and hosiery now on the shelves have been produced since the elimination of OPA; that not a single capitalist manufacturer has done any “hoarding” throughout 1946; that their warehouses and refrigerators and granaries have been empty; that its millions of workers who were coming around every day put in 40 hours a week twiddling their thumbs; that it was all a vast feather-bedding operation.
“Prices of some foods,” says the Times, “which rose steeply with the end of OPA appear to be settling back in the face of buying resistance.” The gentleness and caution of the Times are superb: some prices are “settling back.” “Not in buyers’ strikes,” but due to the inexorable, benign and self-correcting operations of “our system of free enterprise.” There is “buying resistance,” but this is concerned with quality only, never with price. This “buying resistance” is not a buyers’ strike. The Times would perhaps explain the difference by saying that there is no violence, no bricks are being thrown, housewives are not yet storming the meat markets.
In New York City, the merchants report that there is nothing to this buyers strike propaganda, there are “only changes of buying habits” among the masses. One creamery company reported that the drop in the price of butter was due to “restoration of open market conditions and not to any buyers strike.” Another dealer reported that any drop in prices was due to the “ordinary good sense of the average housewife.” This dealer also was of the opinion that housewives were using up “hoards they had accumulated during the war.” One department store official said that “buyers’ strikes so far represent merely propaganda talk by the union, which ... should be offset by counter-propaganda.”
This same executive admitted that “in foodstuffs ... prices undoubtedly have risen, but I believe, compare favorably with former black-market prices.” This is really making merry with “our system of free enterprise.” This is known as capitalism putting its best foot forward and revealing its most delightful aspects.
 
“No Strike,” but ...
In Boston there is no “buyers strike,” of course, but the Emergency Committee of Citizens and Labor are preparing “to participate in a buyers’ strike next Tuesday.” Boston merchants perhaps feel that this is unnecessary for they have pledged themselves to “absorb added costs as far as humanly possible.”
In Philadelphia there is no buyers strike but the Mid-City Reading Terminal Market was picketed for three days. We take it that each of the picketers had filled a basket from this market before the picketing began and were only walking the picket line to protest, against the “quality” of the meat and butter they had purchased.
In Camden, also, there is “no buyers’ strike.” Local 1, of the Shipbuilding Workers (CIO) only picketed 100 food stores. This had “dramatic results” says the Times. The storekeepers agreed to cooperate with the union against rising wholesale prices.
In Washington, “while organized buyers’ strikes ... have been mostly in the way of scattered ... picketing... housewives ... simply leave high-price butter in the refrigerators and costly meats on the counters. These tactics must force prices down somewhat, retailers agree.” There is something wrong in this part of the Times story. Either these housewives have hoards of butter and meat at home or they don’t like the quality of the meat and butter in Washington.
In Atlanta there is no buyers strike; the customers are only “becoming hard to please.” Either the Atlanta workers have butter and meat stored away at home from the war years or they are very snooty about the quality of Atlanta butter and meat.
The St. Louis CIO industrial union council is putting on a vegetarian program. Housewives are urged to boycott meat and butter. Meat sales have dropped and “slow-moving meat” has been marked down. In Chicago butter was reduced, and according to the Times’ “no buyers strike” survey, this was a reflection “to some extent” of “the wide-spread consumer resistance against the high prices.” In San Francisco, the consumption of butter and meat “has not been up to expectations.” In Los Angeles there has been “a possible backing up of commodities” but the businessmen say that this is due to the hot weather.
 
Capitalists All Worried
This is the way things stand according to this country-wide survey of the New York Times. There is no buyers strike, only picketing, resistance, caution and refusal to buy. A demonstration in Detroit by housewives carrying signs saying: “Drive Meat Prices Down. Don’t Buy It!” is only a sporadic affair.
The fact is that the Times and all the capitalist press are worried. They are worried now just as they were last winter during the wave of strikes which covered the country. That strike wave was really only a ripple in comparison to what organized labor could have done if it had had the proper leadership.
Up to now the present drive of organized labor against high prices is a mere ripple. But the capitalist press and their masters, the monopoly capitalists, are beginning to be uneasy. The reason is clear: the capitalist price gougers and fixers are striking at the masses directly. They strike not only at the industrial and agricultural workers, but also at the middle class white collar groups, the working farmers and the very small showkeeper. Housewives who do the spending begin to understand what low wages really mean, and above all they begin to understand the value of the unions, to which their husbands belong, as never before.
This whole campaign of the unions therefore will bring support to organized labor, and also tend to unify the labor movement itself. The capitalist press and the big capitalist employers understand this. The top leaders of the CIO and the AFL seemingly do not understand it, however. The AFL is far worse than the CIO. This slow- moving leadership only sits and waits.
 
Real Action Needed
If the CIO and the AFL or the CIO singly would get into real action, the workers and the masses of the people would rally to the support of any program they would advance for bringing prices down. They could, organize and carry through demonstrations of millions of workers and the middle class to cover every city and town. Every working class and middle class housewife would rally to a call for such demonstrations and show up on the picket lines.
Only a very feeble start has been made. That is why the Times and other capitalist papers can write as they do. But they can be forced to change their tune. Labor can force them to send their reporters and photographers scurrying to a thousand demonstrations around the big stores, the big packing plants, the big distributors and the homes of the big capitalist gougers.
The unions can organize to prevent rent increases and evictions. They can throw picket lines around the home of every worker whose family is threatened with eviction and stop the eviction. They can support tenants who are faced with rent increases. If tenants are evicted the union flying squadrons can put the furniture back into the house. If a relatively weak organization of the unemployed could do these things during the depression surely a strong and powerful labor movement should do no less today.
All that is needed is for the militant leaders in the CIO to get started and keep the heat on the top leadership. There is no time to waste waiting to see what Congress and Truman will do. They are only playing a game with each other and with the masses of the people. This is a job for the unions and the whole working class and its supporters.
 




The sudden death of Sidney Hillman, president of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers and chairman of the CIO Political Action Committee, should command the attention of all workers who lay claim to any concern with the economic and political problems facing the labor movement in the United States.
Hillman was not an ordinary labor leader and his death was something more than the mere “death of a labor leader.” Certainly, there were times when one could entertain legitimate doubts as to whether Hillman was a labor leader other than in a perfunctory, formal or fortuitous sense. For it could be said that he was more than a labor leader while at the same time less than one.
Hillman rose to prominence in and with the labor movement. His base was always his own Amalgamated Clothing Workers and the labor movement in general. He was not one of those capitalist politicians or employers who flashes his old union card or boasts of his trade union beginnings many years or decades after he had ceased to be a part of the working class.
Hillman was a part of the working class and of the labor movement. Yet, to say that he was a “labor lieutenant of capital” would be correct but to equate him and his role with the capitalist and the role of the capitalist would be incorrect and misleading. It would not aid the working class to understand its own role in modern capitalist society and the part played by the trade union bureaucracy.
 
A Proponent of “Business Unionism”
From the earliest days in Chicago, the youthful Sidney Hillman – a poor Lithuanian immigrant, a Jewish “pants presser,” one of the crowd around Jane Addams’ Hull House – must have been possessed with the notion of becoming a “successful” American as well as a successful trade union leader. After his activities in the strike against Hart, Schafner and Marx, the many militant struggles of the garment workers, and the final stabilization of the union, Hillman continually oriented the union along the lines of the trade union philosophy of Sam Gompers.
He became increasingly a proponent of what has been called “business unionism.” He was for fewer strikes, less militancy, and more peaceful agreements on the basis of “understanding” of and concern with the welfare of the industry.
“There is no chance to bargain efficiently with an employer,” said Hillman, “whose business is not prosperous; labor must be industry conscious.” Here was the “poor Lithuanian boy” speaking who was no longer a poor Lithuanian Jewish immigrant but an “American citizen.” Here was a man speaking who, in the language of Hoover, believed that “American workers had more bread and butter than any other workers in the world.”
Not only this, but Hillman was strongly impressed by the fact that a “poor Lithuanian boy” had become the confidante of a president (Roosevelt) of the mightiest nation in the world. He was an integral part of the saga of America. Or so he thought.
Sitting beside Knudsen, of General Motors, in the Office of Production Management and helping to determine the course of war production, he had arrived. As head of the CIO’s PAC, he was at least in the ante-room of the Democratic Party’s GHQ. “Clear it with Sidney” was a sort of baptismal benediction which was a rare honor for a “poor Lithuanian boy.” Sidney Hillman had arrived politically!
 
Politics of Class Collaboration
But in contemplating his own personal success, Hillman, like the whole host of labor leaders, developed a blind spot for the still humble and obscure status of the hundreds of thousands of members in his own union and the working class as a whole. These millions had not arrived and they could not with the Hillman formula and the Murray-Green formula; which was basically the same as Hillman’s. For implicit in this formula is the myth that the road to similar success is open for every immigrant and to every toiler. Implicit in such a formula is the belief that capitalist society and capitalist democracy are precisely what they are said to be by the defenders and benefactors of capitalism. Under such a formula there can be no significant difference between the exploiters and the exploited, between the owners of property and the property less, between those who hire and those who are hired.
To be sure there are “the poor” and “the rich” but the labor leaders, such as Hillman, always obscure the fact that such distinctions are not what is basic to an understanding of the main problem facing the working class. They obscure the fact that “the rich” are one class in capitalist society and “the poor” are another. The Hillmans obscure the fact that not only are “the poor” and “the rich” separate classes but, also, that those separate classes will remain so long as capitalism remains, that the interests of the two classes are in irreconcilable conflict, that there is an incessant class struggle between the two classes, that the toilers must press this struggle everlastingly under capitalism. The Hillmans obscure the fact that this struggle between the workers and the owners can only end successfully for the toilers when capitalism has been destroyed, when the workers are the ruling class and the government of the nation is a workers’ government.
Because he had a false concept of the meaning of being an American citizen, because he was not a militant and class-conscious leader of the toilers of the land, Hillman was satisfied that the PAC be a mere gathering of workers’ votes for the Democratic Party. Hillman measured success by his own particular standard. According to this kind of leadership the working class does not need a political party of its own: the parties of Morgan and Owen D. Young, Bilbo and Taft are good enough for the workers and their families.
This attitude, this class collaboration, this bootlicking of capitalist politicians and of capitalist society as advocated and practiced by the Hillmans of the labor movement is the chief curse of the working class and its mass organizations. It will not pass with the passing of Hillman. He was only an outstanding labor leader who was catapulted to prominence by the Democrat capitalist politicians because he was willing to do a job among the workers which the capitalist politicians could not themselves do. They do not have the confidence of the working class. Hillman not only was willing but he had prestige and ability. He could organize and speak, think and plan. He was a “labor statesman.”
These are the main lessons for labor to learn from the career of Hillman. He summed it up very well himself when he took the position that the working class should not be class consciousness with all that it implies but “labor must be industry conscious.” That was really what endeared Hillman to Roosevelt. That is what the capitalist ruling class means by “responsible trade unionism.” That is what they call the correct approach to harmonious labor-management relations.
 




THE persistent demand of labor for higher wages to meet the rising cost of living resulted in a barrage of columns of analysis and counter-demands from the capitalist press and the big associations of employers. One such reply appeared in the financial pages of the New York Times under the signature of Edward H. Collins, financial editor. Collins’ piece is entitled: On the Debasement of Economic Theory. Collins begins with the observation that “The drive of the Congress of Industrial Organizations for a new round of wage increases is an interesting, if depressing, reminder of the fact that, with the possible exception of government spending, more sins have probably been committed in recent years in the name of ‘purchasing power’ than in that of any other single economic doctrine.”
There are many people who will disagree with Mr. Collins in naming the specific economic doctrine which has been used more in recent years for the commission of economic, political and social sins. For instance, there is the doctrine that capitalism is the best possible of all economic systems and must be perpetuated at all costs. Hitler tied his kite to this “economic doctrine” and, financed by big German industrialists, instituted fascism with its concentration camps and gas chambers. There is the “economic theory” or “law” of supply and demand which in some way was the theoretical basis for the demand to eliminate price controls. The “law” is working very well for its proponents with butter at 98 cents the pound. We are reminded, however, that this particular “economic doctrine” did not hold up so well in the period between 1929 and the beginning of the last world war, despite the fact that capitalist economists did yeoman service in its behalf.
We could mention many other “economic doctrines” which did not have their source in the ranks of labor unions or the working class, in whose names many sins have been committed. We could mention “inflation” and “deflation,” “gold standard,” “bimetalism” and a host of others which have kept the “experts” committing fall manner of sins even against each other.
 
Who Will Benefit
Mr. Collins, however, is not concerned with these mediums for the commission of sin. He wants “an expansion of the purchasing power of the people ...” but he doesn’t believe that the way to get it is the method used by the unions. They want an increase in wages. Collins agrees with Dr. Harold Moulton, president of Brookings Institute, that the way to expand purchasing power is to reduce prices without a reduction in wages. The road to a rising standard of living is the expansion of the purchasing power of the people. “... this doctrine has been the very foundation of the success of American mass production methods under private capitalism.”
If you reduce prices without reducing wages the whole population benefits according to Moulton and Collins. But, If “wage rates are increased, the immediate benefits are confined to the particular group of workers involved ...” This is certainly a curious “economic doctrine” and if true, the consequences of its application would be somewhat appalling. That is to say; If 900,000 steelworkers get an increase in wages nobody will benefit except steelworkers immediately. I suppose the catch is in the word “Immediate.” The assumption must be that these steelworkers carry their pay around in their pockets for months and months ’with a feeling of smug satisfaction that they are men of means. Yet every worker knows that he cannot hold onto his wages, but must spend it immediately on the necessities of life.
If prices are reduced and the line is held on wages, “this not only adds to the purchasing power of the labor group, but it increases the real income of the non-wage urban population ... the benefits are distributed throughout the entire economic system ...” To approach the question in any other way, according to the financial expert of the Times, is to perpetrate a “vulgarization of the purchasing power doctrine.” Not only is it vulgar to approach the question of purchasing power through demands for wage increases, but such an approach is also “oversimplified” and a “caricature.” This is very interesting. We have noted for some time that capitalist employers, their lawyers, accountants and supporters always object to workers making demands which are simple and direct. History shows, however, that wages do not keep pace with profits and high prices. Competition and stuffed warehouses and inventories, lack of buyers reduce prices – not stationary wages. If wage increases are not won, labor will only suffer more. Big business does not want workers to come into wage negotiations with only one set of books. Labor should emulate its betters: have at least three sets of books; for example, one set for the employees, one for the government and one for the stockholders. To do otherwise is “oversimplification” and a “vulgarization.”
 
The UAW Demands
Mr. Collins is particularly perturbed about the wage demands of the United Automobile Workers. These demands “show how opportunist labor leaders can turn such an economic legend to their advantage.” (The “legend” is the claim that wage increases somehow benefit those who get the increase.) “... to the extent that profits resulting from increased productivity were distributed, it was preferable that it be done through reduction in prices.” So said Dr. Moulton. Mr. Collins is very careful about his grammar and syntax here. The situation is conditional and a suitable syntax is required. Since there is no distribution of profits resulting from increased productivity, it is necessary to be very careful in the wording of one’s propaganda.
Collins has made the astounding discovery that “here, in the UAW, we see a union which within a few months of receiving a wage rise of 16 per cent is returning with fresh demands for another 30 per cent.” If you give them an inch they will take an ell! What the “opportunist labor leaders” ought to do is consult Dr. Moulton. He will explain to them how to get General Motors not to reduce wages while they bring down the price of their cars a few hundred dollars. Needless to say, Collins has nothing to say about the fact that the UAW is asking for another wage rise because he and Dr. Moulton have been unsuccessful in their “heroic” efforts to get the food processors, the packers, the clothing manufacturers and the landlords to use the “profits of Increased productivity” for reducing prices.
The Workers Party regrets that it must inform Dr. Moulton and Mr. Collins that we cannot accept, not their debasement of “economic theory,” but their economic theory itself. We know a better economic theory. In the first place the Workers Party subscribes to the theory that, twist as they may, the capitalist class, its economists, lawyers and financial experts, cannot brew any potion or devise any scheme which will cure the ills of capitalism. No matter how much they may engarland this rotting system with phrases about “purchasing power” through the reduction of prices, this social order will continue to rot and decay. The evidence can be found even in the article of Collins and the position of Dr. Moulton. They talk about reducing prices and never mention the fact that today prices are fixed, not by some really mythical economic doctrine of supply and demand, but by the big monopolists in the interest of monopoly capitalism. But Collins and Moulton never mention the word “monopoly.” Nor do they mention the fact that monopoly capitalism prefers to export the “surplus” rather than to sell at home at reduced prices.
 
For Workers Power
What worker would object to a reduction in the price of butter, meat or clothing? Who ever heard of labor demanding higher and higher wages as prices dropped lower and lower? Furthermore, where is it recorded that the capitalist employers and their press are fighting for lower prices? Simply lower prices, not to mention lower prices without a reduction in pay.
Our objection to the present demands of labor is that its demands are modest, not broad and inclusive enough. They only demand more wages as a rule. The working class does not see that to confine our demands within the framework of old-fashioned trade unionism is not enough. What would Dr. Moulton, Mr. Collins and the rest of them say to the demand that the workers take over production, manage it and determine their own wages? What would the capitalist economic experts say to the proposal made by the Workers Party that industry be nationalized and that such nationalized industry be under the control of the workers? Only then would Dr. Moulton see his program lower prices with no reduction in wages, put into operation. There would be abundant “purchasing power,” high productivity and continuous mass production. Mass production, not for amassing huge inventories but for supplying the needs of the people.
What would Dr. Moulton and the other capitalist economists say if the working class should take a notion to have its own independent labor party, its own government, army, courts, as well as its own laws determining the level of wages and prices. Dr. Moulton and his kind would probably call this “the debasement of economic theory.”
 




(Continued from last week)
Lewis is dangerous for labor not for the reasons given by the capitalist ruling class, its press, the liberals and the congressional “friends of labor,” but for the very opposite reason. They say he goes too far, he is not reasonably, he is power hungry, his acts will prompt anti-labor legislation, he is unpatriotic; and on and on. Lewis is dangerous for labor because he does not go far enough. His program is too narrow and his thinking is somewhat medieval. He has no educational program for his union, not even a trade union educational program such as the UAW and the ILGWU. He has no program for improving the social and cultural status of the miners. There is no housing program or a program for better schools, hospital facilities, recreational facilities, medical care. The miners and their families are left to rot culturally.
Lewis has no political program for the miners. He goes his personal way, supporting now the Republicans, later the New Deal Democrat Roosevelt and then back to the Republicans Willkie and Dewey. If the miners go along, that’s good, but if they do not, that is their business. With ail this the capitalist ruling class will agree. If Lewis did no more than this he would have the solid support of every proponent of “our system of free enterprise.” The capitalist exploiters are willing for the miners to remain in their hovels in the coal patches, without adequate schools and medical care and without civil rights and political opportunities. They have no objection to Lewis thundering out his annual demands. They are only against the miners and the rest of labor backing their demands with mass action; they are against the working class showing its power in the stopping of production and bringing the ruling class to its knees.
 
We Cannot Function with Outlived Ideas
Over against the capitalist ruling class, its deputies in the government at Washington, its yes men of the capitalist press and its most humble and loyal stooges in the ranks of the liberals, the Workers Party supports the demands of the miners and their strike waged in support of those demands. But we do not and cannot stop here. Neither can the miners and the whole host of the labor movement.
We call to the attention of labor leaders such as Lewis, Green, Murray and Reuther that they are not living in the year 1900. The political and economic situation today is not the same as 1900. The working class cannot function properly today with a 19th century program. Capitalism today is not the exuberant system of “free enterprise” which it was in 1900. The world is in such economic and political turmoil and uncertainty as never known before in the history of capitalism. Capitalism blunders and stumbles along, groping for a way out and some means to assure its salvation from decay and for some way out short of fascism. The world still reels from the impact of the last imperialist world war.
The peace makers talk peace in the open while their governments either pile up the atom bombs or explore the secret of their manufacture. The capitalist ruling class, sensing some sort of threat to its continued rule, tries to restore its world market, raises prices and piles up the hugest profits of its fabulous existence. It seeks to hold down what this class is pleased to call “labor costs,” or the “unit cost of production.” This means a lowering of wages and the standard of living of the masses. It seeks to pull the teeth of organized labor and turn the working class into a group of mere petitioners. Its chief and ever-willing weapon today is its government at Washington. At the same time of course this class carries on a struggle against its government whenever this government does not do its will. The government at Washington on its part, ever mindful of its’ obligations as the protector of the “real” interests of the capitalist ruling class, holds on to its wartime emergency powers, to be used primarily for the adjudication of “labor disputes” in such manner as will keep production going without giving in too much to labor.
It is in such a scene that the miners’ strike came, threatening to paralyze all basic production, transport and power. This threat could not but alert the government in the interest of the capitalist ruling class. It would not put it this way, of course. The government would say that its intervention was in the interest of production of the maintenance of law and order, of the constitutional rights and the rights of the public. The miners were not prepared by their leaders to face this concrete situation.
The strike came this time just as strikes have come before. The miners were totally oblivious as to what the strike really meant. It was only one more strike to them, called because they had no contract. The social and political implications in the strike were not clear to them. Suppose they did get their contract with some increase in wages and a betterment of working conditions? Suppose this occurs at the end of each contractual period? They will still be living in the coaltown shacks. The one-room school shanties will be there. Hospitals, medical care and recreational facilities will not be there. They will still be forced to buy in the company stores, Work in the criminally hazardous surroundings and live in daily denial of full civil rights.
Also, what will they do when faced with $3,500,000 fines, imposed by a capitalist court? Lewis writes to the miners that “the Supreme Court is, and we believe will ever be, the protector of American liberties and the rightful privileges of individual citizens.” This is an extremely reactionary piece of nonsense. It is bombast and the most fatuous Statement which could have been made in this situation. It is cut from the same piece of cloth as Murray and Reuther depending on Roosevelt, or the belief of Green that labor and the employers can get along together if the government will keep its hands off. There is one difference, however. Dependence on Roosevelt was induced by a situation in which, under a New Deal, labor had made material and organizational gains.
How Lewis can contrast the courts which only interpret the Constitution and acts of Congress, and say that they will protect labor, over against the legislative and executive branch of the government, is a mystery. This is a demonstration of the essentially medieval character of Lewis’ thinking. Labor can’t be protected by Congress and the President but it can and will be protected by the Supreme Court.
Such a reactionary and anti-labor outlook will only push the miners and all labor farther away from the road over which we must go. Not by appeals to capitalist legality as established by a capitalist court, even the sacrosanct Supreme Court, but by working class political action; that is, by working class political action oriented toward working class legality. Working class legality can only be established under a workers’ government in which workers have their law-making bodies, their own administrative branch and their own workers’ courts. Lewis not only puts the cart before the horse, but his position obscures the real issues involved. He also tells the workers that the capitalist courts, the most reactionary arm of the capitalist government, will be a friend to working men and women. This has not been our experience with the courts and the police.
Are we saying here that this strike should not have been called? Not at all. We are saying something far more important. We are saying that the miners cannot continue with the over-simplified formula: “No contract, no work.” They cannot and must not continue to do this without understanding all the things which we have been saying: without understanding the political situation and the political nature of the strikes which they engage in.
 
Political Organization Indicated as Need
The miners must rise out of the political slough of despondency. They and all of labor must proceed to political organization and political action. The Workers Party says to those miners and other workers who read Labor Action that economic organization is not enough. The union is not enough. The miners have a powerful union and this union has demonstrated again and again that it can tie up the economy and stop production. It can and has raised wages and improved working conditions. This is as it should be, but it is not enough. This last experience of the miners should teach this. Their union cannot combat the capitalist ruling class and its political arm: the government at, Washington, including the capitalist courts.
The miners and all labor must have a program for keeping production going under the control of the workers and, eventually, by workers’ control in a socialist society.
Such demonstrations of economic power as just displayed by the miners, without a program and an organization for taking hold of the economy and the government, will only lead the capitalist ruling class and its government to prepare for taking the harshest measures against labor. Labor cannot resist these attacks with its economic organization only. For such political resistance labor must have a political organization: a party of labor ready to become the government and assume the total leadership of the nation.
 
Miners Were Not Prepared Properly
We are not here supporting those labor bureaucrats who talk to labor very militantly about keeping quiet lest the militancy of the workers bring down upon the head of labor reprisals from the ruling class government. We oppose such a craven and cowardly attitude from any labor leader. We say that labor must fight, it must strike, it must engage in mass strikes.
But we say, also, that we must be in a position to combat any and all measures which the capitalist ruling class and its government take against us. The miners and the rest of labor are not prepared today for carrying through such a struggle as Lewis led his union into. Lewis has capitulated and the union has retreated. Retreat is often or usually necessary to some degree. There is nothing wrong about a union retreating. What was wrong in this strike was that the union was not prepared either for the advance nor for the retreat which Lewis ordered.
We say that the miners were not prepared properly for the strike. For instance, aside from the nonsense which Lewis utters about the Supreme Court, he says that the country needs the coal. Didn’t Lewis know this when he called the strike? Didn’t he know that industry must have coal if it is to keep going? Didn’t he know that the mines were under government control? Didn’t he know that the Department of Justice would resort to the courts? Was he ignorant of the fact that the capitalist monsters would put on their three-ringed circus about freezing children, hospitals with no coal, schools closing for lack of coal, trains suspended and all the rest of the capitalist appeal to prejudice and ignorance? How did Lewis expect to wage this battle to which he called the miners? Merely have the miners and their families sit it out in their miserable shacks? Take a holiday and go hunting?
It is to the everlasting glory of the miners that they will sit it out, that they will hold the line, that they will remain firm even though they go hungry and freeze on the bleak hillsides. But they deserve something more, much more than this. They and all the working class deserve and must have food, clothing and shelter in abundance. They deserve and must have wholesome and nutritious food, decent and sanitary homes, paved and light streets, schools, hospitals, culture, health, peace and freedom. They deserve the life of a human being. They have the power to get all of this and more. All that is needed is for this potential political power to be made actual.
The miners are back at work without a contract. We suppose that later they will get their contract and a few gains. But they were not prepared for the sudden and “dramatic” about-face of their leader. They did not participate in this decision.
 
We Must Assume Our Responsibilities
What comes next? The case is still in the courts. The $3,500,000 fine stands. Suppose the Supreme Court should reverse the little judge Goldsborough? Suppose the government returns the mines to the capitalist banks which own them? What will the miners do on April 1 if they have no contract? Should they strike, the government will step in again. What then? Will they simply demonstrate once again that labor has tremendous economic power, that production can be stopped? This will get labor nowhere.
The magnificent spirit of the miners, their courage and their fortitude must not be frittered away by a mere repetition of the recent strike. Surely workers must strike. Of course, we must fight on the economic level. But we must move ahead to independent working class political organization and political action. This is the only effective way now to give force to our economic demands.
Labor must not walk into any traps laid by the capitalist ruling class, nor into the swamp prepared by those who believe that labor needs only its unions to win, nor fall into the conservatism of those who prate that, “you can’t strike against the government.”
Labor can and will have to strike against the capitalist ruling class in whatever form this class confronts the working class. But labor can do this only if we are prepared and organized to take the responsibility for operating industry, leading the nation and governing the nation with and through a workers’ government.
These are the imperative and pressing lessons which labor can and must learn from the miners’ strike.
 




The miners’ strike is over. The coal diggers have been instructed by their leadership to “resume production of coal immediately until 12:00 o’clock midnight, March 31, 1947.” The instructions to return to work presumably mean that negotiations will go on and that if an agreement acceptable to the union is not reached by that time there will be another strike based on the position that “we do not work without a contract.”
In this sense the return to work can be called a “truce.” Nothing has been settled. The miners have no new contract, the mines are still in the hands of the government and the appeal of the union to the Supreme Court against the $3,500,000 fine of the lower court is yet to be decided.
In his statement to the union Lewis called the restraining order of the District Court, “the administration ‘yellow-dog’ injunction.” The Supreme Court is a “constitutional court” and derives its powers from the “Federal Constitution.” From this Lewis draws the conclusion, by some mode of reasoning which he does not explain, that “the Supreme Court is, and we believe will ever be, the protector of American liberties and the rightful privileges of individual citizens.” Out of “fitting respect due the dignity of this high tribunal” Lewis finds it fitting to call off the strike during its deliberations in connection with the appeal of his union. In addition to this “weighty” consideration, “public necessity requires the quantitative production of coal during such period.”
The capitalist press announced that Lewis “surrenders,” that he had “capitulated.” The New York Times in its editorial said that Lewis “yields” and that he deserved credit for only one thing: “for knowing when he was beaten.” The Times was indignant because Lewis “was not wholly repentant.” But the Times takes comfort because, while Lewis attempted “to bully the Federal Government and people,” he did not get away with it. “It is Mr. Lewis who has given in. And in his surrender a great danger passes. It is not likely that any future labor leader will try to do what Mr. Lewis failed to do.” And so the capitalist press rejoices in the return of the miners to work and in the firmness of the government in dealing with the situation.
Since nothing has happened except the return of the miners to work after their union had been fined several millions of dollars, it is important for us, the miners and all of labor, to inquire into what the real situation is in connection with this very important strike.
What caused the strike and what were the miners’ demands? The government was and is operating the mines under what is claimed to be the emergency war powers of the President. Under this arrangement last spring the UMWA and Interior Secretary Krug worked out what is called the “Krug-Lewis Agreement.” Under this agreement the miners got a pay rise of 18% cents, a yearly vacation ,and a welfare. While the Krug-Lewis Agreement was signed for the whole period of government control, it contained a stipulation that all provisions of the old contract which were unchanged would remain in full force as part of the contract of the UMWA with the Government.
The old contract said that if there was a change in Government wage policy after March 1, 1946, the UMWA might give notice that it wanted a new contract, that negotiations must begin within ten days of the notice and if no agreement was reached in fifteen days, the UMWA would call off its contract upon five days’ notice. This clause is, in effect, in the present contract with the government and was not invalidated by the Krug-Lewis Agreement.
The government, however, took a different position after a great deal of shifting and beating around the bush on the question. At first Attorney-General Clark supported the contentions of the UMWA in its interpretation of the legal terms of the Krug-Lewis Agreement. Later, under pressure, Clark reversed himself and held publicly that Congress authorized the government to take over strike-bound plants for the purpose of keeping them in operation, and that it was not the intent of Congress that the government should be forced to enter into negotiations with a striking union, demanding a new contract. The whole meaning of the position of the government was the contention that “you cannot strike against the government.”
This was the contention of the government before Judge Goldsborough of the Federal District Court, in its demand for an injunction. The court accepted the position of the government lawyers and issued a restraining order telling Lewis to issue instructions to the miners to remain at work. Lewis did not do this and in accordance with their custom of not working without a contract the miners walked off the job. It was his and the union’s refusal to obey the order of the court, and this alone; upon which the court based its action in levying the fine. The court did not go into the merits of the case, saying only that its order for the miners to remain at work had been disobeyed. It was this act which Judge Golds-borough characterized as “anarchy.” It would be the contention of the court of course that if the miners had, or believed they had, a grievance against the government, they should have remained at work and presented their grievance to the proper authority.
The importance of all this resides in the fact that the miners themselves did not understand what was transpiring and the reasons motivating the government and their leadership. They therefore proceeded as they had always done: “No contract, no work.”
While the union and the government were contesting the issue, the coal operators were sitting it out. No doubt there were all sorts of behind the scenes negotiations going on by emissaries of Lewis, the government and the operators. Also the operators were not in unanimity about what to do in the situation. It seems that their final decision was to let the government carry the ball and give Lewis and the union a drubbing. They made no demand for returning the mines to the coal corporations.
 
Meaning of the Facts for Whole of Labor
The above are the pertinent facts in connection with the strike. These facts are relevant to an understanding of the situation. What is more relevant, however, is the meaning of the facts for the miners and for the whole of labor. We have to answer the question: “What means this strike?” What is its significance? What can and should labor learn from this ordeal through which the miners are passing today? Correct answers are imperative if labor is to understand and be able to chart its future course.
In the first place, the strike fulfilled in superlative degree the chief requirement of a strike: it stopped production. Coal was not produced except in extremely small quantities in relatively few non-organized mines. There was no question of scabbing. Picket lines were not necessary. The operators made no attempt to operate the mines. It was admitted by all the capitalist press that production had stopped and that there was no indication of a “back to work” movement. The operators and the press did not attempt to stir up a return to the mines, as has been their custom in days past. While Truman finally decided to go on the air and appeal to the miners to return to work, no one, except possibly Truman, believed that the coaldiggers would return without an order from Lewis.
It is necessary to point out, in addition, that this strike not only stopped production of coal but that it was on the way to halting production in other basic industries, the operation of the transportation systems and the power plants. No more could be demanded of a strike from a formal and tactical viewpoint. Production was halted and slowed down. The miners were again exhibiting a magnificent solidarity. The whole labor movement was rallying to their support in the form of a struggle against the injunction. A conference of all labor organizations was projected. Inter-union solidarity was developing. While this inter-union solidarity was not on a par with the solidarity within the ranks of the UMWA, it was something new in the recent history of the labor movement in the U.S. The AFL supported Lewis and the harsh Criticism of Lewis inside the CIO was considerably muffled.
This miners’ strike was an outstanding manifestation of the tremendous actual and potential power of an organized working class. The capitalist ruling class was helpless to keep coal production going. The government could not get coal produced. The capitalist press very plaintively admitted that no one could “force men to work.”
This brute fact renders the cackling attitude of the capitalist press somewhat ludicrous, when its headlines bellow about the “capitulation” or the “surrender” of’ Lewis. This fact also makes one feel like vomiting on reading the feeble bleating of The Nation for December 7. This “liberal” weekly declared that “Mr. Lewis’ act of defiance is as disproportionate to his immediate aims as his power is incompatible with the functioning of democratic society.
That point cannot be driven home to him by the action of government alone. As long as organized labor lends him support, however nominal, he will be a martyr or a hero, whatever the courts decide.” This weekly “friend of labor” then praises the scab members of the Washington Newspaper Guild, who have “taken the lead in condemning the resolution adopted by the CIO convention in defense of Lewis.” This is merely a continuation of the position taken by The Nation in 1943 when its editors wrote that “no matter what the grievance of the miners, they had no business to strike.”
 
Dangerous Because His Program Is Inadequate
We say again that this strike was an illustration of the power of the working class: an illustration in real life of the teachings of revolutionary socialism that labor is the chief of the productive forces; that the capitalist economy cannot operate without the working class. No matter what the size of the capital invested, the number and competence of directors, finance committees, executive committees, “hardworking, square-jawed executives,” etc. Machinery, technology, patents, “management,” capitalist courts, Congress, the man in the White House, and all the paraphernalia of capitalist society could not produce in the face of the dogged determination of 400,000 miners to stay away from the pits.
This was where the strike stopped, however; with the cessation of production. It was a well-planned and thoroughly organized economic struggle! You demand a contract with certain provisions; if a contract is denied, that means that the operators do not agree to granting the demands; in such a situation you stay home and away from the mines.
But while the miners looked at the strike in the above mentioned simple terms, this strike, as are all major strikes today, was far more than the economic struggle which the miners considered it to be. It was a political strike. The capitalist ruling class understands this, but the miners do not. The whole capitalist class, its government and all its retainers were arrayed as a class against the miners.
If Lewis understood this, he has kept his knowledge a deep secret from the miners and everyone else. If he understands these things, he is once again displayed as an extremely reactionary and dangerous leader of labor. The same holds for Murray, Green, Reuther and the other top leaders of labor, because they too were not prepared to grapple with present-day labor problems which were exposed so clearly in the struggle between the miners and the government. What we say applies particularly well to Lewis, however. It it he who leads his union into the most resolute labor struggles; even in wartime!
(Continued next week)
 




IN a previous article on the recent CIO convention, I discussed only the Statement of Policy adopted in connection with the Communist (Stalinist) Party. In that article a very critical attitude was taken by me in relation to the way this very important question was handled by the convention and I attributed the responsibility for it to Philip Murray’s presentation of the matter.
Despite the fact that the convention got off to a bad start on this matter, and despite the necessity to be sharply critical of Eisenhower’s presence on the rostrum, the convention accomplished some things of great importance.
Before discussing the genuine and worthwhile accomplishments of the convention it is necessary to deal with the Eisenhower episode. The Army Chief of Staff addressed this convention of labor at the very moment the government and the capitalist press proclaimed that the army was “alerted” for duty in connection with the coal strike. Whether or not the government would actually use the army is beside the point. The real point is that, if the army were so employed. Chief of Staff Eisenhower would direct its operations in the same way that the then Chief of Staff MacArthur directed the “bloody Thursday” massacre of unemployed veterans camped on the Anacostia flats in 1932. I do not now wish to go into the matter of the propriety of having army officers speaking at labor conventions; it is enough now to think of it in relation to the persent coal strike.
If Eisenhower and other high officials of the government were so “pleased” and “honored” to appear before a convention of labor it would not have been out of place to have some delegates ask a few pertinent questions. They might have asked what the Chief of Staff thinks about using the army to break strikes. Someone might have asked just what the General meant by his statements: “it is your army and no one’s else.” “The average man benefits from military training.” The army gives “full play for the best of man’s virtues.” We see no reason why a convention of workers should be subjected to verbal machine-gunning from government officials with only the right to sit quietly and applaud at the end of a barrage.
Only the day before Eisenhower’s appearance, the convention had passed a resolution condemning peace-time conscription, one of his pet projects. Would it have been out of place to have Eisenhower stand up and defend his position before the convention? Especially when he says that it is “our” army.
We mean just this: labor conventions should belong to labor and to the delegates in the convention who have been sent there by the membership to legislate for the union, to discuss the union problems and to find solutions for them. This CIO convention had only five days in which to do its work, but hours and hours of the time were consumed in listening to speeches and most of them made no contributions whatever to the problems confronting the delegates.
 
Convention Gets to Work
Despite the waste of time, the convention did accomplish several things. In the first place, the CIO is slowly moving steadily in the direction of becoming what it should be: the chief economic organization of labor in the U.S. This progress is far too slow but the direction is unmistakable. This is attested to in many ways and by many things. It has to be made clear that my critical comments are made for the purpose of pointing out what needs to be done in order to achieve more quickly the above goal.
The CIO has made real progress in integrating Negro workers into the organization, as well as in fighting for Negro equality in the plants and in the country in general. In relation to the AFL in this matter, the CIO stands out distinctly and to its credit. There were three separate resolutions dealing specifically with problems of Negroes: a resolution entitled Oust Bilbo, another on The Right to Vote, and the third, Protection of Democracy.
The very titles of the resolutions indicate their content. The progressive nature of the convention’s actions on this test question is revealed in the following demands:
Federal, state and Municipal fair employment practices legislation. The immediate enactment of a federal anti-lynching bill. Federal legislation in the District of Columbia against discrimination and segregation and the same legislation in the States. Federal and state legislation invalidating restrictive covenants based on “race, color, creed or national origin.” Safeguards against racial discrimination in federal appropriations for state aid. Federal, state and municipal laws guaranteeing right of suffrage, and against Congressional barriers’ which exclude Negro newspapermen from Senate and House press galleries.
The CIO has attempted to carry the letter and spirit of these resolutions. Negroes occupy a position in the CIO today never before known in the history of the labor movement in this country. I should like to emphasize this. We see in the CIO a most significantly progressive development of race relations and of intra-class solidarity. The Workers Party welcomes this development. It is entirely in accord with the position of the Workers Party which holds that the Negro in the U.S. can gain his freedom not only by the active support, but the initiative of the organized labor movement in the struggle for democratic rights for the Negro. With the establishment of union FEPC committees, the selection of Negroes as members and heads of important CIO committees, even of committees not concerned directly with “the Negro problem,” means that the CIO has placed itself in a position to handle this problem effectively.
This is not to say that the CIO has answered all the problems of discrimination, even in its own ranks. It has not. Many sore spots remain. But the program of the organization is being developed in a correct direction.
 
Organizing the Unorganized
The convention also dealt with highly important problems of Organizing the Unorganized. This part of the agenda was concerned largely with the campaign to organize the South. The resolution and reports, particularly by Van Bittner and Baldanzi, emphasized that the drive would be continued and stepped up. This was important because of rumors that have been making the rounds that the drive was falling off and that in the future each international would be expected to finance its own operations.
Baldanzi remarked in his speech that the drive should not be understood as an “Operation Dixie.” He explained this by saying that the Southern workers are not hostile and that they wanted to be organized. But here Baldanzi seemed to be missing the point. The expression “Operation Dixie” is an excellent designation for this campaign. The slogan is not directed against the Southern worker but against the same forces in the South encompassed by the first Operation Dixie, namely, against the rulers of the South and their Northern masters. It is an operation against the South’s “peculiar institution” of 1946; against the mill owners, the cotton planters, the poll tax, lynching, mob rule and all the dark and reactionary forces of the South. This operation can only be carried out by the working class of the North with the participation of the Southern toilers, white and black. This it seems to me is what the slogan “Operation Dixie” must mean.
There was a resolution pledging the organization to fight against anti-labor injunctions. Since the convention was sitting at the very moment that the injunction against the miners was issued, the resolution was amended as follows:
“We condemn the actions taken by the federal government in obtaining a sweeping injunction against the United Mine Workers of America. This is a clear violation of the Norris-LaGuardia Act. No anti-labor injunctions can dispose of the problems now confronting workers who see their earnings shrink before the fast-rising cost of living. American democracy cannot tolerate any attempt to impose economic slavery through vicious anti-labor injunctions.”
The question of Lewis and the miners’ strike really pervaded this convention. Not much was said but it was clear that the leadership was worried and disturbed over whether or not to support Lewis and on how to separate Lewis from the UMWA. But it is gratifying that a little common sense and a measure of labor solidarity prevailed.
The all-important question of wages was discussed and a program set forth in a resolution. No definite sum for a wage increase was specified. But the resolution is a good one and entirely correct. It is interesting that the resolution does not call on the government to do anything about the wages question. What it does say is that:
“Under present conditions it is therefore imperative that American industry in collective bargaining give substantial wage increases. Our people must have sustained purchasing power and a decent living wage to avert the swift economic tragedy which now confronts us. This is the important task for CIO unions in their approaching collective bargaining conferences.”
There was a resolution on The Jewish People, which urged that “our government immediately enact a code of laws dealing with the hateful evil of racial bigotry ... We must make anti-Semitism and anti-racial acts and incitements a crime.” The government is asked “to open its doors to the thousands of homeless and desperate Jews in Europe.” The government is urged to “bring pressure upon Great Britain to secure the immediate admission of 100,000 Jews to Palestine and the immediate provision for free and unlimited immigration to Palestine and free and unlimited land purchase in Palestine.” It adds “that our government take every possible step to bring about the establishment in Palestine of an independent commonwealth as a Jewish National Home with full guarantees of the legitimate interests of other national groups and equality of rights and opportunities to all its inhabitants.”
The resolution on Foreign Policy called for support to the United Nations Organization, “demilitarization,” and to sever all diplomatic and economic relations with “breeding places of world fascism. (Spain and Argentina.) The resolution calls for “progressive universal disarmament,” that the colonial peoples shall have self-determination and self-government – “free from interference or coercion from any source – benevolent or despotic.” An enduring peace demands “a free, united and independent China ... We call upon all foreign governments as well as our own to cease intervention in Chinese affairs and to end military aid to any faction ... We urge that under no circumstances should food or any other aid given by any country be used as a means of coercing or influencing free but needy people in the exercise of their rights of self-government.” The resolution demands the unity of the “Big Three” and opposes any bloc which would, destroy this unity.
 
Political Action – The Labor Party
Something which must be emphasized is the fact that the CIO in this convention took under consideration virtually all the important problems with which the masses in the U.S. are concerned. These resolutions place the CIO formally in the position of establishing itself as the spearhead of the working class in its bid for the leadership of the nation. The heads of the CIO understand this in a primitive and naive sort of way. What they do not understand is that the most important questions dealt with by the convention are political and cannot be handled by a trade union or other economic organization.
Inherent in the deliberations of this convention and the resolutions passed is the demand for political action by labor. Not the type of political action engaged in by the PAC, but independent class political action on the part of labor. Implicit in the actions of this CIO convention is the necessity for the organization of an independent labor party. This is really what PAC is faced with: transforming itself into a labor party. There is no way to accomplish the demands set forth in these resolutions except through independent action by the working class. No “third party” will do. The leadership of Morgenthau, Pepper, Ickes and Wallace will not produce the results demanded in these resolutions.
 




No one above the intellectual level of a beetle should be surprised at the attempted suppression of the Meader report on the carryings-on of the U.S. Army in Germany. In the first place, what is reported by Meader is nothing new except in quantity and degree. Occupying armies of conquest have always lived off the conquered country and its people. Military conquerors have always been plunderers and despoilers. This fact is not obliterated by calling the conquering military force an “army of liberation.”
Conquered peoples are considered inferiors. This is particularly true in cases where the conquerors are “Nordics” taking over the territory of “lesser breeds.” If it is not the case of “Nordics” against non-Nordics, it may be the simple case of the enemy being a “foreigner.” White Americans, in Germany, have conquered some “foreigners.” There are thousands of “displaced persons,” most of whom are Jews. There are Negro soldiers in the occupying army of the United States, and there are German women who are white and who may not have the same attitude toward Negroes as prevails in the “Land of the Free and the Home of the Brave.” All of this creates quite a situation for the American “men of good will” charged with the responsibility of making a “democratic” nation out of Germany.
 
“Free Enterprise”
It seems that the top military men and their civilian experts haven’t done a good job in the eyes of some people. According to investigator Meader, the army in Germany has a high rate of venereal disease: 70 per cent for Negro troops and 30 per cent for white. Meader also found what he called “flagrant miscegenation.” (Evidently this was something brand new to Meader. He had never heard of any miscegenation in the U.S., “flagrant” or mild.) A “low quality” of white troops is being sent to Germany. Meader doesn’t say what constitutes the “lowness” of their quality. Perhaps they prefer being back in the U.S., and doing something useful.
There are about 450,000 nationals from Russian-dominated countries who don’t want to go back home. They are a heavy expense to the American taxpayer according to Meader. There are 200,000 Jews in the U.S. zone from Eastern Europe. Meader seems to believe that they “ought to go back where they come from,” and get off the backs of the overburdened American taxpayer. It doesn’t occur to Meader that these oppressed Jews may have heard something about “freedom from fear,” and have come to the American zone to enjoy some of this freedom.
Meader discovered that high army officers, true to the Spirit of “our system of free enterprise,” were engaged in all sorts of indiscriminate “free enterprise” operations with U.S. government property and German property. And, according to Meader and his informant, a U.S. lieutenant colonel, “the worst offenders were generals and high-ranking colonels.” One of these very patriotic gentlemen engaged in black market operations and bought a hotel. Another deposited $50,000 in a Swiss bank. Several officers, according to the report, were “charged with . white slavery.” This translated into everyday language means that these officers were peddling German women for “immoral purposes.” Officers were engaged in hauling at my coal, wood and food to the homes of their “mistresses” in army vehicles. These officers had requisitioned both houses and luxurious furnishings for the use of these mistresses.
 
Meader on Negroes
While the escapades of the white officers are very disquieting to Meader, he is particularly perturbed over what he found the Negro troops doing. After all, a limit must be set somewhere. The War Department, according to the report, is aware of the problem “but is reluctant to take any action to correct it because of fear of political repercussion from Negro groups.” And what is it that should be corrected? Negroes move “freely and unsupervised among the civilian population ... they have ready access to army supplies.” (They are cutting in on the generals’ racket!)
Worst of all these Negroes use these army supplies for “gaining favor with frauleins.” And how is this possible? Because German women were “propagandized by Hitler into a psychology of moral laxness, and in view of the food shortage ...” The report does not explain just how this can be the result of “moral laxness” induced by Hitler since one cornerstone of Hitler’s teaching was white German superiority, and especially the inferiority of the Negro. How could any German white woman, “educated” by Hitler, consort with a Negro no matter how hungry she might be? Furthermore, it seems to us that the proper way to remedy this situation is to send over more “generals and high-ranking colonels.” What else should be corrected? Well, “in Moosberg a Negro private and his white English WIFE were occupying a house BY THEMSELVES which had been requisitioned.” According to the report, the local military officer “deplored this.” Also “about 150 Negro troops, housed in private dwellings, brought with them certain German women with whom they had been fraternizing.” This, of course, is terrible. The military authorities in Germany for one reason or other have not yet established the four freedoms American style. Negroes are not completely segregated and Jim Crowed. There haven’t been any lynchings. The report makes no charge that Negro soldiers are “raping” German women. No German women, it seems, has seen fit to yell “rape.”
The report does not charge that the Negro soldiers are engaging in “white slavery.” This is a monopoly of the white officers.
There is venereal disease among the troops, more among Negroes, according to the report than among the white troops. Meader was alarmed at this. There isn’t much venereal disease in the U.S. and of course no one ever heard of this ailment in the army any place outside.
 
A Piece of Tripe
We say again that no one with a higher intelligence than a beetle should be surprised that this report was suppressed. First of all, it is a piece of tripe, prepared by a glorified scissor-bill. We do not mean by this that the report is false. Every statement made by. Meader may be true. That is beside the point. What he reports in substance has been reported for every country occupied, by hosts of returning ex-servicemen. This report could have been called: “What Every GI Knows.” It would be suppressed for the reason that it would never do to let it become public that white men and officers of the U.S. Army were carrying on like a bunch of hoodlums, gangsters and degenerates. The report was not suppressed because Negro soldiers were doing things which they ought not be doing, or which some people think they ought not be permitted to do.
The War Department might be disturbed over repercussions from Negro groups. They ought to be disturbed over the Jim Crow asininities of this backwoods car-window sociologist. That is not what really worries the top brass hats in Washington, but rather the revelations about the “generals and high-ranking colonels.” Their “looting,” “black marketing,” “white slavery,” their numerous “mistresses,” and their shady business transactions.
If Meader were not what he is revealed to be by his own report; that is, a high-placed yokel, he would never have turned in this report. His report reveals that anybody in Germany, so inclined, may have all the women he wants, may use government supplies to get those amenable to such persuasion, may use his position to engage in illicit business transactions and take whatever is available in the way of German property, personal or government. In a word, at least a part of the army in Germany is carrying on in the traditional manner of military conquerors and imperialists.
The real tragedy of the situation either escapes Meader altogether or his attitude toward the situation is totally reactionary, inhuman and indecent. We cite his attitude toward the refugees who are fleeing from Stalinist barbarism and the Jews who come to the American zone because they believe that here they will find security and freedom from oppression. Furthermore this little hurry-up investigator, like so many of his tribe, is not favorably impressed with the liking of the German women for the Negro soldiers who are civilized enough to refrain from using them in the “white slavery” traffic. To this mess the real answer is to remove all the armies of occupation out and return Germany to the German people.
 




Before the beginning of the steel strike the leaders of the Steel Workers Union announced that the union was demanding an increase of $2.00 a day or 25 cents an hour. Before the strike began, President Truman recommended an increase of 18½ cents an hour. Philip Murray told U.S. Steel that he would not settle for less than 19½ cents. This was 5½ cents less than the original demand. Murray also demanded that the wage settlement be retroactive.
Benjamin Fairless, representing the steel corporations, told the government and the steel union that the steel manufacturers could not consider raising wages unless the government agreed to an increase in the price of steel. Mr. Olds, chairman of U.S. Steel, demanded that the increase allowed be $6.25 a ton. Representatives of the government suggested $4.00 a ton. The steel corporations also took the position that they would not agree to make the settlement retroactive.
 
Who Won the Strike?
These are a few of the relevant facts in connection with the steel strike, and the negotiations between the United Steel Workers, the corporations and the government. It is necessary to ask the question: who won the strike? Thousands of steel workers must have asked this question when they were told about the agreement which their elected leaders had made with the steel corporations and the government.
It is necessary to emphasize that the rank and file steel workers had little if anything to do with the wage agreement reached between their elected leadership, the government and the steel companies. It is true that the membership of the union has accepted the original demand for a $2.00 a day rise in pay. The corporations refused and the strike was called. The strike was a very listless affair. The steel workers stood in their places, so to speak, and only marked time. They were only waiting, and thousands of them must have wondered what this strange waiting was all about.
The Workers Party, in Labor Action, told what the waiting was all about. Murray and the leaders of the steel workers were waiting for Truman to act in behalf of the demands of the steel workers. They were waiting for the government of the steel manufacturers to do something for the steel workers and against the owners of the steel mills. Therefore striking steel workers were ordered to "mark time.” Everybody knows or ought to know that while you are marking time you do not advance, you do not move toward your objective. On the other hand, marking time may permit the enemy to move toward his objective.
This is precisely what happened during the steel strike. While the steel workers were watchfully and hopefully waiting, the steel manufacturers were maneuvering and conniving with THEIR government for an increase in the price of steel before they consented to any increase in wages above 15 cents an hour. The steel manufacturers put a gun to the head of THEIR government. Any class which has a government can put on pressure when and if it becomes necessary.
The working class cannot do this because we do not have our own government. If there were a Labor Party and a labor government in Washington, instead of the present capitalist government, the steel workers would not have had to stand marking time. They would have put pressure on this government to enforce the demands of labor, or they would have removed that government.
It is necessary to emphasize also that the steel manufacturers won a victory. They got everything important they were contending for. They got a substantial price increase. That is really what they were after. They were not primarily concerned with the difference between their offer of 15 cents an hour and the 19½ cents recommended by the “fact-finding” committee. They wanted that $5.00 price increase. They got it. To this day nobody outside the steel corporations knows what this increase will mean in the way of profits for the steel companies. The government doesn't know and the workers don’t know. This is a secret hidden away in the intricate accounting systems of the steel companies.
 
Why the Strike?
This wasn’t the whole story of the steel corporation’s victory. Instead of retroactive pay beginning as of January 1, as Truman “suggested,” the union leadership agreed to accept steel’s offer to pay a 9½ cent increase for work performed between January 1 and the end of the strike, February 17. Furthermore, not only did the union leadership not hold to the original $2.00 a day demand, it did not even hold the line for the 19½ cents increase. It accepted 18½ cents. This was the very figure which. Truman had recommended BEFORE THE STRIKE BEGAN.
The steel workers might well ask: "Why did we go on strike?” The only answer that can possibly make any sense is to say that the steel workers were on strike, to get 3½ cents more than the corporations had offered before the strike began. This was Truman’s recommendation. This can only mean that 700,000 steel workers were on strike to force their employers to accept, not their own demands, but the wage rise recommended by the capitalist government of their capitalist employers.
Why did the steel strike turn out as it did? Why didn’t the steel workers win their demands? There can be but one answer. Murray and the other leaders of these workers retreated. They retreated without a fight. They retreated at a time when millions of CIO workers in steel and other mass production industries were on strike or ready to go to the picket lines. Murray ordered his men to fire over the heads of the employers. When the employers did not frighten and run, Murray ordered his own men to run.
Murray and all the rest of the CIO leadership ABDICATED their leadership of labor. Murray turned over the leadership of labor to Truman; to the political representative of the employers, to the political leader of the capitalist class, to the government of the capitalist exploiters and oppressors.
We say again: Labor needs a GENERAL STAFF, a Political General Staff. Labor needs a government, a government of its own at Washington: A Workers Government.
 




The Stalinists (Communist Party) have done it again. They have evidently discovered that the UAW workers on strike against General Motors were “German agents” and “Japanese spies” during the war. Evidently these workers striking against GM are “union wreckers.” Or perhaps the strike of these workers is a well-organized plot to murder Stalin? At the very least, all of these striking GM workers must be “Trotskyists.”
These observations are prompted by the fact that the Stalinists have settled the strike of the United Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers against General Motors behind the backs of the UAW without letting the UAW know what was going on and for less than the UAW strikers are demanding. The Stalinist leadership of the UE settled with GM for 18½ cents an hour increase while the UAW workers are demanding 19½ cents increase.
It was all done in secret. James Matles, the Stalinist director of organization for the UERMW, crept into Detroit secretly and held secret meetings with General Motors in the same building in which the UAW was conducting negotiations with GM. The result of these secret meetings between Matles and GM was an agreement to take 6½ cents an hour less than the UERMW had originally demanded, and one cent less than the UAW was demanding from the same corporation.
Thus the “Communist” Party leadership of the UERMW not only betrays its own membership, but at the same time stabs the UAW workers in the back and acts as scabs and strikebreakers. This from the party which only a few months back “turned left,” went back to “Marxist- Leninism,” according to its “new” program. This is the outfit which beat its breast all over the country last year and wailed and moaned that Browder had led the organization into the wilderness of “revisionism.” Foster was resurrected from the ashcan to which he had been consigned by Stalin and Browder and put at the head of the resurrected “Marxist-Leninist” organization which henceforth was to lead the workers in “militant struggle.”
Now they have demonstrated what their militant struggle is to be: strike-breaking, scabbing and wage-cutting.
The Stalinist leaders of the electrical workers never wanted a strike.
They were ready to settle with the employers without any struggle whatsoever if the employers would consent to any small wage increase. They announced in the beginning that they would settle for whatever wage increase the steel workers would win. That is, these bureaucrats were willing to let the steel workers do the fighting for the UERMW.
This has been their policy all along. It was their policy during the war. They had such a reactionary position that the question of opposing the nostrike pledge could not even be raised in that international with any degree of realism.
Of course, this most recent sell-out of the Stalinists will not be put to the membership of the UERMW for a vote. This leadership does not function in that manner. Fitzgerald, the president of the UERMW, who is only a dummy president, says that the GM settlement should pave the way for the settlement of the strike of his union against General Electric and Westinghouse. We agree. Betrayal of labor by labor leaders as a rule paves the way for the settlement of strikes. The Stalinists are experts at that kind of a settlement.
Why can’t the UERMW workers reject this agreement made secretly between Matles and GM? Some worker or workers in every UE local should introduce a resolution condemning this action, rejecting the “settlement” and expressing their solidarity with the UAW General Motors strikers. This is the least that they can do to demonstrate that they do not support the scabbing tactics and principles of their Stalinist leadership.
 




While the CIO bureaucracy, led by Philip Murray, organises mass retreats for the million CIO workers now on strike, the capitalist ruling class employers continue and intensify their drive against the working class and organized labor.
“Steel Parleys Go on in Secret in Washington,” the capitalist press reports. What are these “secret” steel discussions? They are conversations between Fairless of U.S. Steel and the federal government over granting an increase in the price of steel of from $4.00 to $6.25 a ton before the steel companies accept the “demand” of Truman that the steel workers be given an increase of 18½ cents an hour.
The steel manufacturers and their government negotiate behind closed doors and in secret while the steel workers wait and while, according to the press, “Mr. Murray himself ... was silent.”
Murray is silent. The 700,000 steel workers wait. But the steel companies do not wait. They fight for the increase in the price of steel so that they can be assured that even the slightest increase in wages will not disturb the profits, the dividends and the interest payments to bondholders.
The capitalist employers are not only conspiring with the executive branch of their government in Washington, but also with the legislative branch against labor. They have caused dozens of anti-labor bills to be introduced into THEIR House of Representatives and into THEIR Senate. Every one of these dozens of anti-labor bills is aimed at placing the trade unions in shackles. Truman is the sponsor of one of these bills, which calls for the establishment of “fact-finding” committees to have authority similar to the authority of the old WLB.
 
It’s an Old Pattern
The capitalist employers, with the assistance of THEIR CONGRESSMEN and their President at Washington have constructed what is called a new pattern for the “control” of strikes. But this “new” pattern is cut from the same cloth and with the same aims as the old pattern used during the war. The new procedure is the Truman “fact-finding” committees, which are in fact wage-fixing committees.
It was this so-called fact-finding procedure which determined the Chrysler and Ford “settlements.” These settlements had no relationship whatsoever to the original demands made by the unions. The settlements were not negotiated in any genuine collective bargaining between the unions and the capitalist employers. The agreements were the result of shadow-boxing between the union and the employers after Truman’s “fact-finding” committees, had recommended that wage increases amount to around 1914 cents an hour. The only struggle which took place between labor and the employers was one to inveigle the capitalist employers into accepting a recommendation made by THEIR capitalist government.
The capitalist press hailed the Ford and Chrysler “settlements” as setting the pattern for future settlements. This is nothing more than nonsense or mere journalistic trickery. The pattern was set by Truman’s “fact-finding” committees. Ford and Chrysler only decided to accept this proposal made by their government. The UAW had already accepted this scheme for settlement of the GM strike. Murray had accepted for the steel workers. The packinghouse workers had already been sent back to work by their leaders, with the naive statement that “our strike is not off.”
 
“Company Security”
Not only is the capitalist ruling class continuing its offensive through pressure on the White House and its Congress but it presses its demands on the unions for “company security.” A security clause is written into the Chrysler agreement. It reads as follows: “The union agrees that it will not oppose the discharge or discipline of anyone who instructs, leads or induces another employee to take part in any unauthorized strike.” While this “security” clause is not so drastic as that agreed to by Richard Leonard for the Ford workers, it is just as much a betrayal of the interests of the workers. This clause should be rejected by the Chrysler workers. They should insist on the opportunity to vote for or against this clause. If a company wants to fire one of its employees for whatever cause, that is the company’s affair. It is the business of the union, however, to handle the case under the grievance procedure and see that justice is done both the employee and the company.
The union is, or should be, the representative of the worker ONLY and the protector of HIS interests. To do justice to the union member, therefore, is not the same thing as to do justice to the company. Over a million workers are rendering justice, but only partial justice, to the capitalist employers and the capitalist ruling class today through the strikes which are taking place. It is not the business of the labor movement and the working class to grant security to the capitalist ruling class. Let the capitalists protect themselves – if they can.
President Truman comes over to the side of his capitalist masters openly with the statement that capital and labor are both striving for power. He added something about the public interest and that labor and capital would have to get. together in the interest of the public welfare. This statement must have evoked a few chuckles in the ranks of the NAM and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.
 
Which Way to Power?
These capitalists know that they already have the power. Truman knows this also. They have power because they are the owners of the land, the mines, mills, factories and banks. They have economic power, social power and political power. They only have to strive to retain this power. That is what they are concerned with today. That is what Truman is also concerned with: to see to it that the capitalist ruling class retains its economic, social and political power. That is what Congress is concerned with. That is the reason for Truman’s “fact-finding” committees. That is the reason for the dozens of anti-labor bills in Congress. That is the reason for court injunctions against strikers. That is the reason why the police charge into workers’ picket lines all over the country.
The working class is not striving for power. Not yet, Mr. Truman. We of the working class are only beginning to understand that we ought to be striving for economic, social and political power. But for that the working class needs and must have a POLITICAL GENERAL STAFF. Right now a Labor Party: a mass party based on the trade unions, independent, militant and with a program based on the struggle of the working class against the capitalist ruling class.
 




The entrance of the United Mine Workers of America into the AFL has resulted in a great deal of speculation and prediction as to the significance for the trade union movement as a whole of this shift in the labor scene.
This is true of the labor movement and also of the “friends of labor.”
There are those who predict that the return of the UMWA to the AFL is the signal for a raiding expedition on the CIO. If not this, then the AFL, under the influence of Lewis, will experience a resurgence of “Gompers- ism,” particularly on the question of the relations between the government and unions on the one hand, and the unions and the employers on the other.
A third position is that the entry of the Mine Workers into the AFL will be a blow at industrial unionism. A fourth contention states that the return will be a setback to the political development of the working class and a blow against the formation of an independent Labor Party.
 
History of the Split
To be in a position to deal with the questions raised in connection with the entrance of the UMWA into the AFL it is necessary to go over some of the history of AFL-CIO-UMWA relations during the past few years. First, it is important to recall how the miners got out of the CIO because it was the events leading up to leaving the CIO, which the UMWA had done more to found than any other single organization, that created difficulties both for the UMWA and the CIO.
In a reactionary outburst in 1940, Lewis announced his support of Willkie and promised that if Roosevelt was re-elected he (Lewis) would not remain as president of the CIO. Roosevelt was re-elected and at the 1941 convention of the CIO, Lewis announced that he was not a candidate for re-election. The Stalinists, who feared Murray because they were of the opinion that he would institute a CP purge if he succeeded Lewis, put on a 45-minute demonstration for Lewis, demanding that he stand for re-election. Lewis kept his “promise,” however, and Murray was made president. This was the beginning of the rift between the UMWA and the CIO.
The breach was widened later when, at the instance of Lewis, Murray was removed as vice-president of the UMWA. The situation was not helped by the Stalinists when, with their usual opportunistic approach, they climbed on the Murray bandwagon and began the organization of an anti-Lewis campaign in the CIO and the whole labor movement.
While all of this was happening, the rank and file membership of the UMWA was being fed an anti-CIO diet. The top leadership of the CIO did not deport itself in such a way as to clarify the issues for the miners and lead them to understand that the CIO was not anti-UMWA. Anyone who attended the convention of the UMWA in 1942 and 1944 could very easily detect this tragic situation, which was deliberately fostered by Lewis and which the CIO leadership aided and abetted by its stupid attitudes during the numerous strikes engaged in by the miners.
The fact that the top leadership of the UMWA and the CIO was indulging in the most impermissible forms of bureaucratic internal prestige politics was in itself enough to disorient both the miners and the workers in the CIO, especially during the mine strikes. To this, however, was added the machinations of the Stalinist betrayers, who by this time had gone over to full support of Roosevelt and the war. They crawled into bed with Murray.
The fact that Murray and the Stalinists were both ardently supporting the war gave the Stalinists greater prestige and influence in the CIO. This and the opportunist attacks on Lewis by the Stalinists, combined with the Stalinist attacks on the miners’ strikes, infuriated the rank and file of the UMWA and served to turn them against the CIO. Neither the leadership of the CIO nor of the UMWA turned a finger to correct this situation or to effect a reconciliation between the two organizations.
The workers of the UMWA and of the CIO were made mere pawns in a game being played by their leaders. The Stalinists were always present and active, keeping the witches’ brew boiling and bubbling and creating trouble such as only the Stalinists know how. The whole struggle between these bureaucrats at the head of the UMWA and the CIO expressed itself in the support of Roosevelt by Murray and Co. and opposition to Roosevelt by Lewis and Co. Murray and the Stalinists supported Roosevelt, and Lewis supported Willkie and Dewey against Roosevelt. Not one of them made any proposals for independent political action by their organizations, or by the working class as a whole.
Such fratricidal strife could only lead to a split in the CIO and the establishment of the UMWA as an independent unit in the labor movement. This was the end of the road for the miners after the events of 1941 when Lewis refused to remain as president of the CIO.
 
AFL or CIO?
It is pertinent, in light of the above, to ask the question: What business did Lewis have leading the UMWA out of the CIO? There was no valid reason. His reason was an extremely petty one. It was based on the outcome of an election which in no sense should have been a determining factor in deciding the course of a leader of a working class organization. His action was reactionary for the reason that his basing of his course on the outcome of a contest between two ruling class politicians subordinated the interests of labor to the interests of the capitalist ruling class.
The fact that Murray performed in the same manner cannot be advanced in mitigation of the course pursued by Lewis. He was the outstanding leader of labor in the U.S.
In the circumstances, and, with the background detailed above, it would have been, and still is, unrealistic to take the position that the UMWA should have entered the CIO and not the AFL. We do not say that it was impossible but extremely unlikely that such a consummation could have been achieved. Also one must be careful not to establish a difference in principle between entering the AFL and becoming part of the CIO. There is no difference of a principled sort between the two organizations.
The leadership of both organizations are class collaborationists. In a fundamental sense, the programs of both organizations limit the struggles of the working class to the framework of capitalist society and capitalist democratic procedure. This is illustrated by the fact that both organizations supported the Second Imperialist World War. Both gave a no-strike pledge during the war. The leaders of both organizations oppose the formation of an independent Labor Party in favor of support to the two capitalist parties and their candidates.
There is a difference of course between the AFL craft union movement and the industrial union movement represented by the CIO. This difference is important and determines the preference of real militants, progressives and revolutionaries in the labor movement. The AFL, in so far as it advocates craft unionism, represents the interests of the “aristocrats of labor” and not the decisive mass of workers in the mass production industries. Any strengthening of craft unionism is therefore reactionary. The CIO is the organization of the real toilers; the millions of laborers in the mines, fields and factories. To organize these millions of workers in the decisive sections of modern industry into industrial unions is progressive, over against craft union division and organization.
For these reasons it can be said that it would be better for the UMW to become a part of the CIO. It does not follow from this, however, that the entry of the miners into the AFL is a blow at industrial unionism. The UMWA is an industrial union and will remain so. Its influence in the AFL will not be such as to strengthen craft unionism. Furthermore, the spirit of the times, the temper of the working class and the structure of modern industry are not conducive to the increase of craft unionism. The presence of the miners in the AFL might well become a source of increased tendency away from craft unionism.
 
On Government’s Role
Lewis is not an heir to the philosophy and teachings of Gompers in any basic sense. Lewis does not believe that the “time has come for capital and labor to sit together around the council table and arrive at decisions to the mutual interests of both groups.” At least he does not adhere to this position in the way meant by Gompers. Lewis believes that labor should sit with capital around the table, but he knows that the interests of the two are not mutual. He does not practice such an attitude in his negotiations with the coal operators. True, as we said above, Lewis practices class collaboration, but his collaboration is not identical with that of Gompers and Bill Green.
Lewis has been correctly criticized for taking the same position as the AFL leadership in the dispute with the CIO leadership over the question of the role of the government today in the affairs of the working class and its organizations. Lewis takes a very conservative position. This is based largely on his inability to understand the political needs of the working class, and a naive belief that if the government keeps out he can beat the employers back. He does not understand that the role of the government in a capitalist society, whether headed, by a Roosevelt or a Willkie-Dewey, is to stop a labor organization from bringing the employers to their knees.
Murray and his followers of the CIO do not understand this question any more fundamentally than does Lewis. They have a glimmering notion about the inevitability of government intervention. They understand vaguely the need for government aid and assistance to the masses of the people in a period when capitalism faces disruption and is not in position to provide plenty for all.
But Murray, too, in his approach to this question, is just as reactionary as Lewis. His program is also inadequate and does not fill the political needs of the working class. He has the naive belief that the capitalist government will function in the interest of the working class if it is headed by a Roosevelt. Neither Murray nor Bill Green nor Lewis understands or supports the idea that labor must resort to political action and establish its own government.
 
A Setback for Labor?
Will the entry of the UMWA into the AFL result in a setback, to the political development of the working class? To say this is to attribute to Lewis ideas and a position on this question which he does not hold, or to say that the political development of labor is in some significant sense dependent on Lewis to the exclusion of other more potent factors. The working class today in the U.S. is in motion politically. The movement is slow and not very articulate. But it is there, and not even Lewis can stand immune from any ferment in the ranks of labor, whether in the economic field or the political field.
Lewis organized the CIO but he did not create it. He organized an industrial union movement which was erupting in the ranks of the mass production workers because the mass production workers had long felt-the need for such a type of organization. They were ready for the program which Lewis formulated and presented to them.
It is true that there could have been no CIO merely because there was a need for an industrial union. There had to be some organization in existence ready to project itself on the objective scene with a program, money and a staff of organizers. This was what Lewis did; but the importance of this must be properly estimated. Lewis seized on a situation created by the development of modern capitalist industry, and exploited that situation.
It is not excluded that Lewis and other labor leaders like him might be propelled toward the advocacy of independent political action by the working class, just as he was pushed toward industrial unionism. Lewis or Murray may not forever be able to say “NO” to the demands of labor for independent political action. What Lewis or Murray may do in the future cannot now be answered by them, or by us.
Any attempt on the part of Lewis or the AFL to raid the CIO in, the interests of craft unionism; should be roundly condemned a reactionary in the extreme. Perhaps Lewis has such a step in mind; we do not know. Even if such a reactionary course should be attempted we do not believe that it will succeed. The working class of today is not the working class of 1900 or even of the first Roosevelt Administration. It is a far more advanced working class than of those periods. There will be no advance by craft unionism in the days to come.
We believe that the above considerations are the relevant ones in connection with the entry of the UMWA into the AFL. The new shift may or may not prove beneficial to the labor movement. That remains to be seen. The AFL is not the AFL of Gompers, nor is the CIO the organization which it ought to be as an industrial union set-up. The working class is not the working class of Gompers’ day, nor of ten years back. Should Lewis practice the militancy of the miners’ strikes of ’42 he will not only serve to improve the situation in the AFL, but such an AFL will certainly not be an obstacle to the development of the CIO and industrial unionism. And such an AFL will not be a hindrance to the development of independent political action by labor.
 




During the recent meeting of the International Executive Board of the UAW-CIO two statements were issued: a Policy Statement by the Addes-Thomas-Stalinist bloc and a statement by President Reuther containing his policies for the UAW-CIO. The first statement was presented to the IEB by the Addes-Thomas-Stalinist forces as their program for the UAW. This statement of policy and program was voted on by the board and adopted against the votes of the Reuther supporters. In the first test, therefore, the Addes-Thomas-Stalinist bloc demonstrated that it has a voting control of the IEB.
The Reuther statement was announced near the end of the IEB sessions. It was issued as a statement of policy by Reuther as president of the UAW and was evidently not placed before the IEB for a vote.
 
Forced by GM Program
The outstanding feature in the Addes-Thomas-Stalinist statement of policy adopted by the IEB is the clear attempt of this group to restore its prestige and satisfy the demand of the rank and file for a more militant policy than that followed by this bloc in the past. Their Policy Statement is, furthermore, an attempt to make up for the disgraceful conduct of this group at the recent UAW convention.
Above all, the new program of the Addes-Thomas-Stalinist bloc is their way of admitting the power and the appeal of the GM program, which really was the basis for the victory of Reuther at the Atlantic City convention. The Stalinists and their captive, Addes, understand these things. Thomas does not, of course, but he is useful to Addes and the Stalinists as a front and as window-dressing. In the concrete situation the Stalinists and Addes knew that they could not confront the membership of the UAW with the conservatism and the reactionary attitudes which they assumed at the convention.
They know also that they could not come forward at the IEB meeting with that time-worn piece of programmatic bunkum: “support the program of Philip Murray.” When they advanced this slogan at the Atlantic City convention they were merely trying, very demagogically, to find a way of knifing the GM program without making a frontal attack.
 
Some Shenanigans
The Addes-Thomas-Stalinist program begins with the statement that “our big wage victories had to be fought for and won.” They did not result from a “partnership of industry and labor.” The program repudiates “all plans attempting to link wage increases to increased manual productivity.” This is an attempt to distort the GM program which tied the demand for wage increases to profits and prices. The only people in the labor movement, so far as we know, who have attempted to “link wage increases to increased manual productivity” were the Stalinists, with their piece-work incentive pay schemes during the war.
This program affirms “our historic position that capital is entitled to a fair return on its investment but that the worker must not be penalized” because of “shortcomings of management.” It would be difficult to crowd more nonsense into a single sentence. It reads like a pronouncement coming from the board of Matthew Woll’s AFL photo-engravers.
“We affirm our policy established at the 1943 Buffalo convention that piecework systems of compensation shall not be instituted or extended.” The Stalinists who helped Addes with this program were some of the same boys who fought tooth and nail to establish “incentive pay” at the Buffalo convention. The program calls for the 30-hour week with 40 hours’ pay and 30 days’ vacation after ten years’ service.
Addes, Thomas and Leonard are for “union security” and not “company security” as they were in the case of the Ford Motor Co. These three have advanced a long way on paper since they counted the vote for president at the UAW convention.
 
Third Party Nonsense
They want a “broad third party”; they promise to expose “the Republican and Democratic reactionaries”; they will tell Truman that he and his administration “are yielding and capitulating on issue after issue to the forces of reaction.” Here the Addes-Thomas-Stalinist group attempts to pass ahead of Reuther, who was not so specific in his political platform in connection with the two capitalist parties.
At bottom there is nothing to choose between the two groups. Reuther is for electing those running on both tickets who are friendly to labor, while the Addes-Thomas-Leonard group agrees to “expose” reactionary Republicans and Democrats. Both want a “broad third party.” It must not be organized too soon, however, and its base must not be too narrow. The working class is far too narrow a base for both sides.
This program calls for “collective security by the peace-loving nations.” This sentence reads as though it came straight from one of Browder’s ancient speeches. They urge the “Big Three – Britain, Soviet Russia and the U.S.A. (the ‘peace-loving nations’) to iron out their differences.”
They are for price control but in holding prices down the union must concern itself with whether the corporations are protected in maintaining their high-profit levels. “The corporations are ... capable of protecting their own profit levels.” When did Thomas and Addes learn this? Above all, when did Leonard learn it? They all have certainly made rapid strides in their education since the first proposals on “company security” which they approved for the Ford Motor Co. Did they perhaps learn something besides mud-slinging at the Atlantic City convention?
They are for price control but they won’t touch the “Open the Books” formula nor will they consent to have wage demands tied in with prices and profits. To them this is a scheme “to cut workers’ wages if living costs decrease by a certain percentage.” Thomas-Addes are stuck here just as Reuther was stuck. Neither Reuther nor the others can have an answer. The only answer is that given by the Workers Party in Labor Action:
Nationalize the Big Industries Under Workers’ Control!
Reuther said in a press interview that if a corporation could not pay decent wages it should not be in business. We don’t hear anything about this nowadays, however.
As we said above, this program is an attempt to drown the GM program and at the same time escape the wrath of the rank and file who supported that program and who want more of it. This program is put forward by a group who want power and offices. They could not hold power nor could they retain their offices beyond the next convention if they carried through with what they stood for at Atlantic City.
 
Reuther’s Reply
How did Reuther meet the Addes- Thomas-Leonard-Stalinist attack? What did he say about their program? He issued a statement on “Policy.” We are handicapped in discussing the Reuther statement because we do not have the whole statement. For some strange reason the New York papers carried only an “abstract” of the statement. We do not know what they left out.
The statement as we have it is very tame indeed. Reuther accepts virtually all of the proposals of the Addes-Thomas program. There is nothing in his statement to differentiate him from his opponents except he wants to “be vigilant to protect the union against those whose loyalties to groups outside the union and to foreign powers cause them to take positions and from time to time shift such positions on union issues, without regard for the welfare of either the union, its members or our country.”
It is clear, of course, that Reuther is talking about the Communist Party. But how is Reuther going to protect the UAW against the Stalinists? The best way is to stand up and fight for the GM program: for integrating wage demands with demands about profits and prices. What does it mean to talk about protecting the union from the Stalinists so long as he tries io harmonize the GM program with the sly programmatic vaporings of Thomas, Leonard and Addes, who are now in tow of the Stalinists?
Reuther, so far as we read, has abandoned his GM program. Not only this, but he is now piously calling for “unity” and “harmony.” He expects harmony with those who are hellbent on countermanding the mandate of the convention.
How does Reuther expect to protect the union from the Stalinists when his political platform is essentially no different from theirs? He wants to mobilize the union “in an aggressive program of political action to elect candidates who are pledged to fight for the domestic and international policies championed by the late President Roosevelt.” Here is another ancient shibboleth. Add to this “Support President Murray” and you have anything but a real fighting and militant program for labor in 1946.
 
Save GM Program!
The backsliding of Reuther away from the GM program is a real challenge to the militants in the UAW. They and they alone can save the GM program with all its revolutionary implications. But they will have to rise from their slumber and their indifference. They will have to go far beyond the point they reached at the Atlantic City convention. They will have to move ahead politically; far, far beyond the “broad third party” stage. They will have to come to grips with the important truth for labor: that the working class is a broad enough base, and a correctly narrow base, for labor’s independent political action. All others must fall in behind and be led by labor, which has demonstrated that it speaks for the WHOLE of the people, in a nation-wide Labor Party based on the trade unions.
 




The United Steelworkers of America held their biennial convention in Atlantic City last week. The first comment which has to be made is that this convention was a very dull affair. The convention was not only dull and flat when looked at in comparison with a UAW or UMW convention but also from the standpoint of the steel workers themselves and the way their own problems were presented and handled by the leadership of the International.
The steel workers’ convention had more the appearance of a large mass meeting than of a convention. There were 2,600 delegates seated as in a mass meeting. There were no tables, and should a delegate desire to make a few notes for a speech or take down anything which was being said, he would have to use his knee after he had dug for a piece of scrap paper in his pocket. There were no tables and writing material supplied the delegates as in a convention of the automobile workers. There were no banners, signs or placards. One delegation or local could not be distinguished from another. All one could see was over two thousand men and women seated in an auditorium as an audience listening to speeches being made from the platform where the leadership of the international and its top functionaries sat. Of course, the audience participated in the meeting by speaking from the floor and asking questions. On the whole, however, it was a case of the leadership calling a conference to report to the membership.
A most astounding thing occurred on the first day of the convention.
Philip Murray made what has been called his warning to “outsiders.” He said that “we are run solely by our membership.” To be sure, this isn’t true, but we will let that pass for the moment. He then went on to say that:
”... this union will not tolerate efforts by outsiders – individuals, organizations or groups – whether they be Communist, Socialist or any other group, to infiltrate, dictate or meddle in our affairs. I do not direct that remark to any one person or group ... At the same time, however, we will not permit any limitation on the free and democratic right of full discussion of trade union problems in our ranks ... We have no ulterior or subversive aims and we will not tolerate any attempts to divert our activities into such channels ... As a democratic institution we engage in no purges, no witch hunts.”
What was astounding is the fact that there was no discussion from the delegates. Nobody wanted to know what Murray considered “meddling” or what was his conception of an “outsider.” Furthermore, it might have been pertinent for some delegate to rise and ask Murray to explain and clarify his conception of the “full discussion of trade union problems in our ranks.” Also, what are “trade union problems” to which discussion must be confined? What does Murray mean by subversive aims? Does he mean the same thing as Fairless, Ford or Truman? We would also like to know just what is Secretary-Treasurer David McDonald’s conception of trade union or any other kind of democracy. But more about McDonald later.
No delegate seemed interested in any of the questions raised above.
If they were, they did not let it be known. It was clear that Murray’s speech was directed at the Stalinists and the Communist Party. It is reported that the source of the speech was some agitation which occurred in the Board meeting just before the opening of the convention. There were some Board members who wanted a clause in the constitution barring “communists” from membership. Murray’s formulation in his speech was a compromise position. This ambiguous speech was adopted as the official policy of the union without discussion.
 
Who Are “Outsiders”?
We don’t know how Murray intends to carry out and apply this “policy.” The Workers Party and Labor Action will certainly not “meddle” in the affairs of the steel union or in the affairs of any other union. But we are certain that we do not agree with Murrays’ notion of what meddling is. Furthermore, neither the Workers Party nor Labor Action considers itself an outsider.
Murray and McDonald, while not outsiders, function as outsiders occasionally, in a very important sense. They bring notions, ideas and programs into the labor movement from the outside; that is from the capitalist ruling class. They and other labor leaders bring in capitalist ruling class politics. They brought the Second World Imperialist War into the labor movement and insisted that the workers support that imperialist slaughter. They organized the PAC for the support of the Democratic Party, a capitalist party. They have consistently opposed a party of, for and by labor. They are organizing now in the PAC for the support, not of labor candidates, but of Republican and Democratic Party candidates in the fall congressional elections.
To Murray, it is meddling by “outsiders” when the Workers Party and Labor Action speak out against these practices and try to win the workers in steel and elsewhere to the support of a working class program and an independent labor party. To oppose the late imperialist slaughter and tell the workers that they should do likewise, is to Murray, meddling by “outsiders” with “subversive aims.”
The Workers Party is a revolutionary socialist party. That means that it is a working-class party. It is a part of the labor movement, a politically advanced part of the labor movement. Labor Action is a working-class paper and is read by thousands of workers, who buy it and subscribe to it: steel workers, coal diggers and other workers.
The Workers Party attempts to recruit steel workers, just as it attempts to recruit other workers. We don’t know of any speech by Murray which can stop this. We see no reason why any steel worker should refrain from reading Labor Action or joining the Workers Party because of Murray’s talk about “meddling” and “outsiders.”
The Workers Party has not and will not interfere in the organizational affairs of any union nor in any way seek to dictate to any union. We believe in the independence of the trade unions. But independence for a labor organization should mean first of all independence from the capitalist ruling class and independence from Republican and Democratic Party capitalist politics. It should mean independence from Roosevelt, Truman and the capitalist government at Washington.
Let Murray see to it that the program of the capitalist employer and the programs of the capitalist government at Washington do not “infiltrate” the labor movement. That is a cornerstone of the Workers Party program for the unions, and that in fact is what Murray means when he talks, about “meddling” and being subversive..
 
On Housing Negroes
Another event at the convention deserves comment. At the 1944 convention in Cleveland, Secretary-Treasurer McDonald, who is really the overseer of the USW, sent out a notice on housing of delegates in which it was recorded that Negro delegates would be accommodated at Negro hotels. This was a decision on the part of McDonald that no effort would be mads to house the Negro delegates with their delegations. The Negro delegations raised this question on the floor of the convention and McDonald replied that he had adopted this procedure because he felt that the Negro delegates would rather stay with their own people. Here was a clear case of discriminatory practice by a high official of a CIO union.
At the recent convention in Atlantic City McDonald proceeded to accomplish the same ends by a different route. He merely sent out a circular prepared by the Hotel Bureau of Atlantic City. But this circular notified the delegates that such and such hotels were for “colored only.” It was understood, of course, that the Negro delegates would stay at “colored” hotels and the white delegates at “white” hotels. This was not the procedure at the UAW convention and never is, but this is the way that McDonald does it, even after he has received warning.
The Negro delegates brought this discriminatory practice to the attention of Murray and to the floor of the convention, where it belonged. McDonald replied in a very weak attempt to prove that what had happened was a mere routine practice carried on by the Hotel Bureau in Atlantic City. He, however, was in agreement that all hotels should get some of the business which the convention brought to a city. To the Negro delegates this was a very tame excuse. And they were correct.
When the question of electing a third, vice-president who was to be a Negro came up, Murray spoke on the whole question of the Negro membership and said that he had discussed these matters with Negro delegates. He said that he planned to hold a conference around this question and that definite plans would be started for bringing the affairs of the international in connection with the Negro members in line with its declarations.
Right here we would like to indulge in a little meddling. The Negro members of the steel workers and the white members who want to see real equality and democracy in the union should not depend on Murray to correct this situation. They should begin in their locals and make a fight against every and any discriminatory practice.
If a Negro wants to be bn the International Executive Board, let him run for District Director. If a Negro member wants to be president or to hold any other office in the steel union, let him announce his candidacy and run for that office.
 
Oppose Constitution Change
Among the resolutions passed by the convention were those calling for the guaranteed annual wage, protection of democracy, against peacetime military conscription, against the poll tax, and a resolution on foreign policy calling for support of the United Nations “so that it may grow strong in the battle for peace.”
The only real flurry which took place in the convention occurred during the report of the constitution committee when that committee read its motion for changing the basis of representation to the convention. The revised section provided that instead of there being one delegate for each 100 members there should be one delegate for each 500 members. This brought the delegates to their feet. No one was to be allowed to tamper with this. The motion, if adopted, would mean that in 1948 there would be about 1,800 delegates instead of around 2,800. The motion was soundly defeated.
If the steel workers were as alive to the really important issues which come before the convention as they are on the matter of just getting there, they would have a far better union, more democracy and a better fighting organization to win their economic and political demands.
 




The capitalist and also the labor press are saying that the Democratic Party suffered a defeat on November 5. It was a “landslide,” it is said, for the Republican Party. “The New Deal is dead.” “Free enterprise may now really be free.” “No more ‘regimentation.’”
“Had Enough?” asked the New York Daily News the day before the election. “Don’t lay that pistol down” the same paper continued. Hearst’s Mirror said that the victory of the Republicans is “like feeling clean again after a long time in the muck.”
What did the labor leadership have to say? Jack Kroll, head of the CIO-PAC, stormed through the capitalist press the morning after with the earth-shaking battle cry: “We have only begun to fight.” The “Continuations Committee of the Conference of Progressives,” announced that “the progressive forces of America remain strong. We have our great and growing trade union and farmer organizations ... the fight will go on.”
This conference was presided over by Henry Morgenthau, Jr., former Secretary of the Treasury, the man who made the proposal that Germany be stripped of all her industrial equipment and be turned into an agricultural nation controlled by the United Nations. And how will the fight go on, according to Mongenthau? Through an independent political party of “our great and growing trade union and farmer organizations?” Perish the thought. Mr. Morgenthau was clear about this. He emphasized that this group would stay inside,the existing parties and that a third party was not even discussed. Present and helping Morgenthau make this fighting decision were Addes of the UAW, Emspak of the UERMWA, Pollack of the TWU, and Kroll, fresh from his “we have just begun to fight” interview with the capitalist press. Aside from Morgenthau, other outstanding trade unionists and farmers present and taking a leading part, were Senator Pepper, Chester Bowles and Harold Ickes.
 
It Is Reassuring ...
The Republican Herald Tribune welcomed the festive and militant; spirit in the ranks of the “progressives.” This soundly Republican organ is run by men of “good will,” who know the value of a “loyal opposition.” In an editorial it said:
“It is reassuring that the Conference of Progressives has decided to continue its political activity despite the discouraging response to its efforts in the recent campaign ... Serving as watchdog, critic and vehicle of protest, the organized progressives can exert a salutary influence on the two major parties ... Without putting forward candidates of their own, they can nevertheless influence the selection of candidates and the modification of policies to an extent ...”
If Murray, Kroll, Addes and Reuther, for example, had blood in their veins and not water, this Herald Tribune piece would be to them like salt rubbed into an open wound. For what is this capitalist Republican paper saying? It is saying that the only role which labor can or should play in politics is to push the two capitalist parties around a little; influence them and insist on a modification of their policies.
The Herald Tribune is pleased that Morgenthau, Ickes and Wallace are in this “progressive” movement. The owners of this capitalist paper know what these men are. It is only the labor leaders who don’t know. The owners of the Herald Tribune know that Wallace, Ickes, Pepper, Bowles and Morgenthau are supporters of capitalism. They are all Republicans and Democrats. It knows that nothing untoward ban possibly happen to capitalism so long as this group is giving political leadership to “our great and growing trade union and farmer organizations.” These men are all Republicans and Democrats but they are also has-beens. Today they are discarded and are a bunch of professional politicians in search of a party. They seek a come-back in the manner of demagogues who have been rejected: they go to the “people.” And when the masses rally around the cymbals and big bass drums of the “progressives,” these gentlemen are then in position for the ever recurring betrayal. The masses are corralled bag and baggage for the Republican and Democratic parties.
 
Was Labor Defeated?
What is labor thinking today of all this? What do the workers feel about the recent elections? What is in their minds as they think over Kroll’s bombastic prediction: “we progressives are going to win on November 5. The philosophy Franklin D. Roosevelt gave us is a living philosophy today. There are millions of people ready to take up his challenge.”
The fact is that labor suffered a defeat on November 5. Was it a defeat merely because the capitalist Republican Party won and the capitalist Democratic Party was defeated? Not at all. It was a defeat because labor had no political instrument at its disposal to take care of its interests. There was no independent working class party. Labor was left to choose between the Republican and the Democratic parties. It was left stranded with the choice we have had for 86 years.
While all of them had felt “the hurt on their own bodies” they had no place to go save to Dewey or Truman. Stupid labor leaders and dried out liberals attempted to make it appear that this was a contest between Hoover and Roosevelt. But everybody knows at least that Roosevelt is dead and that Hoover is doddering along after him. And even if Roosevelt had been alive, what difference would that have made? Who killed the “New Deal” which Murray, Wallace and Kroll yearn for so plaintively and fatuously?
November 5 was a defeat for labor and the little people because the working class\had no program of its own for the elections and no program for the masses of the people. Millions of workers and others could see no reason to vote for a dead Roosevelt and forget the living Truman sitting in he White House. These workers were not impressed by the pro-Democratic Party propaganda of the CIO and its PAC. They had been through four years of war under the Democratic Party and hundreds of meatless days after the war under a government headed by this same party. They had seen this same party’s Congress pass anti-labor legislation and yield to the pressure not of the little people but of the monopoly capitalists.
The workers and the common people certainly were not impressed by the propaganda of the Stalinists that the Republicans were the fascist or near fascist forces in the country. It was just too much to expect the masses of the people to accept the charge of the Stalinists that Lehman, Guffey, Mead, Kelly, Hague and other Democrats were progressive Americans, while Dewey, Vandenberg, Lodge and other Republicans were incipient fascists. It would of course be foolish to believe that the workers who vote Republican did so primarily in response to the charge of the Republican demagogues, that the Democratic Party was “communist.”
Without any program of its own, without any organization of its own, without a goal of its own, labor did precisely what it has been doing for decades: a large section of it voted for the party which had not been in office for 14 years.
This has happened again and again, particularly in connection with control of the House of Representatives. The pendulum has swung from Republicans to Democrats and back again. In this election just passed the decision of workers and other toilers to vote Republican is not a conscious swing to the right. It was a swing from the Democrats to the Republicans; from one of the two capitalist parties to the other. Since they were dissatisfied with the Democrats, what would they be expected to do?
With the middle class things were different. They did swing to the right, and consciously. These groups had been harangued about strikes, “communists” and low farm prices and the high cost of or the absence of farm equipment because of the slow-down of labor and the high wages paid to labor. But here too it would be wise for the labor bureaucracy to stop and think a little. The middle class was and is embattled. It too has been hit by high prices and low income. This group also had no place to go except to the Republicans or Democrats. It chose the Republicans. Had labor taken the lead with a party and a program fit for the times and for the little people, millions of the middle class would have supported that program and that party.
The trade union leadership, it appears, cannot grasp these simple and elementary facts. Here is the CIO with its PAC. Two years ago the PAC demonstrated what labor can do when it is organized. Labor has power and strength. In 1944 this power and strength were used to elect the Democratic Party. Labor had no program. Labor’s money, time and energy were consumed in support of the Democrats. This year the PAC sought to repeat or better its 1944 performance. It went down to miserable defeat and now the PAC is severely battered. Murray is playing with a new political bauble: “The Conference of Progressives.” No labor party! No independent working class polities! Stick to Roosevelt! Deliver up labor to Wallace, Ickes and Morgenthau; to the Democratic and Republican Party candidate, to the capitalist employers and their government.
Labor suffered a defeat in the recent national elections. We must not keep on in this way. We must banish the Morgenthaus, Ickeses and Wallaces to the scrap heap where they belong. If the trade union bureaucrats desire to follow them, that is their business. Labor must have a political party, a working class political program and the determination to make that party and that program dominant. And all of this before the 1948 elections come.
 




ATLANTIC CITY. Nov. 18 – The eighth constitutional convention of the CIO opened here today with the usual ceremonies and organizational details which are associated with trade union conventions. The meeting was opened by Carl Holderman, who, in the course of his introductory remarks, told the convention that he hoped that Philip Murray would be drafted for another term as president of the CIO. This, of course, was the opening gun in the “draft Murray” movement. The election takes place on Friday morning and. of course, no one has any notion that Murray will not “choose to run” or refuse to accept, as there is no candidate for him to run against.
In his opening speech Murray said that this will prove to be a unified convention. How true was this prediction was to be demonstrated a few hours later in the day. He said that the most important question to come before the convention was the matter of wages and collective bargaining. He reviewed the history of last winter’s strikes, taking them union by union to demonstrate that not only had industry refused to bargain properly with the unions but that these same industries had “refused to accept the recommendations of their government.”
He put the question: “Who was striking against the government?” and gave as his answer that it was “the heart of big business in the United States.” He pointed out that the steel companies got a price rise of 350 millions to meet a wage increase of 165 millions. He said that the biggest threat to “free enterprise” and to the country was the estimated corporate profits for’ this year of 15 billions of dollars. Industry would get this huge profit while labor was working for wages $13.04 below March of this year.
 
Harmony Reigns
The big event of the day and the matter which brought the delegates back to life after the boredom of MacDonald’s report on the Officers’ Report, was the resolution on Declaration of Policy. (See page 2 of this issue – Ed.) This was the resolution against political “interference.” Murray made the only speech on the resolution. He said that in the past few months the CIO had been denounced and slandered as being communist. This campaign of vilification had been waged, he said, in order to get votes at the polls.
Without consulting any officer or member of the union or anyone else he had decided to lay the matter before the executive board. In the board he had expressed his convictions about communism. There was no disagreement in the board with his expressed convictions. The committee of six which he had appointed (three Stalinists and three non-Stalinists) to work out a policy on this question submitted a unanimous report to the board. This statement was unanimously adopted by the board.
Murray said that he wanted to make it clear that the statement on policy was not a legislative document. Legislation on this question properly belonged to the various CIO internationals. The resolution was rather a statement of policy designed to chart a course. It was not to be used as a repressive measure. He was opposed to repression in any form. While this was true, Murray said that the resolution must be adhered to after adoption. The CIO does not care to be bothered with and will not tolerate interference, not only from the Communist Party but from other political parties. The CIO is a trade union and must attend strictly to its affairs as a trade union; as an American trade union, giving allegiance to no other country except the United States.
 
No Debate
Murray closed his speech by telling the delegates that since the EB had already passed the resolution unanimously, he hoped the delegates would respond unanimously by a rising vote. He hoped that there would be no needless debate.
It can be said most emphatically that Murray got his desire. There was no needless debate. There was no debate at all. Not one delegate took the floor. They had abundant encouragement from Murray to accept the decision of the EB without even asking one question or making one remark. When the vote was taken three delegates voted against. There was a rumor going around that later they had recanted. (The press so reported – Ed.) A remark was made that “the party [Stalinist] got on the job in a hurry.”
The way this question was handled was extremely interesting. While one can understand Murray’s concern over having a “unified convention,” it is very difficult to understand how he expects to develop any worthwhile unity from such a bureaucratic procedure. It is easy to understand Murray’s apprehension over a terrific factional struggle which might do harm to the CIO. But what kind of unity is it which comes from saving such an important resolution adopted in so sheepish, submissive and undemocratic a manner.
 
Nothing Settled
Furthermore, did not the delegates have the right to know why three delegates voted against the resolution? Didn’t they have the right to hear the arguments which caused the EB to vote in favor of the resolution? Didn’t the delegates have the democratic right to hear the position of the Stalinist members of the EB on this question?
One leading member of the EB. who had voted for the resolution made the remark, off the record, that the resolution settled nothing. This is all too true. How can It? For one reason, what is interference in the affairs of the CIO? Someone might have asked the question whether or not the Democratic Party had ever interfered in the affairs of the CIO. But perhaps Murray thinks that the Democratic Party is not a political organization.
At any rate, the adoption of this resolution ended the first day of the convention.
 




In this, our last article on the South, I want to continue the discussion started in a recent Labor Action. We discussed the question of the bourgeois-democratic revolution in the South. We took the position that in the scientific and theoretical sense the bourgeois-democratic revolution was completed in the South with the overthrow of the slave regime and the triumph of Northern industrial capitalism. The 13th, 14th and 15th Amendments to the Constitution are the juridical expressions of this triumph. To these should be added the equal rights amendment of 1875.
Not only was the triumph of INDUSTRIAL capitalism a victory over the slave economy but also a triumph over Northern COMMERCIAL capitalism which was allied with the slaveocracy. Since this time Southern economy has essentially been an integral part of American capitalism. The South is not “semi-feudal” but completely capitalist. The peons, where peonage exists, are not slaves and the tenant farmers and share-croppers are not serfs or peasants.
The basic conflict today in the South is not between Negroes and whites, but between the protagonists of the plantation system and the advocates of industrialization; between the land and the factory. This attempt to supplant the domination of the planter is not new. But where formerly his main antagonist was the “poor white,” today it is the modern industrialist.
In the designation “plantation system” is included not only the big cotton planters but also the tobacco, rice, sugar cane, and lumber growers. Also there are the extractive and chemical industries. It is in these enterprises that most Southern toilers are employed. Virtually all of the Negroes are employed here with the exception of those in service occupations or who are employed by Negro business. These are the occupations which are the most laborious, undesirable, lowest paying and often the most dangerous and unhealthy. Negroes are today virtually excluded from the manufacturing, processing and fabricating industries.
 
What Is the South?
It is this peculiar complex of social relations in the South which has misled so many persons into the position that the big task today is what they term “the completion of the bourgeois-democratic revolution.” The Communist Party has been the chief exponent of this notion. At one time the Stalinists developed the notion that the Negroes are a nation and organized their political propaganda around the slogan of “Self-Determination in the Black Belt.” By a process similar to the gerrymander, they carved out an area in the “Black Belt” whose population was overwhelmingly Negro. It was for this area that they advocated separation and independence.
Although the Stalinists still contend, if only in a whisper, that the bourgeois-democratic revolution has not been completed in the South they do not say what its economic system is today.
It must be emphasized that the two main groups in the South: the planter group and the industrial group, are two capitalist groups contending for capitalist profits. For this reason each group seeks political domination. The political demagogues such as Bilbo and Talmadge are in the main the political representatives of the planters (and of the power companies). It was their predecessor demagogues, Tillman, Blease, Vardaman and others who after the Civil War became the champions of the “poor whites.” Their chief weapon was the threat of “Negro domination,” and the doctrine of “white supremacy.” With this the “poor whites” who had formerly been the enemies of the planter group were won over against the Negro. What is known as a “liberal” in the South, is found in the ranks of the industrializers: the Arnalls and the Peppers. It is in this group also that one finds the individuals and groups who are willing to tolerate or collaborate with union organization.
This group is for better educational facilities for the Negroes and “poor whites.” It will support the abolition of the poll-tax and a slight improvement of the conditions under which Negroes live. This group is well-aware that the kind of industrial and technical progress which they advocate for the South cannot be attained, at least for the present, without an increase in bourgeois-democratic rights for all the working class. This is the real meaning of the struggle which goes on between the two groups. Both Northern finance-capitalism and the most reactionary Southern landlord know that increasing industrialization and increasing mechanization of agriculture will transform the social scene in the South and bring it into more conformity with the North.
Negroes in the South and the country at large have a far better grasp of the problem facing them than do most of the theory builders. It is interesting that the Negro slave militants did not develop nationalist, separatist or colonial “Back to Africa” movements. They had no notions about a “49th State.” They acted as human beings have acted in all of history and struggled for freedom and for those rights and privileges which were the lot of other people in the population of the country in which they lived. Negroes continued this struggle after emancipation and that in fact is the struggle they carry on today. Garvey discovered this when he attempted to give an answer to the dissatisfaction of the Negro with his condition by organizing the extremely chauvinistic Back to Africa nightmare of the twenties known as the Universal Negro Improvement Association.
The AFL discovered how Negroes are thinking today when at its first Southern organizing conference at Ashville, this Jim Crow trade union federation provided for the seating of all Negro delegates on one side of the hall, as is the custom in the South. The Negro delegates refused to be segregated and all delegates took seats according to their individual preferences. For its recent convention the United Mine Workers attacked the “race problem” correctly. This union purchased 900 Pullman tickets and brought the Southern delegates, white and black, to Atlantic City together in Pullman cars.
The last question is the often-heard statement that the South is “fascist.” This kind of very dangerous loose talk is the kind which has been spread around from time to time by the Stalinists. In 1930 the AFL was “outright fascist.” Later there were the “right social-fascists” and the “left social-fascists.” Later of course fascism became merely a “matter of taste.” Today, it is the Republican Party which is fascist. Dewey is the head of the fascists and his group is “the same people who burned the Reichstag.”
The South is not fascist. To call the South fascist is to say that the distinguishing feature of fascism is terror, intimidation, “lawlessness,” and lynching. If this were true we would have to say that fascism did not begin with Mussolini and Hitler and that it is still with us after they have been destroyed. Even if fascism were merely an extreme form of terroristic regime, the South could not be called fascist. Fascism is an economic and political movement of monopoly capitalism which atomizes the working class and other exploited poor. It destroys the organization of the people first of all. How can one say that we have fascism in the South? This has to be kept in mind, lest when fascism does come it will not be recognized; clothed as it might well be in the garments of the Founding Fathers.
We have tried to set forth in this series of articles certain relevant ideas in connection with the South; certain considerations which must be faced by the CIO, AFL, Negro and white workers and revolutionary socialists. We say again that the beginning of a solution for the South is the organization of the Southern toilers into mass unions. From the side of the Negroes there will be no great difficulty. But there will be some difficulty with white workers who have been indoctrinated for decades with race superiority notions.
This will be fully exploited by the white ruling class and the organizers of the AFL. These same AFL organizers will advise the Negroes against the CIO because it is “controlled by communists.” It must be the function of the CIO to dispel the fears of the white and black workers by a skillful process of welding them together in the same organization and locals; by showing them that it is possible and necessary for the white and black workers to work together, live together and struggle together. Through such experiences they will learn to vote together, eat together; attend school together, live together and organize as a class for economic and political action across the lines of race and color.
 




An organized but not clearly defined campaign against the Communist Party (Stalinists) is under way in the United States. As is usual in these intermittent drives against the “Communists,” or “the reds,” all sorts of people and organizations are participating. There are, of course, the professional red-baiters: the hypocritical leaders of the Republican Party, the NAM, the fascist groups, Catholic Church dignitaries, and the top leadership of the AFL. But the spearhead of this specific campaign seems to be inside the CIO. This does not mean that the initiative was not taken by the federal government. Such initiative on the part of the government could be expected considering the new relations between the government and Stalinist Russia. With the close tie-in of the CIO, the Democratic Party and the government, it may be true that the word was passed along to Murray from the government, that the time had come for a house-cleaning in the CIO to get rid of the “reds,” to begin again to protect the country against an attack “from without.” In plain language this means that the time has come to begin thinking once more about national unity and “defense.” As a result of the “Peace Conference” in Paris, and the sharp disagreements between the U. S. and Russia anything can happen. Thus we are getting a new version of “remember Pearl Harbor.”
Anti-Communist Party agitation and propaganda is breaking in all CIO unions. Union presidents resign because they have suddenly discovered that their organizations are dominated by “communists.” Carey, the CIO secretary, is busy going from convention to convention and caucus to caucus speaking out against the CP and Moscow. Little trade union bureaucrats, such as Jack Altman, who were never averse to playing with the Stalinists when they needed a vote or two or a measure of prestige, are today industriously pointing out that Stalinism is totalitarian and anti-labor. Philip Murray has had a revelation also. He has discovered that the Stalinists are not interested in the labor movement in the U. S. but only in the welfare of Russia and that they take their orders from “a foreign power.”
Little Johnnie Green of the shipyard workers union, is also on the alert for any “communist” who may be lurking in his union. Any day now we can expect a pronouncement from George Addes that he knows nothing whatsoever about any communist influence in the UAW and if any is pointed out he will certainly be ready to step on it. R.J. Thomas is probably having many sleepless nights trying to forget how he joined the Stalinist caucus at “’the last UAW convention and the vicious clown he made of himself in his fight against Reuther. Perhaps Murray would like to forget his quiet and pious alliance with the Stalinists during the war, or how he rose in the Boston CIO convention to present a plaque to Joe Curran and the NMU with these words: “this is what the CIO thinks of your union and what it thinks of you personally.”
Why didn’t Murray and the other CIO leaders, including Reuther, take the same attitude toward the Stalinists during the war as they do today? The answer is easy to give. Stalinist Russia, for its own reasons, was “our gallant ally” in the Second World Imperialist War. The Russian people were being crushed by Hitler’s tanks. The Russian soldiers were “holding the line” while this country got its tanks ready. The “gallantry” of the Russians at Stalingrad kept Hitler’s legions away from the West until “we” were prepared to meet them. Murray and the others were part and parcel of the American imperialist war machine. Any ally is good enough to use against one’s enemy. You don’t stop to discuss the color of the ally, the color of his politics, his “ideology” or “ism.” That is a luxury one saves for quieter and less dangerous times. Any one who dares bring it up while the barbarous “German people” are warring against “peace-loving” Russia, is a traitor to “national unity” and the “solidarity of the labor movement.” This was the refrain.
Things are different today. The war is over and Germany is crushed. The “German people” are being made to pay for the “crimes they committed against humanity.” The peace-loving conquerors, Russia, England and the United States, have just hanged what remained of the scoundrelly Nazi leadership. Stalinist imperialism is voracious and not easily satisfied. Not even with Poland, Hungary, Czecho-Slovakia, Austria. There are China, Turkey, India. Iraq, Iran and oil. There are also atom bombs, vetoes and Communist parties in every country, bound together by a “dissolved” Third International. There is a GPU with its agents in every country, in every factory and on every ship. They may even be in “our State Department.” To be sure this GPU was in these same places during the war but then it was there, you must remember, in the interest of “democracy, peace, good will and the struggle against totalitarianism.”
These, then, are the roots of the “anti-communist” campaign today. We do not concern ourselves primarily with the motives of the capitalist ruling class and its government at Washington. We understand them and we are against them.
Day before yesterday the German “aggressors,” yesterday the German and Japanese “aggressors,” tomorrow the Russian “aggressors,” the day after tomorrow another “aggressor.” This is the capitalist world during the armed interlude between two wars. It’s called “peace.”
In the days to come we should be prepared for some queer and surprising propaganda from Washington. The capitalist politicians will lament that their former ally, Russia, is not really a “democratic country,” that’ the Russian workers are not really. “free” but oppressed and stifled. They will talk about “totalitarianism,” “bureaucratic methods,” the “new Ghengis Khan,” etc. If necessary for their purposes they will even go so far as to become the defenders of the Old Bolsheviks murdered in the purges by Stalin. They may even become the defenders of Trotsky who was murdered by a GPU agent acting under the orders of Stalin. Publishers will not only be free to issue books against Stalin, but may even be exhorted to do so. They will certainly not be told to hold up anti-Stalinist writings as they were instructed during the war.
The Workers Party will have none of this and urgently warns the workers against this hypocritical campaign of United States imperialism.
The ruling class in the U.S. is not a defender of democracy, not a defender of the working class and its interests in this country or in any other part of the world. American capitalism is against Stalin today for the same basic reason that it was against Hitler: namely, that their imperialist interests conflict with those of Stalin and the Russian bureaucracy. Now they want to drag the labor movement behind this scheme just as they dragged the working class behind their war.
Bearing this in mind, it is necessary to understand that the attitude of the labor leaders is, unfortunately, cut from the same cloth as that of the American imperialists. In fact the field of politics and diplomacy, Murray and his lieutenants, and Green and his lieutenants, think like the ruling class. Their chief fault in this, as in all the major questions of the day, is that they have no INDEPENDENT PROGRAM for labor, for the working class, for the trades unions. This is especially true on the main social and political questions such as imperialist war, political action and imperialist aggrandizement. They are a transmission belt of the capitalist-imperialist exploiters. Hence, in the tangled web of imperialist diplomacy, in the midst of the scheming and plotting for international trade, supplies of raw materials and financial domination, the trade union bureaucrats continue to act as the willing tools of the capitalist ruling class.
And this is their role in the present drive against the American Stalinists. They did not in the past and do not now take a principled position in connection with the Stalinists. They have never had a progressive and militant working class program or attitude toward Stalinism in the labor movement. When it suited their own bureaucratic purposes, or the purposes of the big leaders in industry and the government, they made the most unprincipled deals with the Stalinist goons, bureaucrats and murderers.
The labor officialdom never presented a political program by which labor could combat the Kremlin political line of the Stalinists. In fact, they have themselves often, albeit very stupidly, followed the political line of the Stalinists, except where this line was clearly in conflict with the line of the government. They have aided and abetted the Stalinists, playing into their hands by opposing and stamping out as best they could every trend of labor toward independent political action. They have opposed every proposal, particularly those coming from the genuine anti-Stalinists, the Marxist revolutionaries, for S’ program for the workers which would enlighten them on Stalinism and prepare labor to destroy the disease of Stalinism.
Not only have the positive actions of Murray and Co. disoriented and confused the working class in relation to the Stalinists and Stalinism, but what they have failed to do has been a blessing to the Stalinists as they went about their usual business of stabbing the labor movement in the back.
While they failed to give labor an independent program, independent of the capitalist class and its government at Washington, and independent of Stalinism and its government at Moscow, today they continue this policy, only now it is against the Stalinists. They still have no program for labor which is in the interest of labor, and thus labor will again be led onto a reactionary course. Out of this anti-Communist Party drive, the working class will get no decent working class education, no independent political program and no understanding of what took place.
The program of Murray and Co. as of all the other labor bureaucrats is therefore reactionary and should receive the condemnation of every militant and progressive worker. Many of these workers are already anti-Stalinist. They have learned many bitter lessons from years of painful and heartrending experience with the Communist Party. They have seen this gang of union-wreckers fight for their “second front” in France in order to protect the Russian bureaucrats. They have seen them fight for “incentive pay” (piecework wages), the no-strike pledge, labor-management plans. They have seen the Stalinists lie, steal elections, beat up opponents and, smother every trace of democracy in unions under their control. They have seen the Stalinists organize frame-ups against opponents and act as stool- pigeons for the FBI.
These progressive and militant workers in the unions have a job to do. They must reject the reactionary red-baiting campaign of Murray, Green, Lewis and Co. They must not fall prey to the bait held out by the capitalist ruling class and the government. But if they do not support the red-baiters, they must, nevertheless, carry on a ruthless and enlightened struggle against Stalinism inside and outside the union movement. This must not be done as mere anti-Stalinism, but should be accompanied with a program for labor, a militant economic independent political program. Such a program will differentiate labor from all the reactionary forces in the country: from the Stalinists on the one hand, and the capitalists and their government at Washington on the other. Such a program would serve notice on the trade union leaders that we will tolerate no more of their foolishness, no more of their licking of the capitalist boot, bowing before the anti-labor capitalist government, walking arm in arm with the Stalinists today and calling on labor to trounce them tomorrow.
It is to these workers that the Workers Party makes its appeal. Their opposition to the Stalinists and to Stalinism is correct and progressive. They are not “red-baiters” and they should not permit themselves to be intimidated by the Stalinists or their dreamy-eyed fellow-traveling liberals, or by the union bureaucrats. The attitude of the militant and progressive trade unionists toward the Stalinists is generally a correct one. They want to preserve the unions as independent, fighting organizations of the working class. But this cannot be done either by submitting to the program leadership, and blandishments of the Stalinists, the opportunism and class collaboration of the union leadership, or the imperialist program and solicitations of the capitalists and their government.
The anti-Stalinist progressives and militants have another job to do in relation to those in the rank and file of labor who take a reactionary position in connection with Stalinism. We are talking about the misguided workers who, for example, follow the lead of the Hearst press or the Catholic workers who follow the lead of the Catholic hierarchy, and all those tragically misguided workers who are against “politics,” against Jews, Negroes, foreigners, the loudest “patriots” who are against strikes, those who hesitate to join the union, and those who are inclined to be friendly with “management.”
Many of these workers will join in the packhunt against the Stalinists for the most reactionary reasons. There position will not be progressive. They will be the willing or unwilling tools of the most reactionary forces in the country. These are the workers who are against “the reds” on principle. They are against socialists, and revolutionists and Marxism. They do not understand these things but they are against them because this is what they are taught.
It is the task of the progressive militants to win these workers away from their reactionary attitudes, to explain to them what Stalinism really is and how to differentiate between Stalinism and independent working class economic and political action. These workers must be made to understand that the Stalinists are not socialists or communists as they claim but just Stalinists, representatives of the reactionary bureaucratic ruling class of Russia, who function in the labor movement, not in the interests of the working class but in the interest of the Kremlin.
Above all now, as always, the militant progressives in the labor movement must struggle ceaselessly for an independent economic and political program for labor. The Workers Party has such a program. It is carried in Labor Action each week. It is an anti-Stalinist program. It is an anti-capitalist program. It is an anti-imperialist program too. It is a program for labor, for the working class and the trades unions.
 




Just one week after the adjournment of the UAW convention, the hired labor “experts” of the capitalist press are explaining that Reuther is already in difficulties because he doesn’t have a majority of the UAW IEB, and because Thomas and Addes, according to these hired men, are lining up in a bloc against Reuther.
In the Sunday New York Times, Walter Ruch is certain that Reuther is outvoted in the IEB by 9 to 13, or by 430 votes to 739 votes. Furthermore, says Ruch, Reuther has already been notified by the Addes-Thomas bloc that for the coming IEB meeting in Chicago he must put his whole program in a “package” and lay it before the IEB at one time. According to Ruch, the Addes-Thomas faction will not tolerate Reuther operating one step at a time to get his program across piecemeal.
 
Program Is Main Factor
We don’t know whether or not this is the case, and we are certain that neither does Ruch. The membership of the UAW does not need to be too much concerned with this question either. Reuther was elected after a bitter factional struggle at Atlantic City. The program which he had advanced during the GM strike was the decisive factor in his election. Reuther did net displace Thomas merely because the delegates and the membership of the UAW were tired of Thomas and wanted to give someone else a chance.
It was the power of the new conceptions and the now programmatic ideas advanced in the GM situation which gave the UAW workers, and above all the progressives and militants, a sense of going in a new direction. Among the rank and file this was, of course, very primitive and confused, but it was there.
This is what the progressives and militants need to concern themselves with today; not what the capitalist press says about who has the majority or the most votes in the IEB.
 
Keep the Heat On!
Reuther is president. He will be president for about 16 months before he comes up for re-election. No one can say now exactly what the line-up will be in the IEB. Any maneuvering by the Addes-Thomas forces in the IEB, even if they turn out to be the majority, will not be decisive. It is not a majority in the IEB, whether it is Reuther’s or Thomas-Addes’, which will be the decisive factor in the situation. No Addes-Thomas majority can for long hamper Reuther in the carrying through of the program to which he is committed.
It is the militants and the real progressives who are the decisive force in the UAW, if they will only recognize this fact and let it be known to Reuther and Thomas-Addes. They should make Reuther realize that they expect him to go into action with the program which they voted for when they elected him. They should let Thomas and Addes understand clearly that they will tolerate no obstructionist tactics from them. Also, they should let the Stalinists know that none of their anti-labor Kremlin political shenanigans will be tolerated.
If the progressives and militants who led the fight for Reuther, and who were responsible for his election, proceed in this manner they will rally the rank and file to their support and behind the new program to which Reuther is committed. Should Reuther waver or falter in the pushing of the program, such an attitude on the part of the progressives and militants will keep the heat on. Such a procedure will bring pressure not only on Reuther but on the whole IEB.
It is correct pressure of this type which will determine where the IEB members will jump, and what they will vote for and what they dare not vote against. It is the pressure of the rank and file under the leadership of the progressives and militants which will determine who has the majority on the IEB.
 
Program Will Prevail
If Reuther stands up and fights for the program which he has been given a mandate to carry out, that program will prevail in the UAW, even though for the present, Thomas and Addes may succeed in organizing a voting majority in the IEB. Because at the next convention the progressives and militants can go prepared with the support of the rank and file to vote every member off the IEB who obstructed the carrying out of the program. The membership of the UAW got rid of Thomas as president, and it can get rid of Thomas as vice-president, Leonard as vice-president and Addes as secretary-treasurer.
The task of the militants and progressives right now is to render full support to Reuther in every step which he takes to carry out the program which has been adopted. It is their task, also, to demand that he carry out this program. It should be the function of the militants. and progressives to understand this program to win the rank and file to its support. It is their business to demand that the program be strengthened where it is weak. And it is weak in many places.
The chief weakness of the Reuther program is the dismal failure of Reuther and the progressives to understand that this program, even as it is written, is only so many pronouncements on paper until it is given a correct and concrete political content and orientation.
 
For Real Political Action
As written, the program does not ignore political action; it does worse: it makes a miserable farce of the very idea of independent working class political action. The section headed Political Action reads as follows:
“We propose an aggressive program of political action to, elect candidates pledged to this program within the existing party structure. But we stand for independent political action. Labor should join hands with farmers, professionals, small business and other functional groups to build the base for a new progressive party.”
This plank is a masterpiece of contradiction and skullduggery. Even from a literary standpoint it is incoherent. Politically it is incomprehensible. The Republican and Democratic Parties are called upon to convert government owned plants “into public corporations and cooperatives under democratic controls in the public interest” if “private enterprise will not use these plants.” The two capitalist parties are called upon to support the demand that “wage increases” be paid “out of profits and productivity – with no price increases.”
Reuther, according to his “political action” plan, is going to get this “within the existing party structure.” But at the same time he is for “independent political action.” Where? When? How? Inside the Republican- Democratic Parties? Does he expect to elect enough “candidates pledged to this program” to capture the Republican and Democratic Parties?
He wants to “build the base for a new progressive party.” But he isn’t even for this right now. Right now he is for the Republican and Democratic Parties. Later he will be for getting started on the base for a “new progressive party.” This sort of thing can have no other name than shysterism. Reuther is against the formation of an independent Labor Party by the working class. He is in full agreement with Murray and Thomas on this matter of independent working class political action. The Republican and Democratic Parties are good enough for them.
But it is precisely at this point that the progressives and militants have a job to do. It is the job of changing the program to include a demand upon Reuther and the IEB for action in connection with independent working class political action NOW. They can start with the PAC – by demanding that the PAC be turned into an independent Labor Party NOW.
 




“Operation Dixie!” This is the phrase which has been coined to describe the new CIO organizing campaign in the South. This operation has also been described by the watchword: “We Are Marching South!” A million-dollar fund has been contributed by CIO internationals. An organizing staff under the direction of Van Bittner has been appointed. The organizing attack will be directed chiefly at the rubber, textile, furniture and clothing industries. In time other sections of Southern industry will be brought within the orbit of this organizing campaign.
This is the second great drive into the South within a period of a hundred years, the second march into the South, the second “Operation Dixie.” The first was the Civil War, which struck the shackles from 4½ million black chattel slaves. This drive gave citizenship to these millions and to one-half million free Negroes. It gave them democratic rights, so far as the constitution and law could give democratic rights.
 
Operation Dixie” – Then and Now
By constitutional amendment and law, the first “Operation Dixie” gave the Negro people political and economic equality. They had the right to vote and be voted for, the right to a job just like other people, the right to be free from proscription, discrimination, segregation, Jim Crow and insult. However, the first “Operation Dixie” was not carried through to completion, either in relation to the interests of the freed black black slaves or the interests of the free white workers. The leaders of the new Northern industrial capitalism, who organized the war against the Southern slave owners and cotton planters, knew what THEY wanted and how to get it. They got what THEY wanted. They got a vast territory with unlimited natural resources and a working class of millions to exploit as they went about their business of the capitalist development of the country.
The labor movement of the days following the Civil War did not know how to get what it vaguely conceived to be “the workingman’s share.” It did not understand the real meaning of the Civil War: “The Second American Revolution.” This early labor movement did not understand that it must have an “Operation Dixie,” that it must march into the South, that Sherman’s March to the Sea was only a small part of what was necessary to give real freedom to the chattel slaves and opportunity to the white wage slaves. Because the early labor movement did not understand these complex social, political and economic problems, the emancipated slaves were left stranded, at the mercy of their former masters and without the protection of the organized working class, of which they had the right to be a part and from which they had the right to claim protection.
The result of this indifference, ignorance, prejudice and lack of understanding on the part of the labor movement of the period following the Civil War, is in no small way responsible for the situation which the organized labor movement is confronted with in the South today. I do not speak only of the situation in which the Negro toilers find themselves but the no less miserable state of the white workers. Disfranchisement of Negroes directly by law and indirectly by the poll-tax. The disfranchisement of millions of white toilers by the poll tax. The lowest wages in the land, the longest hours and the worst working conditions for all workers, white and black. Peonage, intimidation, terror and lynching. The clubbing arid mobbing of union organizers. Bilbo, Rankin and Eastland. Ignorance, savagery and brutality. Hovels, disease and hatred. Government by “Rope and Faggot.” Ranting and itinerant Bible pounders, black and white, calling emaciated textile workers and cotton pickers to repentance!
This is the South. The South, 86 years after the first “Operation Dixie,” after the “Second American Revolution,” after the first March into the South.
 
The Second March to the South
Negro and white workers participated in the first “Operation Dixie.” We marched together in 1860 for freedom and we will march together in 1946 for a higher freedom. This means that there is a difference in the two Operations Dixie. In 1860 just one year after Governor Wise of Virginia had hanged old John Brown, the troops of the North were marching South singing: John Brown’s Body Lies A-Mouldering in the Grave, but His Soul Goes Marching On. Today, the working class armies of the North prepare to march South in the spirit of Working Class Solidarity Forever.
John Brown knew what Gov. Wise did not know and what Lincoln may not have known in the beginning: that the problem of chattel slavery could not be resolved by peaceful means. John Brown was hanged for carrying this sound conviction into action. The leaders of the slave rebellions knew this also. Gabriel and Denmark Vesey and Nat Turner understood this far too well for the comfort of the slave barons of the South, the copperheads of the North and the emerging industrial capitalists of the North. Harriet Tubman understood this too, as she carried on her “Operation Dixie,” by going into the South with her shotgun to bring black slaves to the North and to freedom.
The first march into the South was welcomed by the black slaves who described it as “The Coming of the Lord.” What they really meant by the “Lord” was freedom; freedom from misery, hunger and nakedness. Freedom for the body and the mind. Freedom to be a real human being, freedom from fear and freedom of opportunity. The black, freed men did not get what they had fought for, prayed for and suffered for. The “Lord” turned out to be a northern capitalist with his exploitation for the white toilers and his super-exploitation for the black toilers. This capitalist with his textile factories, mines, steel mills, cotton acres, turpentine swamps and lumber camps, only wanted and took his pound of flesh from black and white worker alike.
The “Lord” turned out to be Bilbo, Smith, Rankin and Eastland: the men of “Rope and Faggot,” organizers of the mob to lynch Negroes and club the organizers of the working class. This “Lord” was a divider of the masses; who came not to bring peace, happiness and plenty to the masses but division, hatreds and misery.
 
This Operation Dixie Can Be Successful
The white and black masses of the South will welcome the second “Operation Dixie” today just as they did the first “Operation Dixie” 86 years ago. The present march to the South is long overdue. The masses have been ready and were ready long ago. Those of the labor movement, in the North, were not ready. Now they have begun. They can be successful. They have the money, the men and the strength. They know how to do the job. If they fail, it will be the failure of the labor movement in the North. The leaders of the CIO know what the job is and they do know how to do it so far as the organizational problems are concerned. They know too, to some degree, that this “Operation Dixie” is not merely a trade union organization task. It is a political task, requiring not only the most painstaking economic organizational procedures but independent working class political organization. This is true today for the working class of the country no less than it was true for the young capitalist ruling class of the 60’s. The capitalists of the 60’s understood this. It remains to be seen just to what extent the leaders of labor understood their task today.
The first “Operation Dixie” has been called by the Beards, the historians, the “Second American Revolution.” The second “Operation Dixie” can and may become a part of the Third American Revolution: the final mighty effort of all the workers and toilers: black and white, male and female, native and those born in other lands, to free themselves and all mankind. We know that this great consummation, this goal is not a part of the thinking, in any concrete way, of the leaders of the CIO drive into the South. But history, even labor or working class history, is not made by labor leaders only. Often they only begin what others more enlightened, more courageous must complete and make permanent.
The toiling workers and agricultural laborers of the South can make history too. They must be organized and led. But it is only to the degree that they participate, in a most democratic way, in their own organization that they can make their own history and settle the problems of their own liberation and the liberation of the whole of mankind.
 
We Hail This New Development
On this May Day the Workers Party welcomes and hails “Operation Dixie” of the CIO. The black and white exploited of South will welcome again their liberators from the North. They expect you to carry on. All the martyrs of the labor movement, black and white, in every land, would expect you to carry on. But we of the Workers Party, we of the revolutionary socialist movement, say that we too have a place in this struggle. We have a big place in this struggle, not a subordinate place. As “Operation Dixie” proceeds, some of the leaders of labor may learn this. Thousands and thousands of the toilers surely will. You of the trade union movement cannot complete this job alone and the oppressed and exploited of the South and of the whole country will learn this. And in that day they will turn “Operation Dixie” into the real Third American Revolution.
 




Nearly two thousand men and women from automobile factories and shops, and representing their locals in the UAW-CIO, put in eight days in Atlantic City at the tenth convention of their international union, the biggest union in the world. Their great international had just come through a test of strength with the giant General Motors Corporation, part of the du Pont industrial dynasty in the United States. These men and women workers had aided their brothers and sisters in the longest strike ever conducted by their union. They had heard a new slogan in the trade union movement: “Open the Books.” They had been told that to go on strike for an increase in wages without having anything to say about prices, profits and production must become an outmoded procedure for the labor movement today. Labor must correlate a demand for a wage increase with the demand for no increase in prices, and labor must share in the profits not only of years past but of the year in which the labor has been performed.
These delegates also had seen their unions assaulted by the big corporations with a demand for “company security” and by the Truman Administration with a new “Little Steel” formula. They knew that there was an internal dispute among the top leadership of their international. Some of them knew that this dispute was concerned with what kind of program the union should have, whether or not the GM workers should have gone on strike first and how the strike should have been conducted. They knew furthermore that there was dissatisfaction with the leadership of R.J. Thomas and that a real contest was developing around the question of whether or not Thomas should remain at the head of the union.
 
Wanted New Program
These two thousand men and women workers came to Atlantic City to discuss all of these problems and exercise their democratic right to make decisions about them. Hundreds of these delegates really wanted to adopt a new program for the UAW. They did not want to go on in the old way. These were the genuine progressives and militants. Many of them went away at the adjournment of the convention, dissatisfied and disappointed. They had not had the opportunity, to discuss important resolutions which had been submitted for the consideration of the convention.
For instance, they had had no opportunity to discuss the two resolutions on Foreign Policy, one by the Resolutions Committee majority and the other by a minority composed of two Stalinists: Oliver and Ganley. They did not have the opportunity to discuss the resolution on So-Called Company Security. This was a very weak resolution, and if it had come to the floor the real progressives would have had the opportunity to trounce the leadership for its disgraceful and cowardly capitulation to the Ford Motor Company on this question. Furthermore, they would have had the opportunity to confront Leonard and chastise him for the disgraceful part he played in agreeing to the Ford proposals for “company security.” Also Reuther would have been forced to explain Whit position he had taken in the IEB when this Ford security question was up for consideration.
The leadership provided no opportunity for a discussion of the important question of political action. There were rumors and more rumors that there was a resolution on political action but it never reached the convention floor. There were some feeble and factional anti-Reuther remarks about support of the PAC. The Reuther faction attached a cryptic and incomprehensible paragraph to their programmatic statement. This was all. There were many other important resolutions which the convention did not get to. This sent the delegates away in varying degrees of dissatisfaction and disappointment. One could hear such expressions as: “This convention is a flop.” “We’re not getting anywhere.” “The 1944 convention was far better than this one.”
 
Something New Emerges
We can understand the attitude of the progressives and militants but we cannot agree with them. Despite what took place and what did not take place at this convention, it was not a flop, it did get somewhere and it was, in an extremely important sense, at a far higher level than the 1944 convention. In connection with the 1944 convention it is necessary to say something right here. At the 1944 convention a rank and file progressive group was in evidence and was the outstanding progressive force in the convention. This group had been organized before the convention. It had an excellent program, including a demand for the rescinding of the no-strike pledge.
The no-strike pledge was the real important concrete issue before the working class at that time. Progressives were able to make organizational and agitational headway with this issue during the war because the workers knew from their own experiences that they were being frustrated by this pledge which their leaders had given for them without their consent. At this convention, no leading officer of the union stood out above the others on this question or on any other. Reuther, like Thomas, was supporting the war and the nostrike pledge. This lack of any program by the leadership provided the opportunity for a rank and file leadership to assert itself and get a hearing from the membership of the UAW and the delegates to the 1944 convention.
This was not the situation at the Atlantic City convention. Something new had emerged before this convention convened: Walter Reuther, a top officer of the UAW, with a type of program and demand never before advanced by a trade union leader. We are not discussing right now whether or not the Reuther program was adequate, nor how Reuther defended and fought for his program. We are only saying that he advanced a new program with revolutionary implications. This is what is important at this point. Because the program was new, because of the feeble manner in which Reuther propagated the program and because of the mud slinging that went on in connection with the GM program, before and during the convention, it was difficult for rank and file militants and others to appraise the convention properly.
We say that something new had emerged by the time of the Atlantic City convention. Since programs are advanced by people and since Reuther was the protagonist of the Open-the-Books-Wages-Profits-Prices formula, he became the object of opposition by others in the leadership of the UAW, including Thomas and the Stalinists – Thomas for personal reasons and because of the fact that he could not understand what the GM program meant; the Stalinists for their own Stalinist political reasons and because Reuther is a sort of trade union social-democratic anti-Stalinist.
Not only did Reuther become the center of attack, veiled or open, by the Murray-Thomas-Addes-Stalinist bloc, but he became the center of attraction for militants and progressives. Virtually all of the progressives and militants, including the revolutionary socialists, aligned themselves with Reuther against the Murray-Thomas-Addes-Stalinist combination. The situation was different therefore from 1944. The militants with political insight and training understood far better than Reuther himself the revolutionary potentialities and implications of the GM program which Reuther had advanced. They knew that Reuther would not carry this program through. They had seen the manner in which he had conducted the GM struggle. It was the duty of the militants to enter the Reuther caucus and demand not only that the GM program become the center of the convention but that the program be extended to include independent working class political action: the formation of an independent Labor Party.
 
Issues Not Discussed
Neither on the convention floor nor in the Reuther caucus was there an opportunity to accomplish anything concrete and significant along these lines. The Thomas caucus was devoted to the most shameful mud slinging, filth, lies and clowning, particularly by R.J. Thomas.
The first Reuther caucus was a sort of burlesque in which Reuther was “drafted” for the presidency. At the next caucus Reuther advanced his program and refrained from the nonsense which he had uttered at the first caucus. For instance, at the first caucus meeting Reuther spoke about the necessity for keeping outside political influences out of the union. The union must be based only on trade union principles for the benefit of the “guys who pay a buck a month.” That is, Reuther appeared at the first caucus as a simple and politically backward trade unionist who believed that economic action alone could solve the problems of the working class. We say that this is nonsense, and Reuther knows that it is nonsense.
There was no opportunity for the militants to assert themselves on the convention floor. The most important resolutions did not reach the convention floor. The real issues involved in the contest for president were not discussed on the floor of the convention. Such discussion as was held around these questions took place in the caucuses of the two contending factions.
The trade union bureaucracy has learned how to handle conventions in which the rank and file is demanding to be heard and conventions in which the rank and file is likely to have harsh things to say about the leadership. Such a leadership simply organizes and conducts the convention in such a way that many of the most controversial questions are left over for the consideration of the Executive Board after the convention has adjourned. This is precisely what happened at Atlantic City.
 
A Struggle over Program
These are some of the reasons why many delegates went away dissatisfied. There are many things which these militants forget, however. One is that the convention was divided into factions and that these factions held caucus meetings. These caucus meetings were really an integral part of what can be called the convention. They were legal. They were open to the public. But most important of all it is necessary to realize that the two factions and the disputes between them were really around the question of what program the UAW should have. The contest for president was not a mere struggle for power and the caucuses were not mere “power caucuses,” as some delegates remarked. At the bottom of the mud slinging of the Thomas-Addes group and the timid, conservative and often bureaucratic procedure of Reuther there was a real struggle over program.
This struggle was concretized around the GM demands. It is correct to say that the election of Reuther was due in no small degree to his advocacy of a relatively advanced program for the union. It was the Thomas-Addes concern about this GM program which drove them also to concoct some sort of program in opposition to the Reuther program. It was the power of the GM program and its attractiveness to the militant workers which led the Thomas-Addes faction to its disgraceful and filthy anti-Reuther pre-election campaign. It was his disagreement with the GM program which led Philip Murray to give underhand support to Thomas in his speech to the convention the day before the election.
This important fact, that the GM program was the real focus of the convention struggle, gives this convention its character and its real meaning. Reuther defeated Thomas and it would be a very serious mistake to believe that the victory of Reuther can be attributed primarily to union clique politics, “power politics” or some of the other unsavory happenings at the convention. When one remembers the rah-rah manner in which Reuther proceeded in many instances, his fear at being booed in the convention and the downright skullduggery at times, it is not difficult to conclude that the majority of the delegates were prepared to vote for something new in the way of a trade union program over against the stand-pat, support-Phil-Murray attitude of the Thomas-Addes-Stalinist bloc.
 
Reuther’s Election
The fact that the advanced militants were not able to assume important leading roles in the convention or in the Reuther caucus says something about Reuther and also something about these militants. We have already discussed the fact that Reuther had already moved up forward as a trade union leader. He had a large and important following in the international. He was in combat with Thomas, who had a reactionary, programmatic position in relation to the GM program.
Reuther proceeded in a sort of one step forward! one step backward, then side-step movement. But the mass of the rank and filers supporting him were not ready to challenge this inadequacy on the part of Reuther. They were for him. There were thousands of these,average rank and file militants and only a few of the advanced militants with political understanding. There were not enough advanced militants to make themselves heard or to have any appreciable influence. The progressives who went away from the convention dissatisfied will have to learn what the correct program is for the union, when a program is not adequate, how to organize a correct program, how to organize around their program and how to carry on an organized struggle to get their program adopted.
They already have the beginnings. They have elected Reuther because they believe him to be a progressive and a militant. He has announced a program. But Reuther will not carry out that program, inadequate as it is, unless the rank and file progressives and militants in the UAW, in all the locals, keep pressing forward in an organized and persistent way. They must demand that Reuther carry out and fight for the program which the progressives voted for.
(David Coolidge will continue his analysis of the UAW convention in next week’s Labor Action. – Ed.)
 




Millions of industrial workers in the United States are on the mark, set and ready for militant mass action, as a class, against the capitalist ruling class.
Labor in the automobile, steel, electrical, textile, meat packing and farm equipment industries awaits the call of its elected leadership to form the picket lines and begin the too-long-delayed struggle against their capitalist exploiters and oppressors.
These CIO millions have spoken in the clearest possible manner to the leaders of their Internationals and to the top leadership of the CIO. In every one of the Internationals mentioned they have voted, by overwhelming majorities, to strike, to mass their numbers against the tremendous economic, social and political power of the employers.
Outside the CIO there are thousands of workers on strike from other labor organizations. The grievances of labor in the CIO, AFL, UMWA, railway brotherhoods and the non-affiliated unions are basically identical. All the legions of labor are demanding a living wage, the guarantee of economic security, a permanent job, the opportunity to live and develop as human beings.
The working class now knows more than formerly. We know that it is not enough to be concerned with wages alone and in a narrow way. We know now that wages are inextricably related to production, profits, dividends and prices and that therefore wages cannot be separated from or negotiated without taking production, profits and prices into consideration.
This is why the demand of the UAW that the General Motors Corporation open its books to union inspection represents a correct beginning in the matter of dealing with wages in the present concrete situation. That is why GM rushed into the capitalist press screeching about a “finger in the pie.” That is why Ford demands “company security.” That is why Kaiser proposes his bonus (incentive pay) fakery. This is also the reason why President Truman intervenes in the conflict with his “fact-finding” boards.
Who doesn’t know the facts? Truman? The employers? Congress? The CIO? The working class? Everybody who knows anything knows the facts, for they are clear. Before the beginning of the Second Imperialist World War the working class was in the breadlines for ten years. The capitalists had demonstrated that capitalism was bankrupt in the sense that this decayed and rotten system could no longer feed, house and clothe decently the masses of the people. The masses were fed in soup lines, housed in the streets and “Hoovervilles” and clothed in rags. When the war came the masses were herded into the tank, airplane and atomic bomb factories to manufacture the instruments of imperialist devastation and barbarism. This was the capitalist solution to the unemployment crisis.
 
The Facts
When Germany had been reduced to rubble and the atomic bomb had conquered Japan, the imperialists began to close their factories again, pocketed their billions in blood profits and threw the workers into the streets. These are the facts, Mr. Truman, and no fact-finding boards are needed to discover them.
What are some other facts that do not need to be discovered by President Truman’s “fact-finding” boards? Here are some of them: At the beginning of the war the capitalist free enterprisers refused to produce for THEIR government until THEIR government met their demands for an increase in profit guarantees. They won their demands from THEIR government. During the war they demanded that THEIR government build plants for them to manage and that they also be subsidized by THEIR government. When the war was over they demanded that THEIR government reduce corporation taxes and guarantee to corporations a return in taxes if profits fell below a certain amount. They won all of their demands from THEIR government.
When organized labor, after the war, demanded a modest increase in wages, the capitalist employers at first said: “We can’t pay it.” Then they admitted that they could pay more wages. Getting bolder they later said that they would not pay, but suggested that they might consent to a little increase if they could be guaranteed “protection” by the unions. When GM was confronted by the demand of the UAW that the union have a look at General Motors’ accounting system, the whole pack of the capitalist employers yelped, in unison that it was not really a question of wages or the ability to pay, but WHO IS TO BE MASTER IN THE HOUSE? Who is to have a “finger in the pie”?
The capitalist employers are correct. This is the main question today: WHO IS TO BE MASTER IN THE HOUSE? Who is to run the country? Who is to run industry and the government? Who is to control production? Which class? What kind of government shall we have and in whose interest shall the government operate? Shall industry continue to be privately owned and run by those who say that they cannot or will not pay decent wages? Shall the government continue to be composed of those who represent the exploiters and oppressors of the masses?
 
Capitalists Have General Staff
The capitalist employers have their general staff, their NAM, their Chamber of Commerce, their Republican and Democratic Parties. They have their general staff to plan, organize and lead them. The general staff of the capitalist ruling class operates and functions iq every phase and aspect of the life of the capitalist ruling class. It functions today as millions of workers prepare to form their ranks on the picket lines. The capitalist employers will have their strike council to coordinate their strike-breaking activities. They will not function as individuals or as separate units of industry. The steel, automobile, farm equipment, electrical, meat packing and textile industries will not go it each for itself. They will be together: one class protecting its class interests.
We said above that labor is ready for militant mass action. But to carry through effectively in the present situation it is necessary that the efforts of labor be coordinated and unified. Big and decisive unions of the CIO are involved in this strike situation. The GM strike is the spearhead. Tomorrow when the steel
workers go out they will play a most important part in the action because of the basic importance of steel in the production of other commodities. Proper organization and coordination of the activities of the various CIO internationals will bring all of the UAW, including Ford and Chrysler, into action. Philip Murray knows this and he trembles at the prospect of being forced to the head of a nationwide militant action of the CIO as a whole. While millions of workers strain at the leash Murray and his lieutenants pale at the sight and scheme to apply the brakes.
 
Labor Needs General Staff
We say coordinate the projected strike actions of the several CIO internationals. Every worker in every international, local and shop should demand this. Let there be a National Strike Council, democratically elected by the locals in all the internationals involved. This would be a CIO National Strike Council authorized to coordinate the actions of the striking internationals, to plan and lead the strike, to adopt the slogans and formulate the demands of the workers.
The National Strike Council might well adopt the slogan: “OPEN THE BOOKS!” Let us see all the books – U.S. Steel, Jones & Laughlin, National Steel, Republic Steel, Youngstown Sheet & Tube, Westinghouse and General Electric.
The Workers Party takes this position because this is no ordinary situation. This is not mere bargaining for wages. The working class is at a higher level of understanding today than ever before. in its history in the U.S. The fight of labor and its demands have gone beyond the pure and simple trade unionism of the past. The main problems of labor today, cannot be solved by pure and simple trade union action. The strikes themselves cannot be confined to old-fashioned wage demands, as Murray wants to do. The UAW in its demand to see the books of GM, demonstrates at least an elementary understanding of the problem.
 
For a Workers’ Government
The demand for “Open the Books” is itself a part of the demand for workers’ control of industry. We must see the books and examine them. Is this a mere trade union demand in the old sense? Of course not! The capitalist employers and their press are correct when they point this out. We are correct also when we make this demand.
To demand that the books be opened, that big industry be nationalized under workers’ control is a political demand, a demand for political power. Furthermore, the mass militancy of the working class today is a political struggle in its most elementary form. It cannot be confined to the old-fashioned trade union procedure.
To have political power a class must have its own government. For labor this means a WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT. For the capitalist ruling class it means also its own government, the present government at Washington.
In the present strike situation the working class must have its general staff. Its general staff for the present strike situation: the GENERAL STRIKE COUNCIL elected by the locals in the striking internationals. We must have our over-all political general staff: a national political party of workers and based on the trade unions, a mass Labor Party freed from all connections with and control by the capitalist Republican and Democratic Parties.
 




The bungling of the strikes by the top leadership of the CIO and the AFL, the resoluteness of the capitalist employers in refusing to grant wage increases, the intervention of the government with its “fact-finding” new Little Steel formula, all these indicate the correctness and urgency of the position of the Workers Party: the labor movement needs a general staff.
The capitalist class, the capitalist employers, have their general staff. The general staff of the capitalist employers – steel, automobile, packing, electrical and all the rest of capitalist industry – is a political general staff. This includes their Chambers of Commerce, the NAM, their Iron and Steel Institute. These are political bodies which make it their business to prepare political programs for their government at Washington and insist that the government adopt these political programs.
This is what is going on today right under the nose of labor, right now while over a million workers are on strike, on strike with no central democratic direction. The strikes are not unified and coordinated. There is no democratically- elected General Strike Council. Labor has no general staff.
The President of the United States, in his message to the Congress, calls for a law giving his ‘‘fact-finding” boards more power in the handling of “labor disputes.” These so-called fact-finding boards have already demonstrated what their role and function are to be. They will be wage-stabilization committees functioning in peacetime, just like the WLB functioned during the war.
The top men in the labor movement have already accepted these fact-finding boards. The leaders of each international union and the leaders of the CIO have already accepted the recommendations of the Truman fact-finding boards in the present strikes. They have receded from their original demands for wage increases higher than those recommended by the “fact-finders.”
The big capitalist corporations like General Motors and the steel companies have rejected the recommendations of their government that they give a very miserly wage increase. Thereupon Murray, Reuther and the others rush to the side of Truman to fight together with him against the capitalist employers.
That’s what they think, these bureaucratic and stupid leaders of over a million workers on strike. They become righteous and indignant that U.S. Steel and GM refuse to abide by decisions of the government.
If they know, why don’t they tell the million workers on strike and the whole labor movement exactly whose government it is? Furthermore, why don’t these fat ten- and twenty-thousand dollar a year bureaucrats give the members of their international unions an opportunity to vote on the question of accepting the recommendations of the fact-finding boards of a capitalist government? What do they mean by agreeing that labor shall take a cut in real wages and have a new Little Steel formula hung around its neck?
 
Not So Brave
The UAW leaders, including Reuther, evidently, feel that they have done a very brave thing. After accepting the “award’’ of the government “fact-finders,” and after it was firmly rejected by GM they now announce that they will return to their original demand for a thirty per cent increase.
While these labor leaders take their place at the side of Truman and the capitalist government, Murray at the same time sends a letter to this same government praying for a revision of tax exemptions to the steel companies. He says that if the steel companies only break even in 1946, “that is, do not make any profits,” they will receive “guaranteed profits that are 29 per cent above the level of pre-war earnings.” The U.S. Treasury will “actually pay to the industry 149 million dollars,” says Murray. This means that if the present steel strike should last a whole year the steel industry would nevertheless receive 149 million dollars from the government.
Murray closes his letter to the government with a call to the government of the steel barons to “terminate this outrageous condition permitted to develop during the war whilst the attention of the American people was fully concentrated upon the defeat of the nation’s foreign foes.”
 
Boldness Needed
During the war Murray, Thomas, Bill Green, Reuther and the others chained the labor movement with a no-strike pledge, supported “the President’s foreign policy,” and his domestic policy which included this “outrageous condition” about which Murray now whines to Vinson and the government. Murray is indignant at the “unmatched boldness” with which the “steel magnates” rejected the “determination of the President of the United States.” This is really a tragic pronouncement coming from the president of the CIO while a million workers he leads are on strike.
If Murray can’t learn from any other source he might at least learn something from Fairless and the “steel magnates.” How about a little “unmatched boldness” from you, Phillip Murray, in the interest of the million workers now on strike and the other millions who look to you to lead them to victory?
While Murray whines and pouts, Mr. Truman resurrects the economic philosophy of Alf Landon.
“We speak a great deal about the free enterprise economy of our country. It is competition that keeps it free. It is competition that keeps it growing and developing. The truth is that we need far more competition in the future than we have had in the immediate past ... Both management and labor have identical interests in the long run. Good wages mean good markets. Good business means more jobs and better wages ... substantial wage increases is good business ... capacity production means an active, healthy, friendly citizenry enjoying the benefits of democracy under our free enterprise system.” (Truman may go down in history as the “friendly” President.)
This is Truman’s solution: more friendliness between labor and capital, more capitalist competition, more free enterprise that is really free. There would be no strikes if there were more good will between Ford and his workers, Fairless and the steel workers, Dupont and the automobile workers.
 
Where Is PAC?
Where are the PAC congressmen while this battle of tears goes on? What are they doing about the strikes and the “rights of labor,” which they so ardently defended before they were elected by labor? They are silent. They hope that the strikes will be over and forgotten before they enter the lists again as the “champions of the rights, of the little people.” Instead of whining to Vinson why don’t Murray and Hillman call together the PAC congressmen and demand that they take the floor in Congress against the big corporations, IN SUPPORT OF THE STRIKES, and against Truman’s attempts to saddle labor with a new Little Steel formula?
The Workers Party says again: the working class needs a GENERAL STAFF, a political general staff, an INDEPENDENT LABOR PARTY.
Right now, for the strikes, labor should demand a General Strike Council. A General Strike Council democratically elected by the locals. A General Strike Council to plan, coordinate and direct the strikes!
 




As Labor Action goes to press, approximately one million workers are on strike in the United States. The majority of them are members of the CIO, the industrial union movement. The latest to join the strikers’ ranks are 200,000 electrical, radio and machine workers and 250,000 packinghouse workers.
At least a million more workers would be out on strike if their leaders would heed and accept) the challenge being hurled at the labor movement today by the capitalist ruling class and its government at Washington.
The whole labor movement is being challenged by the big employers either to stand up and fight unitedly across the lines separating the various national sections of the trade union movement, or run the risk of being disrupted and seriously weakened.
But this is not all. The labor movement is being confronted by the Truman government with a proposal that the working class take a cut in real wages and also that labor accept what is virtually a new “Little Steel” formula. This is what Truman’s “fact-finding” boards are up to: pegging wages for the workers in the mass production industries.
This is the meaning of the “awards” being made by these fact-finding boards. They are really playing the role of wage stabilization committees. The fact-finding board reiterates again and again in its report, President Truman’s formula that labor must take a wage cut from its wartime take-home rates.
The UAW in the beginning asked for a 30 per cent increase. The fact-finders recommended 17.2 per cent. The Oil Workers demanded 31 per cent. The fact-finders said 18 per cent. The Electrical Workers asked 25 cents an hour increase and the recommendation was 19.5 cents an hour. The Packinghouse Workers demanded a 25 cent increase and later, after the pattern was set, offered to settle for 17.5 cents. The Steel Workers demanded approximately a 25 cents hourly increase but Murray agrees to accept 19.5 cents increase. Thus it is clear that the Truman government has decided to grant about the same meager increase to all the striking unions and get the workers back on the job.
The government proposal is one to save the face of the big corporations and the big labor leaders at the same time. The corporations are holding out, but they will agree with the proposals of their government. The workers will find their wages stabilized, just as during the war, while prices will remain where they are and the corporations resume their profit-making, adding billions to the reserves piled up during the war.
 
Murray and Fairless
The truly reprehensible aspect of the situation is the role of Murray and the top labor bureaucrats. They are capitulating all along the line. The UAW is ready to forget GM’s books and the 30 per cent demand and has agreed to take the 17.4 per cent award of Truman’s fact-finders. The oil, packinghouse and electrical union bureaucrats are all in full retreat. Murray decides that the steel workers can get along with six cents less an hour than was demanded of the steel companies.
Of course, no one has asked the union membership what is their opinion of the matter. After the conference in Washington on the demands of the steel workers between Murray, Fairless and the government, Fairless, of U.S. Steel, announced that he could not speak for his or the other steel companies. He would have to consult with those he represented before he could accept any offer made by his government. But not Murray. He himself could accept the suggestion of Truman that the strike be postponed for a week. Murray said: “I have personally agreed to postpone action on the strike for one week at the request of the President and will meet at the White House cabinet room at 2 p.m. next Wednesday with Mr. Fairless.”
“I approve the statement,” said Fairless.
Murray postpones the steel strike for a week so that Fairless can induce the steel manufacturers to accept an increase of 19.5 cents instead of the workers’ demand for 25 cents. The UAW is ready to accept 17.4 per cent without seeing the books of GM. All the big labor leaders are willing to be “reasonable” men, “responsible” labor leaders.
During the war they went along “with the President’s foreign policy” and gave a no-strike pledge. Now that the war is over they are willing and anxious to go along with the President’s domestic policy and accept a cut in real wages for the working class.
 
Labor Leaders Back Down
Despite the fact that hundreds of thousands of CIO workers are on the picket lines, the leaders are only marking time, only waiting for the “fact-finding” boards to set their wages. They are not really waging a militant struggle against the big capitalist corporations as in the old days.
This only underscores what we said in Labor Action last week. The great need of the strike situation today is for a National Strike Council, elected by the locals, to plan, coordinate and formulate uniform demands for the strikes. The strikes are planned and coordinated but the planning and coordinating arc being done by Murray and the top leaders without the consent of and consultation with the rank and file workers.
The present series of strikes got off to a good start with the GM walkout and the militant demand to see the books of GM. Without doubt this demand put the fear of the might of the working class into the capitalist ruling class and its government at Washington. But labor has not followed through.
Despite the lethargy with which it is being conducted by the CIO top leadership, the present strike wave is of tremendous importance. As we said last week, the capitalist ruling class has organized its general staff for the conflict. They act as one. Their publicity reads as though it came from one man and out of one office. Labor has no such general staff. If we had such a general staff, functioning in the present situation to protect the interests of the working class, we would not be witnessing the capitulation and retreat which is taking place.
 
How to Win
The CIO can still win its demands for the 30 per cent increase in wages. Those demands are just and they can be paid. The Truman government knows this, the employers know it and the CIO bureaucrats know it.
All the workers know that the 30 per cent can be paid and they know that they need it and more. The labor bureaucrats haven’t the courage to stand up and fight for their own demands, formulated for them by their own competent economic experts. They accept the opinion of the government experts, that is, they accept the opinions of the experts hired by the government of the capitalist employers.
We can win this fight. Not only can we win this fight, but we can use this struggle to lay the foundations for the winning of future and bigger fights. We can get, right now, not a “finger in the pie,” but a far bigger slice of the pie. Later it is possible for us to take the whole pie. It is ours. We made it and we should eat it.
But for this we need a political party and political action. We need a militant mass Labor Party. We need a general staff, a political general staff.
We need a WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT: OUR government.
 




The United Automobile Workers (CIO) will meet in national convention at Atlantic City from March 23 to March 30. This convention will convene hard on the ending of the General Motors strike and at the end of the general wave of strikes which have been going on for the past three months.
Undoubtedly all of the important aspects and problems connected with the strikes in the automobile industry will come before the convention. There was the matter of what the corporations call “company security”; there were the problems of wages, prices and the rise in the cost of living, arbitration, fact-finding boards, the intervention of the government and the demands of the unions in connection with wages, prices, profits and production.
The most dramatic and far-reaching demand made by any union during the strike wave was the demand of the General Motors division of the UAW that the corporation open Its books for union scrutiny in order that the union might investigate the corporation’s claim that wages could not be advanced without an increase in the price of automobiles. This was in addition to a demand for 30 cents an hour increase in wages. General Motors steadfastly refused to grant this demand, taking the position that corporation financial records are none of the union’s business, that the books are not open even to the corporation stockholders, and that the union was trying to get “a finger in the pie.”
The strike and the negotiations dragged on. The government entered with its conciliators. President Truman initiated the system of “fact-finding” boards. These boards established a new wage formula whloh established wage increases for industrial workers generally of about 19½ cents an hour.
In the matter of “company security,” the UAW, under the leadership of Leonard, agreed to corporation protection clauses in the new Ford contract which were decisively rejected by the membership of Local 600 when submitted to a vote of that local.
While the GM division of the UAW was struggling with GM for the 19½ cents rise which the government had recommended, the Stalinist-led UERMWA settled with General Motors for its GM workers for 18½ cents without consulting with the UAW or without notifying the UAW that they were going to sign up.
General Motors stood adamant against accepting the recommendation of the government that the GM workers be given a 19½ cent increase. The corporation offered 18½ and refused to budge from this figure. Finally the UAW proposed that the company agree to send the dispute to arbitration by an arbitrator to be appointed by the President. The company refused. A week or more later the UAW leadership accepted the corporation’s offer of an increase of 18½ cents an hour coupled with the few minor concessions.
 
Role of Leaders
These are the outstanding matters in connection with the procedure in the handling of the strike and the wage negotiations. There are other questions, however, which are of paramount importance in connection with the GM strike. In the first place, it is necessary to emphasize that there was no solidarity of opinion among the UAW leadership or the CIO leadership concerning the issues of the strike, the demands or the way in which the strike should he conducted.
It seems clear that Reuther alone among the top leadership defended the demand for opening the books. Murray, Thomas and Addes certainly expressed no enthusiasm about pressing, this demand on GM. There is good reason for believing that Murray was against it. It is reported that Murray took the position that such a demand would put GM on the spot and make it difficult for the corporation to retreat from its position that if could not grant a wage increase without price relief.
It is certain that the top leadership of the UAW was not functioning in harmony in relation to the uniform problems which confronted the automobile workers and which had provoked the strikes. They did not understand that not only the automobile manufacturers but the whole of large-scale capitalist industry was embarked on a campaign for weakening the unions, for holding wages at a minimum while they put pressure on THEIR government for an increase in prices.
These trade union leaders did not understand the significance and the import of the not too subtle demand of Ford for “company security.” This is the best that can be said for them. If they did understand, this issue, then they stand out as the most brazen capitulators and betrayers.
In proof of this charge we can cite the action of Leonard, who was in charge of the Ford division, in agreeing to include the most monstrous company security clauses in the new Ford contract; and at the very time that another group of UAW workers were engaged in the toughest sort of struggle with another automobile manufacturer.
 
Reuther’s Conduct
It is necessary to say something about Reuther’s conduct also. Although he understood the issues far better than the other leaders of the UAW and the CIO, he acted in a very cowardly manner. He was always ready either to retreat when he should have stood his ground or to remain silent when he should have spoken out. He had nothing to say about “company security.” He did not tackle the question put by GM concerning the attitude of the union if at some future date the company’s books demonstrated that the corporation was losing money. Reuther could not face this question because there is only one answer, and Reuther cannot give this answer.
That answer is: if GM or any other capitalist business enterprise cannot pay wages, decent wages, then the only solution is workers’ control of industry. The only solution is for capitalist industry to come under the control and operation of labor. While this eventuality is inherent in the demand for the opening of the books, Reuther was not prepared to accept the consequences of the slogan which he had initiated. The reason was, of course, that to combine wages, prices, profits and production into one demand is really to transcend the confines of traditional trade unionism and, face the necessity for independent working class political action.
Reuther has given no indication that he is ready for this step. Consequently he had to retreat, resort to arbitration proposals, run to the government, accept whatever the government offered and participate with the others in botching the demands of the workers. The strike was miserably handled both from the side of simple trade unionism, and from the side of the real and important political issues involved.
To the extent that .Reuther permitted the real issue to be obscured, to the extent that he remained silent while Murray, Thomas and others were scuttling the demands of the workers and collaborating with the capitalist government to defeat the excellent program which he has advanced, he must bear the major blame for the failure of the workers under his supervision to win a victory over GM.
Because Reuther failed to stand up and fight for the 30 cents an hour increase, because he failed to face the real implications of the open the books slogan, that is the POLITICAL implications, because he too encouraged the workers to place their confidence in the government of the capitalists at Washington, because be failed to tell the workers that the only road for them is through independent working class political action, Reuther stands out today as just one of the more enlightened leaders in the field of pure and simple trade unionism. But this is not enough and a hundred, a thousand or any number of Reuthers scattered through the labor movement would not be enough to solve the really fundamental problems of the labor movement and the working class today.
 
Main Problems
This leads into a consideration of the main problems which ought to be the concern of the delegates to the forthcoming UAW convention. Already the faction lines in this international are being drawn. There is nothing incorrect about this provided the factions are prepared to go before the delegates with clear-cut programs which differentiate one from the other. If they are mere “power cliques” organized around ambitious top leaders, then they can have nothing worth while to offer and should be rejected out of hand by the delegates.
A group of officials of certain UAW locals have already declared for Reuther for president against Thomas, who will be a candidate for re-election. Addes will be a candidate for re-election and there will be a scramble for the post of the DESERTER Frankensteen. Up to now Reuther has had nothing to say about his plans or intentions. Thomas has announced with his usual moaning that Reuther is simply after his job. That seems to be his program at the moment: to keep Reuther from getting his job. Addes wants to keep his, and Leonard probably is ready to fight for a pay rise in the post of vice-president. There will be all manner of jockeying, maneuvering and horse trading at the convention. The Stalinists will be present, ready to jump into any opening which will give them the opportunity to increase their dangerous and suffocating influence in the labor movement. As is their custom, they will be prepared to make blocks with any groups; Reuther, Addes, Thomas, the ACTU or the professional “red baiters.”
Philip Murray is probably giving attention to the internal situation in the UAW. He will surely be interested in the struggle over the union leadership, especially with the candidacy of his friend R.J. Thomas. It would not be surprising if Murray should appear at the convention to pour oil on the troubled internal waters and throw his weight behind the candidacy of Thomas.
The Big Job
While all these things will take place, none of them will solve the pressing problems with which the convention should concern itself. Whether Thomas is re-elected or whether he is replaced by Reuther is not really of any basic importance. Whether one man or some other man is made a regional director is not of any basic importance. The problems of the automobile workers or of any union and its members cannot be correctly dealt with by emphasis on such a trivial matter. It would be a very sorry spectacle to see the delegates to this convention wrangling over whether Thomas or Reuther should be president, and engaged in bitter factional dispute and vote- snatching over the question as to which man should be the union’s president for the coming year.
Organized labor and the working class in the United States today has one big job to do; TO ORGANIZE ITSELF POLITICALLY AS A CLASS. That is our task right now. We must subordinate all other tasks to this: THE ORGANIZATION OF AN INDEPENDENT WORKING CLASS POLITICAL PARTY, a National Labor Party based on and organized by the trade unions.
Through its own LABOR PARTY the working class could establish a WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT in the nation to replace the present CAPITALIST GOVERNMENT at Washington. The WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT would begin to solve the problems of the working class just as the present CAPITALIST GOVERNMENT at Washington attempts to solve all the problems of the capitalist ruling class.
This is the really important and serious problem before the labor movement today. This is the important and serious problem for the UAW convention to deal with. This is the question which indicates what kind of program the UAW and all of labor needs. This is the question around which the whole convention should revolve: THE ORGANIZATION OF LABOR FOR INDEPENDENT CLASS POLITICAL ACTION.
This is the criterion by which all candidates for office should be judged. To all of them the question should be put and put directly: “Brother Thomas and Brother Reuther, are you for independent working class political action now? Are you ready to break with the Republican and Democratic Parties and support a motion in this convention for an Independent Labor Party? Are you, Brothers Murray, Thomas and Reuther, ready to start now to TURN THE PAC INTO A LABOR PARTY?”
 
For a Labor Party
The experiences of labor during the war and their experiences following the war give all the evidence needed for this position. Labor fought the war for the ruling class capitalist imperialists in the U.S. and the world as a shambles today. Starvation, misery, nakedness and the threat of a third imperialist world war. In the U.S., right at the close of the war, a concerted drive by the capitalist ruling class to make the unions mere appendages of the big corporations: a sort of luxury for big business, so long as the unions act in a “responsible way” and grant “security” to the big corporations.
The CAPITALIST GOVERNMENT at Washington has demonstrated that it stands ever ready now, and will in the future be ready, to come to the aid of its wards: the big corporations. This government has demonstrated what it is and to whom it will guarantee “security.”
Under the CAPITALIST GOVERNMENT at Washington, whether Republican or Democrat, the working class and the unions will be faced with new trials and tribulations. Higher and higher prices for food, clothing and shelter. This means lower and lower real wages. Price rises granted by the government of the capitalist ruling class, tax reductions; protection and security. Mounting profits, mounting dividends and bigger interest payments to the gilded loafers who hold the bonds of the big corporations.
In such a situation, and every delegate to the UAW convention knows that this is the situation, the one way out, and the only way out, is for LABOR TO MOVE, INTO WASHINGTON: into the White House, into the Capitol, into every government department and bureau.
The one way out and the only way out is for labor, through its own political party, to take over in the country; to assume the POLITICAL, ECONOMIC and SOCIAL leadership of the nation. This is the real problem for the UAW convention; this is an issue worth fighting over, to organize caucuses and factions around. It is essentially a part of the GM program which we discuss elsewhere in this issue. This is a program to run for office on. Any other program today is a waste of time and the union’s money. More than this, any other program is a program of defeat for the labor movement.
 




At the request of Marshall Field’s New York daily PM two white southerners have written their replies to a question put to them: what is the cause of racial conflicts in the South. PM states for itself that the arguments of the two disputants are presented “because it believes the important problem of racial conflicts needs to be thoroughly discussed and all viewpoints stated.” The two debaters are James N. Alsop, editor of the Greenwood, Miss., Morning Star and Dr. Clark H. Foreman, president of the Southern Conference for Human Welfare.
The Morning Star is said to be a “liberal” paper and Mr. Alsop is said to be a Southern “liberal.” Dr. Foreman is also labelled “a liberal and a Southerner.” After reading what each has to say one can only conclude that being a “liberal,” especially the Southern variety, is like being a Christian: there are all kinds, all varieties and all degrees.
The immediate and specific event behind the debate was the killing of a Negro in Mississippi by a mob and the roving of this mob through Mississippi swamps for other Negro victims of Mississippi justice, “white supremacy” and Southern determination to protect “white womanhood.”'
 
Alsop’s Evasions
The “liberal” Mr. Alsop begins his argument and discussion with the traditional plaint about the attitude of the “decent people of this section.” They do not “condone” lynching and mob violence. “Southerners are very little different from people of other sections. Only a small percentage participate in crimes of any kind.” Mr. Alsop may not know it but this is an evasion of the real issue, the main point in connection with mob violence against Negroes.
Mob violence against Negroes in the South or in the North is not just a “crime of any kind.” It is not something like burglary or racketeering or wife-beating. Lynching and mob violence against Negroes are not offenses committed by individuals but by organized groups acting on the foundation of political, economic and social notions, prevalent nationally in the U.S. and accentuated in certain communities, such as the South. Lynching and mob violence are chronic social phenomena in the South. In the South, mob violence is a custom of the country, a community enterprise. Mob violence against Negroes has the persistent support of the community. Alsop admits this when he says that “... the type of people who lynch also would kill informers.” This means that the lynchers are the ruling force in the community and that they really have the support of the community. This could not be said of burglars or wife-beaters, for instance.
Alsop himself really supports the mob. He may not know it, since he is a liberal, but all the support the mob needs is contained in Alsop’s article. Both white people and Negroes in the South are filled with “fear” and “unrest.” He talks about Negroes “violating a taboo” and becoming the victims of “whites” who fear something “they can’t describe.” He finds that the Negro “is becoming more sullen by the day.” The Negro hears about his “rights,” “not understanding what they mean but feeling somehow that he is being cheated.” When one reads this kind of trash by a man known as a Southern “liberal” it is difficult to separate Alsop from Bilbo and Eastland. Alsop puts rights for the Negro in quotation marks. Is it really unclear to him, for instance, what the Workers Party is talking about when it says that Negroes should have social, political and economic equality? What does Alsop think about the Negro “being cheated?” Does he hold that the Negro’s feeling in this matter has no basis in fact? And what does he mean by the really vicious expression about the Negro “growing more sullen ...?” When the slaves grew sullen they were given a beating by the overseer. What does Alsop recommend for the increasingly “sullen” Mississippi Negroes?
 
Dressed-up Bilboism
Alsop talks about “a smart-sounding person” telling Southern Negroes that their “rights” are not being granted. He says that to the Negro “it means just that.” What does this liberal editor think it should mean to Negroes? Does he believe their rights are being granted? Does Alsop put rights in quotation marks because he believes that Negroes have one kind of rights and white people another kind?
And then this Southern liberal gets off a real piece of Bilbo rubbish. The Negro “has never been taught initiative or pride, so he cannot understand that privileges granted in the Constitution mean earning a place of respect through his own accomplishments.” This is a brand new interpretation of the Constitution; it does not cover those who do not have accomplishments to their credit. In the South they first violate the Constitution in relation to the Negro; they provide him with the worst schools in the country; they terrorize him for centuries; they Jim Crow him and lynch him. After all this is completed, the “decent people” say to the Negro, “you cannot have Constitutional privileges because you have not won a place of respect by your ‘own accomplishments.’” And this is Southern liberalism!
“The better class Negro and the intelligent white are caught in a seething whirlpool ...” That is true. A seething whirlpool of stark and brazen reaction and something known as “liberalism” that is indistinguishable from reaction.
“... a Southerner will not tolerate intrusion upon his race by a black person.” What is the white Southerner’s race? And who has really done the intruding? Did the black slave woman intrude the bedroom of the master or did he invade the cabin with his lascivious and lecherous designs? Where did the mulatto Negroes come from? Were they brought to this country from Africa? Does Alsop claim that they are the result of cohabitation between Negro men and Southern white women?
“... every boy and girl had grown up knowing that the Negroes had always acted better for a year or so after one was burned or shot.” This I suppose is what Alsop, the Southern liberal, would call preventative sociology. The thing to do is to burn a Negro at the stake now and again. This would insure the safety of Southern white womanhood “for a year or so....” We ask: what’s the difference between Alsop and Bilbo? According to Alsop, the Southerner is determined that the “white race shall not be on equal terms with the Negro.” We don’t want to see the little people of the South, white or black, at the level of the Negroes today. We want to see them become the ruling class in conjunction with the white and black workers of the North. Then they can solve their own common problems and put the Alsops and the Bilbos where they belong.
Alsop recommends that dissatisfied Negroes move North leaving “those content to work as manual laborers in their present locations.” This is a proposal for the most militant Negroes to leave the South so that the lynchers may ply their trade in peace and without molestation. It means this, or it means asking the dissatisfied Negroes to go, leaving behind the “Uncle Toms” to do the work without any agitation about “rights.” It is also a proposal from a “liberal” to be left alone and not be bothered with the question of “rights” for Negroes.
Alsop is not only a slanderer but he is also a first rate liar. He writes that the Southerner fears the Negro because the Negroes are dissatisfied, “demanding more pay than before while evidencing little interest in actually working.” This is an old slander as aged as the pro-slavery arguments of Alsop’s ancestors. Alsop knows that human beings in capitalist society work for wages. He knows that the wages of everybody in the South are miserably low. In his article he gives the reasons for this. But being a good Southern “liberal”, he is satisfied to get off the old dirt about Negroes being lazy.
We said that Alsop is also a liar. He says: “the honest educated Southern Negro admits that his race as a whole is making little attempt to better itself.” Alsop is both a liar and scoundrel: a dirty snivelling scoundrel. It’s so easy for a Negro to better himself in the South with the mob at his heels. It’s so convenient to better one’s self in a Mississippi cotton field. One learns all that is necessary about bettering one’s self in a Mississippi state-supported Negro school. One can always better one’s self best while being burned at the stake. We would like to see Alsop after he had a few years of this type of opportunity for self-betterment.
Alsop closes his slimy article with the information that with the help of many liberal people working in the South “there is every chance that the health, educational and economic problems of the Negro will be relieved in the near future, if that is what they seek.” The last phrase, “if that is what they seek” really says a lot about this Southern “liberal.” He fears that Negroes will want more than improvement in the most elemental things. They may want full Constitutional rights. They may want social, political and economic equality. They may want all the rights a Southern “liberal” enjoys. This is too much for Alsop and Bilbo. “... only more lynchings and killings are in store for those who remain in the South and cannot live by the standards set by the whites.” That is, the standards set by the Alsops and the Bilbos.
Alsop’s piece is nothing more than an open declaration to the lynchers to go ahead with their lynching bees. It is open support to Bilbo, Eastland and Rankin. The Negroes will do well not to place any confidence in the liberals of the Alsop stripe.
Dr. Foreman’s piece is of a different kind. In his piece he refutes every contention and position of Alsop. He does not say so but he too knows that Alsop is a slanderer and a liar. He says: “... we must rejoice that so many Negroes are determined, even at the risk of their lives, to participate in our democracy.’’ This, of course, is what worries Alsop. Far too many Negroes are ready to die for their freedom. This makes the Alsop type of “liberal” uncomfortable. They may be faced with the necessity for making a real choice: human equality including the Negroes, or Bilbo and the lynchers.
As the Negroes defend themselves more and more and as they receive aid more and more from the working class, the Alsops will be in a dilemma. Either they will place themselves at the side of the Negroes or they will take their rope and torch and run with the mob. At that time they will discover that they are not only lined up against the Negroes but the white toilers as well.?
 




There is a great deal of propaganda and agitation in the South concerned with industrialization. Before the industrialization outburst, many in the South had become convinced that in order to prosper and feed its population, it would be necessary to this region to escape from the practice of putting all of its eggs into one basket. Many leaders took the position that for prosperity it would be necessary for the South to resort to a system of diversified agriculture and produce foodstuffs for the population. A great deal of progress has been made along this line but the area is still overwhelmingly covered with cotton. Not only that, but the cotton producers have resisted the mechanization of cotton growing. To date there is not even the beginning of technological improvement in the growing and harvesting of cotton such as has taken place, for instance, in wheat planting and harvesting.
This is to be accounted for not only by the difference in the technical problems involved, but also by the differences in the labor supply and the social and political contrasts in the cotton and grain regions. The Western states are scarcely populated and it is necessary to use a migrant and mobile labor force. In the South there are millions of Negroes and “poor whites” ready to hand for year-in and year-out labor in the’ cotton fields. In the South the labor force lives on the plantation or in communities adjoining the big plantations.
 
Down at the Heels, But a Capitalist
There is another reason, however, why the South resists the advances of modern technology: the lack of the necessary capital for experimentation and the introduction of mass production machinery. Furthermore, the cotton planter has at hand a source of “cheap” labor. When cotton is selling at from 20 to 30 cents a pound and the planter gets it picked for $3.00 a hundred, for $1.00 the hundred or in any number of instances for what amounts to actual or mere subsistence, in a very practical sense, he is not likely to think seriously about mechanization and the introduction of the mechanical picker.
What must be understood is that the Southern cotton planter is really a capitalist, quite often a sort of bedraggled and down-at-the-heels capitalist. it is true, but a capitalist. The cotton economy is part and parcel of capitalist production in the United States. The planter therefore is primarily concerned with capitalist profits. He functions in a similar way to the Northern manufacturer; for instance, he does not change his method of production until he becomes convinced that the change will be profitable in a very concrete way. He. like the manufacturer, will be concerned with the return on his investment, the per cent of profit and the demands of the market. Also, just as with the manufacturer, he will be influenced by such a factor as the availability or the scarcity of labor. The fact that the cotton planter today is faced with an acute labor shortage may do more than all the sociological golden texts to turn his thinking toward the mechanical cotton picker.
In order to attempt to escape from the dilemma in which they find themselves, the Southern “liberals” of the type of Governor Arnall and other latter-day Henry Gradys, fight against freight differentials and proclaim the necessity for industrialization. This is the real inner content of Southern liberalism. They want a greater democratization of the South, increased participation of the people in the political affairs of the region. They are against the poll-tax for this reason primarily. They seek to form an alliance with the masses against the socially backward planters who today wield the political power.
 
Relations Between North and South
These white Southern liberals face more than one difficult problem in their industrialization program. While it is they who will eventually come over to the unionization program of the CIO, because they will become convinced that such a step will be a necessary one for industrialization, they will incur the increasing enmity of the planters and landlords. Every concrete step in industrializing the South is an attack on the plantation system. The workers will leave the plantations and swarm into the factories. The planters will be forced to pay higher wages for production in the hand economy or be forced to resort to mechanization which will tend to transform the old-fashioned plantation into a “factory in the field.” This would make organization easier and also necessitate the payment of higher wages.
The main problem, however, is the poverty of the South. Also, leading Southerners are divided on what is the proper manner of attacking the problem of industrialization. There are the patriots who want the industries to be indigenous. This group desires that the industries be owned by native Southerners in order that the wealth may remain in the South. The other group are the economic and political deputies of Northern monopoly capitalism. It is this group which is in the best position to prosper and make economic headway. It is in this group that one finds the representatives of the great Eastern public utility holding companies, banks and insurance companies, the representatives of Northern manufacturers, of U.S. Steel, of railroads owned in the North.
These managers for Northern monopoly capitalism are concentrated in Atlanta, Dallas, Birmingham and other large Southern cities. They are the defenders of the high tariff, freight differentials and low wages, and they are the financiers of the horde of anti-labor proto-fascists and equally anti-labor religious mountebanks who infest every corner of the South. “He commands the colonial outposts for Northern overlords who have never been averse to the maintenance of the entire South as a slum area, a gigantic sweatshop dedicated to Northern profit.” The manager for his Northern employer “knows the whys of the eighty-five per cent ownership in Georgia, the meaning of the fact that fifty cents of every dollar on deposit in Georgia banks is owned in the North.”
 
Northern Monopolists Pull Southern Strings
The Southern demagogue and political rabble-rouser is often as not in league with the Northern monopoly capitalist through his deputy in the South. It was revealed, for instance, that Talmadge was financed by the Georgia Power & Light Co. The only thing Georgian is the word Georgia. It is an operating subsidiary of a Northern holding company. The congressional tie-up between certain reactionary and blatant Southerners and reactionary Northern Congressmen is not an accident of history or a bloc made, for instance, to keep Roosevelt from becoming a “dictator.” Both of these groups of Congressmen are the political fronts for Northern monopolists. The lineal descendants of Northern abolitionists can and do make such blocs for the reason that not only do their general class interests coincide, but also because they often share more objective economic interests. And so a relatively cultured Taft can find himself arm in arm with stupid and ignorant clowns such as Bilbo and Rankin,
Right now, therefore, it is of no concern to the Northern capitalists that one of every four citizens in the South is denied real political rights. They are not aroused over the fact that Bilbo was elected by only 15 per cent of those of voting age voting. They know that the South has 40 per cent of the natural resources of the country, but produces only 12 per cent of the manufactured goods. The owners of U.S. Steel know the value to them of the Alabama poll-tax. It helps to keep both taxes and wages low.
In the Southeastern states, eight per cent of the people can neither read nor write. Forty-five per cent of the youth below 24 in Mississippi do not attend school. Northern monopoly capitalism is not disturbed by this, for all of these people can pick cotton, cut lumber, mine sulphur and iron and do the many other unskilled tasks of a region used primarily for the production of raw materials. Furthermore, even though a man is illiterate, he is nevertheless a part of the great national market.
Monopoly capitalism today is not disturbed by the high disease and mortality rate of the South. Even here a profit can be made. All the medicinals (except the quack nostrums) and the coffins are made in the North. While the government was disturbed by the fact that 16 per cent of the men rejected for the Army from the South were rejected because of syphilis and only 9 per cent from the North were rejected for the same disease, such things do not disturb the capitalist marketeers, bookkeepers and bondholders.
These are a few of the problems which the labor movement must face and deal with as it moves into the South. The Southern manager who conducts the negotiations with the unions can sign no agreements until he has telephoned New York. The champion of locally owned industries cannot go far because he too must deal with Northern monopoly capitalism with which he is confronted.
 




“The Price Decontrol Board has failed in its responsibility to the American people,” says Philip Murray in a public statement. Murray continues with the statement that “the CIO deplores this action of the Decontrol Board for its failure to keep faith with the American workers.” Murray attempts to chastise the Decontrol Board for “failure to re-establish price control on milk and dairy products, flour and bread.” The CIO president finds that “prices of fifty per cent of the daily purchases of foodstuffs are still left free to rise.”
The big meat packers are also wailing about the Price Decontrol Board. Big packers, who refused to deliver supplies to the retailers until the ceilings were removed, are now pounding the Decontrol Board because this three-man price board of big business men has decreed that meat ceilings will be renewed.
The packers are preparing to enter the field of black market operations again. The American Meat Institute has announced that the renewal ceilings “will stimulate black market trading.” The packers know what they are talking about. They know where the meat is and who owns, slaughters and distributes most of the meat in this country. The American Meat Institute knows precisely what it is talking about when it says the re-establishment of price ceilings will stimulate black market operations.
The packers, however, are very patriotic and honorable gentlemen. The “legitimate meat industry will do everything it can to make restored price controls work.” Every working man and working woman can be assured that the packers will do just as they say. They will attempt to make controls work now just as they did before; that is by releasing millions of pounds of meat to what is known as the “black market.”
 
Take Home Pay Down
What is important and significant here is that the president of the CIO and the Big Packers both call on the government, the same government in Washington, for relief. Both groups call on a Decontrol Board composed of two bankers and a manufacturer for aid. Murray asks these two bankers and a manufacturer to do something for the working class and the people. The Big Packers ask these two bankers and a manufacturer to do something for capitalist industry and the capitalist ruling class. And Murray thinks that this Decontrol Board will hear his voice above the loud shouts of the packers.
Murray also finds that the workers have really had a reduction in take-home pay amounting to approximately 8½ per cent from April 1945 to June 1946. Real income for the workers is now 18 per cent below the April 1945 level. Take home pay in certain key industries including automobile, steel and electrical industries has declined 13 per cent from April 1945 to June 1946. If the increase in the cost of living is included, says the CIO, “the over-all decline in real income as a result of reduced hours and increased prices is 22.2 per cent.”
Murray says finally that “when American workers are squeezed between rising prices and declining take-home pay, something must be done to protect their living standards.”
Every worker will agree with this. But what does Murray propose for labor and the masses? What is his program? What action does he recommend? Murray has no program for labor and the masses that will have any effect on the policies of the employers or the decisions of the government Decontrol Board made up of two bankers and a manufacturer. Murray has no program, but the big food producers do have a program. This is particularly true of the big packers. They intend to return to their practice of storing the meat in their refrigerators and withholding it from the market. They plan to resume their practice of defying their government and nodding while millions of pounds of their meat passes to the consumer through black market operations.
The big capitalist manufacturers, producers and processors have a program. They have a Decontrol Board and a government to aid them in putting their program through. Murray and the other labor leaders have no program for labor which even begins to take care of high prices and low wages.
The Workers Party has a program on prices. That program was announced at the time of the GM strike last winter. The Workers Party called this program “the GM Program” We agreed with Reuther that wages could not be considered separate from prices, that there should be no price rises without wage increases. The Workers Party said at that time that the question of prices was one of prime importance to labor and the mass of people, that the day had passed when labor could be concerned only with fighting for a few cents an hour increase in wages and pay no attention to what price was charged for the necessities of life.
The Workers Party took the position at that time that the demand for tying wages to prices was a demand that had great social implications and revolutionary potentialities; that inherent in such a demand was the necessity for the independent political organization of the working class for the purpose of establishing workers’ control of industry and a workers government.
Reuther, of course, did not extract any of these implications from his program. He did not even carry his program through as he announced it or as he understood it. He wobbled all over the country, from platform to platform and from board meeting to board meeting, finally capitulating to Murray. He has succeeded only in getting himself more and more hemmed in by the Addes-Thomas-Stalin-ist bloc.
Here is what the Workers Party Program calls for:

No Price Increases without Wage Increases.
 
The demand for an escalator clause in the renegotiaton of all wage contracts. The demand for an automatic increase in wages with the rise in the cost of living.
 
The organization of Popular Price Control Committees by the unions, to include other representative democratic organizations (consumers’ organizations, tenants’ organizations, housewives organizations, poor farmers, etc.). The only control which labor and the masses can rely on in the struggle against price inflation is popular price control committees. The Workers Party advocates the immediate formation of these popular price control committees. Such committees can take immediate action through demonstrations and picketing.

Price control and wages can be handled effectively only by the unions and the masses under the leadership of the organizations of the working class. Labor cannot depend on the Decontrol Board or any other government agency. The continued rise in prices demands that concrete actions be organized by the unions and that these actions be carried through by the unions and the masses of the common people. The unions know how to do these things. They have had long experience in the organization of strikes and demonstrations.?
 




In these articles I have discussed many aspects of the problem which is known as “The South.” I have discussed this problem as it is connected and related to the AFL and CIO organization campaign. All of the questions discussed, and many more which have not been mentioned, are an integral part of the very difficult task of getting the workers of the South organized into trades unions.
Liberals, particularly Northern liberals, are wont to lay great emphasis on the demagogic and inflammatory character of the political and economic propaganda carried on by the Southern politicians. It is necessary to emphasize who these politicians are from the standpoint of their social origins. We have already discussed their connection with Northern capitalism and the bloc they have with the chief political representatives of Northern capitalism in both the Republican and Democratic Parties.
This brazen alliance is extremely significant and cannot be emphasized too strongly. Northern Republicans continue to speak of themselves as the “party of Lincoln.” By this they say that they are the party of freedom and progress. They also proclaim in their election platforms that “the Republican Party is historically the friend of labor.” It is with this sort of demagogic propaganda that the Republicans obscure not only the real historic role of Lincoln as the head of the party of triumphant Northern capitalism, but at the same time they obscure the present bankruptcy of capitalism and the extremely reactionary character of the present Republican Party.
Northern Democrats participate in this deception and the two together make a bloc with the most reactionary and bombastic Southern blackguards. This is all in the interest of Northern monopoly capitalism; that is to say, in the interest of U.S. monopoly capitalism.
 
The Conflict in the South
While there is a conflict in the South between the big planters and the Southern and Northern industrialists, this conflict is merely a struggle between these two sections of the ruling class for priority in the exploitation of the Southern toilers. The Southern Talmadges, Arnalls and Bilbos serve one or the other or both masters. Simultaneously, however, each in his own way seeks to enhance his own local economic, political and social independence and prestige. Each seeks, therefore, to build a political machine and to become a part of the native Southern economic groups. They must have something to sell to their masters. The most potent article to put up for sale is the political support of the masses and control of State Legislatures and City Councils.
The Southern political oligarchy retains its control over the masses by the time-honored shibboleths of “white supremacy,” “the protection of Southern white womanhood,” “the South is the best friend of the Negro” and by all the variegated hypocrisies of the “damnyankee” theme. The Yankees they oppose are the Northern liberals who from time to time speak out against the “peculiar institutions” of the South. Even the majority of the so-called Southern liberals are also in opposition to the position taken by outspoken Northern liberals.
There is really no basic difference in the approach to the social questions of the South between that of Bilbo and Talmadge and that of the bulk of the Southern liberals. The Arnalls, Peppers, Alsops, Daniels and Ethridges are in unison with the Talmadges, Bilbos, Eastlands and Rankins on the all-basic question of political, social and economic equality for Negroes. There is also no significant difference between the two groups on the matter of the exploitation of the working class, black and white, the maintenance of “white supremacy” and domination through the indoctrination of the “poor whites” with race superiority notions.
Neither the Southern “liberals” nor the outright reactionaries, of course, have any genuine equalitarian ideas in relation to the masses, white or black. One aspect of the dispute takes place around the question of whether the exploitation of the mass es shall be concentrated on the plantations or in the factories.
 
Negroes as Labor Force
The crux of the problem is the presence in the South of more than ten million Negroes. Historically and socially, the Negroes are a far more important factor in the labor force than they are in the North. Black, not white, labor is the cornerstone of the Southern economy. We have discussed the peculiarities of this outmoded economy with its emphasis on manual operations and its technological primitiveness. It is a low-wage economy, one which can persist only at a low cultural level, on the basis of a strict separation of black and white, the brutalization of the white masses and the degradation of the Negro. Above all it is imperative for the maintenance of this system that the Negro be kept available for labor in the fields, swamps, forests, mines, quarries arid for the many common labor and menial tasks which predominate in the South.
This is the real meaning of the multitudinous anti-Negro laws, rules, regulations and customs of the South. When the illiterate and unwashed old man Adair of Monroe, Ga., tells a PM reporter that he knew a Negro who cooked his own father’s head and ate it, he is only saying in his own stupid and revolting way that Negroes should be confined to all the hard, dangerous, undesirable and poorly paid jobs; that they should be kept herded in shanty-towns, shot down if they attempt to vote and lynched in order to keep them in their place. But what Adair says in the only manner he knows is, in effect, what white Southern leaders say and do.
 
Continuation of the Past
What takes place in the South today is a continuation, with differences wrought by changing times, of the attitude of the South to the slave regime. Peonage is a substitute for chattel slavery. Wages, particularly for Negroes, are kept as near to the unpaid labor system of slavery as possible. In the rural areas the planter is a law unto himself in his relation to Negroes. Bilbo, Talmadge, Eastland and Rankin are worthy successors to Tillman, Blease, Vardaman and Tom Watson. They too are the saviors of white racial purity just as were Tillman and his. blatherskite contemporaries. On the other side, that is, among the “liberals,” we find Arnall functioning as a successor to John Temple Graves and making an all-out struggle for the industrialization of the South.
The whole intricate problem as to what the South is and how it got to be that way has been obscured by a high degree of emotionalism, ignorance, nonsense, demagogy, unscientific theory and downright lying. To this must be added the fact that a great deal of this rationalization has been made possible by virtue of the case with which Negroes can be identified and also by the difficulty of identification in the case of the so-called “white Negroes.” The difficulty is enhanced when it is realized that relatively few people have an adequate knowledge of the South: its history, laws, customs and its economy. Most of what is written about the South by Southern writers is biased, apologetic, trivial, emotional or impressionistic. What is produced in the North is often similar or woefully inadequate.
This is borne out in what is often written and spoken about slavery and the socio-political system of the South today. A majority of the disputants, white and black, do not properly evaluate the South as an integral part of capitalism in the U.S. and the role this section has played in the development of American capitalism. In another article, which will be the last in this series, I will discuss these questions.?
 




We resume this week a discussion of the kind of area the South is and what the conditions are which the labor movement is called upon to face in that section. What we have been emphasizing in this series of articles is that the South is not merely a place where, for some unknown or unknowable reason, there is a poll-tax, ignorance, poverty, lynchings and Bilbos and Talmadges. We are trying to show that there are social, political and economic foundations for the Bilbos, just as there are these same foundations for the Tafts. There are economic reasons for the Southern mobs, just as there are economic reasons for the Northern labor spies and capitalist goon squads.
Social, political and economic phenomena of the South are as much a part of capitalist development in the U.S. as are similar phenomena in the North. These phenomena, as they manifest themselves in the South, must be approached just as one approaches the analysis of social phenomena in the North: with the same method of analysis and with the same analytical instruments. Lynching, poll taxes and ignorance arc no more a part of the “nature” of the people of the South than are corrupt urban political machines, Jim Crow and acceptance of trade unions a part of the "nature” of the Northern people. With these observations we can renew our discussion of the kind of place the South is and why it is what it is.
 
Assessed Valuation of Southern Property
The poverty of the South can be dramatically exposed by comparing the total assessed valuation of property in a few Southern states with the assets of some Northern corporations. The figures are taken from A.G. Mezerick’s book, The Revolt of the South and West. The figures given are the “total assessed valuation of every bit of property inside each” state named. The figures for the states are for 1937; for the corporations they are for 1935. Both have increased in the past ten years but the ratios have not changed in any significant way. For simplification, I have “rounded off” the amounts.
All the property in Texas was assessed at approximately three billion dollars, which was about equal to the assets of the Prudential Life Insurance Co. and considerably less than the assets of the Metropolitan Life Insurance Co. and the American Telephone & Telegraph Co. Texas has the highest assessed valuation of any Southern state equalling that of Georgia, Alabama, South Carolina and Florida combined.
The total aggregate assessed valuation of ALL PROPERTY in the nine states of Louisiana, Georgia, Alabama, Florida, Mississippi, Arkansas, South Carolina, Tennessee and Texas (the lynching states) was less by five billion dollars than the combined assets of General Motors, Pennsylvania Railroad, U.S. Steel, Metropolitan Life and American Telephone & Telegraph,
The Consolidated Edison Co. (electric light and power) in New York City had assets greater than the total assessed value of Mississippi, South Carolina and Arkansas.
It must also be remarked that these huge Northern corporations are also worth more than a combination of Western states. Many of the Western states have assessed valuations greatly below the Southern states. For instance, U.S. Steel has larger assets than the total assessed valuation of all property in Nevada, Wyoming, Montana, Idaho and North Dakota.
It has to be emphasized, however, that there is one very significant difference between the Southern and Western states; that is the difference in population. The five Western states mentioned above have a total population that, is millions less than five Southern states.
 
Industrial Property Taxed Lightly
It must also be mentioned that while the assessed valuation of property in a Western state may be lower than in a Southern state, the per capita income in the average Western state will be far higher than in the Southern state. For instance, the assessed value of all property in Mississippi was more than twice that of Nevada but the per capita income in Nevada was $960 while in Mississippi it was only $195 per capita. Again, while in Wyoming taxable property was not great, this state spent $1,820 annually per classroom while Texas, the best Southern state, spent only $1,395. Mississippi, of course, was low with $448.
In order to reveal the full significance of these statistics we must take into consideration the probability that industrial property in the South, particularly Northern industrial property, is not taxed as high or as rigidly as in the North. This will also apply to a state like Montana, the home of the Anaconda Copper Co. That is, it is probably true that if industrial property in the South was taxed as in the North, these states would show a higher assessed valuation and there would be available greater resources for education and other state-performed functions.
Furthermore, legislatures and city councils which paid more attention to the levying and collection of corporation taxes would at the same time be legislatures which were more mindful of low wages, ill health and bad housing conditions. Therefore, the escaping of tax payments by Northern corporations operating in the South is only one more means at their disposal for further impoverishment of the South.
No matter how much improvement can and should be made in the South in the way of increasing the income from corporation taxes, this would not materially change the figures given above nor the relative weight of the wealth-producing potentialities of the two sections. From Texas to the Atlantic south of the Ohio is a vast agricultural and raw materials area. North of the Ohio and east of the Mississippi is a vast industrial area. There has been discovered no way to get as much wealth from capitalist land as from a capitalist factory.
This situation which we have described in this and in previous articles has much to do with making the South what it is politically, socially and culturally.
It is a situation which demands the intervention of the Northern working class, or there can be no substantial improvement. The Southern workers and toilers are too poor and too backward to go it alone. And when to the general backwardness of the toilers is added the all-pervading racial tension and hatred, it should be easy to realize that the solution must begin with the extension of the trade union movement to the South, especially the industrial union movement.
Our analysis gives the reasons why “Operation Dixie" today must be a proletarian operation. It is only the Northern working class which can bring relief to the Southern workers and toilers. This is particularly true in the case of the millions of Negro toilers, who are the most oppressed, the most exploited, the most degraded,. and upon whom the greatest insults are heaped. If the Northern proletariat, black and white, does not understand this, it only paves the way for its own harassment by Northern capitalism. Negro proletarians in the North need to remember that, despite Northern Jim Crow, they are in position to wage a struggle against it.
They are active members of powerful labor organizations. They have a higher standard of living than either the Negroes or the “poor whites” of the South. They are culturally at a higher level than the great mass of white Southern toilers. They have essentially the same political freedom as the white workers of the North.
The white workers of the North need to remember that they have profited by the degradation and exploitation of the black toilers of the South particularly. All of the Northern working class is a beneficiary of the special exploitation and robbery of the Southern toilers, black and white, by Northern capitalism. Much of the wealth and profits extracted from the low-paid labor of the Southern worker goes to pay the wages of the better paid Northern worker.
In another article I will show how the political representatives of Northern capitalism obey their master’s voice in the Southern states and cities.?
 




Two Negro men and their wives were brutally and savagely murdered in Georgia last week by a band of 20 white men. They were dragged from the automobile of another white man; the two men were shot and then the two women were murdered. “The upper part of the grotesquely sprawled bodies,” says the New York Times, “were scarcely recognizable from the mass of bullet holes.”
One of the men had just been discharged from the army. He had been overseas five years fighting, so he was told, to make the world safe for the “Four Freedoms,” for “democracy,” for “the American Way of Life.” This man had been told that he was fighting against fascism: against cruelty, savagery and barbarism. This Negro, just out of the army, had been told that he must leave Georgia and the United States and travel thousands of miles to Germany and Japan to accomplish the aim of civilization. He and his black and white comrades in arms must kill Germans and Japanese if they and their families were to be free and secure.
And so, after five years of killing the “bestial Germans” and the “savage Japanese,” after five years of torment and sacrifice, Roger Malcolm came back to the United States and to Georgia. Back to “democracy,” to the “Four Freedoms” and to the “American Way of Life.” Roger Malcolm, George Dorsey and their wives found the American Way of Life just as it has always been, from the horrors of the Middle Passage in the 17th century down to the very minute they were done to death by the Georgia mob.
All through the five years when Roger Malcolm was fighting fascism in Europe and the Pacific, his masters in the United States and in Georgia were preserving The American Way of Life for the day of his return. He must not be disappointed or disillusioned. He, his friend George Dorsey, their wives and 15 million other Negroes. Everything was just as Malcolm left it in the United States and in Georgia.
Hate and brutality, exploitation and misery, the chain gang and the cabin in the cotton; rope, faggot and lash, hunger and raggedness; insult, degradation and proscription. This is America. This is the United States, Georgia, South Carolina, Mississippi and New York for the Negro.
This is what Roger Malcolm came back to. The travail and the agony; this is the United States his wife, his family and all of black America suffered under while Malcolm was killing the German and Japanese “beasts,” who stood in the way of the Four Freedoms.
 
The Woodward Case
Roger Malcolm came back to the “Land of the Free and the Home of the Brave.” And so did Isaac Woodward of South Carolina. Woodward, too, had been away in the army killing Germans and Japanese. He also came back to the “Four Freedoms.” Like Malcolm he found his freedom. On the very day he was discharged from the army he had his eyes gouged out by a bus driver.
Just like Malcolm and Woodward, the Ferguson Brothers of Freeport, Long Island, found the Four Freedoms also. They too came back to the “Land of the Free and the Home of the Brave.” And they are dead, too. Not shot or hanged or burned at the stake by German and Japanese fascists but murdered by a policeman. This did not happen in Bilbo’s Mississippi or the Georgia of Talmadge but in Nassau County in Dewey’s New York.
The pattern of the “American Way of Life” for Negroes is the same all over the land: North, South, East and West. Murder. The Mob. Rope and Faggot. This United States. Rapine. Intimidation. Hate. This country ruled over by Talmadge and Dewey. Truman and Taft. Bilbo of Mississippi and the Northern Bilbos. This America of huge wealth and abject poverty. Wall Street and cotton field. Gold Coast and Shanty Town. This is what Roger Malcolm, Isaac Woodward and the Ferguson brothers left and this is what they returned to. This is the way it has been for over three hundred years. This is the way it will always be.
 
Unless –
Negroes and all the oppressed determine, that if we must die we will die like men, like human beings. FIGHTING BACK. Not like stray dogs, hunted in the streets and byways by any mobster with rope, gun and torch. By any roving uniformed thug, clubbing and slaying in the name of “the law.”
Lamentations are of no avail. Entreaty is a broken reed. Petition and Protest? Petition whom and protest to whom? The Mob? The Government? Which Government? Surely not the government of Georgia, or Mississippi. Perhaps the Government at Washington: The “Conscience of America.” But none of these will listen.
“Negroes must be kept in their place.” “White Supremacy.” “Negroes are Inferior.” “All of History and Biology for the past 6,000 years have proven that the White Race is Superior.” “Slavery is the Natural Condition of the Negro.” “A Negro has no Rights which a White Man is bound to Respect.”
This is the United States of America. The “American Way of Life.”
What do the masters of the country say about these executions “without trial.” Listen to the New York Times. “Decent white people everywhere feel a heartsick sense of shame over this ugly event.” This is a lie.
The “decent white people” the Times is talking about only feel a sense of embarrassment. Or some fleeting sense of fright. They only ask themselves if the Negroes will always consent to die like vermin. They worry lest the Negro toiling masses enlist the support of their own kind from among the white toilers. Even the white workers in the mob might decide some day to fight at the side of the Negroes as brothers and sisters, as common victims with identical interests. This can and might happen. Even in Georgia! Even in Mississippi!
If the “decent white people” are against these executions “without trial” why don’t they do something? Why don’t the rulers of the country act? They have the power. They own and control industry and the government. Why don’t these “decent white people” demand, fight for and insist on SOCIAL, POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC EQUALITY for the Negro people? Why don’t they pass an anti-lynching bill? A Fair Employment Practices Act? Why don’t they remove every insult and degradation under which Negroes live? They are liars. They profit materially, socially and politically from the degradation of the Negro, from the hatred of the little white people for the Negro.
 
Who Are the Murderers?
The State of Georgia is having great difficulty in finding and identifying the murderers. The Workers Party can identify the murderers: EUGENE TALMADGE and all the Talmadges. Those in Georgia, Washington, New York and everywhere from coast to coast. The murderers are the protagonists and defenders of hate, exploitation, discrimination, disfranchisement and Jim Crow. Under this head we indict: The Government at Washington, the head and front of Jim Crow of this country. We indict the government of the State of Georgia and of New York State. We indict THE CAPITALIST RULING CLASS. We indict every Negro “Uncle Tom,” every “good Negro,” every Negro “who knows his place.”
When will this murder, exploitation, plunder, degradation, insult and Jim Crow end? Not by the intervention of the “decent white people.” These are either the masters and the rulers or the suppliants of the masters and rulers. These are either scoundrels, hypocrites and exploiters or they are quaking cowards. No, we cannot depend on these “decent people.” What sense does it make for the slave to depend on the “shame” of the master class for his freedom?
There have been Negroes who understood this. There are Negroes today who understand it and who stand ready to go into action. They are not the Negro congressmen, the editors, the professional people, the politicians, businessmen or the office-holders. They are the great mass of oppressed Negroes in mine, mill, factory and the fields. These are the real oppressed, those who really feel the lash daily. They are the Malcolms, the Dorseys, the Woodwards and the Fergusons.
 
The Truly Great Negroes
The truly great Negroes who led the slave rebellions understood what we are talking about. The real giants in the struggle for freedom, equality and human dignity were people such at Nat Turner, Denmark Vesey, Gabriel and Harriet Tubman. These Negroes knew that human freedom and equality are not attained through supplication, no matter to whom or to what the supplication is directed.
There are thousands of black Gabriels, Turners, Veseys and Tubmans today. They are in the cotton fields of the South. They are in the mines, mills and factories all over the land. They are the little people of today: the oppressed, the exploited, the murdered. They are ready to struggle for their freedom and for the genuine freedom of all mankind. They only ask to be taught, organized and led. Not by sychophants, cowards, betrayers, seducers and the deputies of the capitalist master class but by brave, sincere and incorruptible men and women of their own class of workers and toilers.
It will all end when, and only when the little people, the Malcolms, the Woodwards and their kind, black and white, sit in Congress and the White House, the State legislatures, the county buildings and the City Halls. When black and white sharecroppers occupy the desks of the Bilbos and the Tafts in the Senate. When black and white steelworkers and coal miners make and enforce the laws of the nation from the capitals, the courts and the White House. When white Georgia “crackers,” redeemed from race hatred, stupidity and ignorance, sit in the seat of the Talmadges and the Arnalls, clasping the hands of their Negro class brothers.
This will be the day of genuine democracy in the United States: democracy for the masses, Four Freedoms and all freedoms for the oppressed; justice, equality, peace and plenty for all the little people.
 




In the previous article we asked the question: How did the South come to be what it is? We did not complete the answer to this question. In order to give the whole answer it is necessary to go back to a previous era, long before “Operation Dixie” was ever thought of.
We must begin with the old slave economy of the South. The South is still paying for its two centuries of slave economy. It pays not only by economic poverty but also by its social, political and cultural poverty.
Another pertinent fact about the South is the stubborn attitude of the planters, who really dominate the scene, in refusing to recognize that Negro slavery has passed and that the old dream of a Cotton Kingdom with millions of Negro bondmen was shattered by Northern bayonets. The Southern plantation owners attempt by every means, legal and extra- legal, to revive the slave system or a close substitute.
 
The “Penny-Wage” System as It Works in the South
In their relations with the Negro toilers, they attempt to maintain a no-wage set-up. or what may be called a penny-wage system. They perpetuate tenant farming, share-cropping and a combination of these with day labor. They operate a creditor and debtor relation through contract labor, “convict” labor, money advances in the no-work season, and peonage, which keep their “hands” tied to the land and powerless to extricate themselves from bondage.
This relationship is the planter’s substitute for chattel slavery and is in fact more profitable. He has no actual cash investment in the worker, as he had in the slave, and therefore has no need to assume responsibility for even the physical well-being of his employees.
The South pays for slavery in still other ways. It pays because of the continued and intensified economic domination of the South by Northern finance capitalism. Northern commercial capitalism established this domination before the Civil War. With the replacement of commercial capitalism by Northern industrial capitalism and the triumph of the North over the South in the Civil War, the road was open for the North to complete its economic conquest of the South.
In his recent book, The Revolt of the South and West, A.G. Mezerick has a quotation from Henry Grady, a leading Southern journalist of 50 years ago. Grady told a story about a “one-gallus” white man who died in Georgia. His gravestone came from Vermont, his coffin from Cincinnati and his burial clothes from Boston and Chicago. All the South furnished for the funeral was “the corpse and the hole in the ground.”
The South could furnish only the corpse and the hole in the ground because after the Civil War it had no capital to develop manufacturing. Northern finance capitalism was interested only in bringing out the raw materials of the South for Northern factories and then shipping these materials back South in the form of durable and consumer goods.
The durable goods were really not sold to Southern enterprisers for use in Southern owned factories, but for use in industrial establishments owned by Northern capitalists. It was and is also true of all the agricultural machinery used in the South.
 
All The South Has Is the Corpse and the Hole
Northern capitalists have never had to worry about the Southern market because there was no place for the South to buy except in the North. All the South could furnish was the corpse and the hole in the ground. One might say with considerable truth that today the South really furnishes only the corpse because the hole in the ground is dug on land which is probably heavily mortgaged to Northern insurance companies.
It is not true that the South was never interested in industrial development. This interest began to show itself even before the Revolution in the efforts of certain Southerners to overcome the British mercantile system and establish some primitive form of manufacture. These “factories,” of course, were to be operated with slave labor. After the country was independent this effort continued and many slave-operated industries were established. But since a slave is not an efficient factory worker these slave-owning enterprisers tried to reopen the slave trade in order to acquire replacements. Their idea was to keep the slave economy alongside the factory economy. The black slaves were to be confined to the cotton field and the free poor whites were to man the textile mills. Thinking that this was not going far enough, some Southerners proposed a boycott on all Northern manufactured goods. This would merely have buried the corpse naked.
After the Southern rebellion had been crushed, Northern capitalism began ruthlessly to expand. The Republican Party, the Messiah of modern industrial capitalism, established its control over the whole nation. The deal made with the South’s political leaders through the Compromise of 1876, by which federal troops were to be withdrawn from the South in return for votes from Tilden to Hayes, only helped to strengthen the grip of Northern capitalism over the South. After the troops had been withdrawn the South began its efforts to push the Negro back into slavery. Even his few economic and political rights were severely abridged. The “poor white” emerged as the dominant political group, led by a raucous, bestial and ignorant group of political demagogues.
 
The North Expands While the South Sinks in Poverty
While the North was expanding industrially, the South was sinking further into economic degradation. White immigrants were arriving from Europe to man the Northern economy. Neither the immigrants nor native Northern labor would go South in any number. The South frantically held on to its brow-beaten black semi-slaves and its impoverished, ignorant and embittered poor whites. Hundreds of Negroes and poor whites migrated to the North, where there was a chance to procure some food, clothing and shelter. What went South from the North was northern capital for investment, dilapidated New England textile machinery, evangelists and patent medicine.
The Northern capitalists not only own what there is of Southern industry but Northern bankers and insurance companies hold the agricultural economy in their grip through loans and credit. The North owns the railroads and ships running to the South. Northern capitalists fixed the freight rates on the South’s raw materials. Hence the South could not produce those manufactured articles which give a high profit. The Republican high tariff is of benefit only to Northern capitalism.
The capitalist in the North therefore has a great deal to do with the condition of the masses in the South. Rosenwald and Rockefeller have poured millions into the South for education, but the Sears, Roebuck catalogue beat the Rosenwald schoolhouse into the South by many decades. Rockefeller too has built schools, hospitals and churches but his Chase National Bank, oil, sulphur and gas companies only returned thereby, a small part of what they had extracted from this section.
Mezerick, in the book mentioned above, calls the South “The Land of Plenty – Not to Eat.” A group of Northern manufacturers operating in Alabama published a report saying that it costs more to live in Alabama than in the North. The reason given was that the flour, meal, cereals, milk, cheese, fruit, canned goods and clothing come from the North and West. And yet an industrial worker in Alabama had an annual income of $758 against $1,500 for a Northern worker. This report gave the per capita income of the farm worker in Alabama for the year of the report as $238.
The whole myth about the low cost of living in the South has been destroyed. The Negro woman teacher in Monroe, Ga., explained the situation when being asked how she lived on her meager salary: “It was a combination of living and dying.”
The cost of living in Atlanta, Texas and Norfolk is today higher than in Michigan or New York. And yet, while in 1944 the per capita income for the country as a whole was low enough at $1,117, here are a few samples for the South: Alabama, $635; Georgia, $714; Mississippi, $528; South Carolina, $634, and Arkansas, $601. Florida and Texas had the highest per capita income of any Southern state: $929 and $884, respectively. This was for a peak war year. For 1940, the per capita income of the country as a whole was $575. But for this same year it was only $268 for Alabama, about the same for Arkansas, $202 for Mississippi, $286 for South Carolina, and $413 for Texas.
Per capita income statistics are, of course, deceptive, in that they are only a sort of idealized or hypothetical distribution of the total income payments. But they are extremely valuable for our purposes in that they show the total amount of money available for wages, salaries, dividends and interest. The figures show that the total amount available for distribution in the South is completely inadequate for even half-way human existence. At present the South is only a pretentious slum area. Any state with a per capita total of about $300 for income distribution, including dividends and interest, is in a condition in which starvation wages for all will prevail and semi-slavery and lynching for Negroes will be the rule.
This only underscores again the problem before the Northern labor movement as it moves into the South. In another article I will deal further with the absentee ownership in Southern capitalism, showing how Northern and Southern capitalism are related, who are the Southern leaders of this unified capitalism and how Northern capitalists support the Southern political, economic and social regime.
 



What the CIO Faces in Operation Dixie

Operation Dixie and
the Social Structure of the South

How Northern Capitalism Dominates
the Economy of the South
 




After receiving the report of his “investigator,” Lawrence Greenbaum, Governor Dewey has decided to close the Freeport, Long Island, case of the Ferguson brothers. This is the case of the two Negro brothers, ex-GIs, who were shot and killed by a white policeman, one Joseph Romeika, as they stood in line with their hands over their heads awaiting the arrival of the patrol wagon. The excuse given by Romeika for the shooting was the one usually given by cops after they have murdered somebody: he shot in self-defense, he saw the man drop his hand to his hip.
According to Greenbaum, there was some testimony given in his “investigation” to the effect that one of the brothers talked about having a gun and that one of them “leaned over and dropped his right hand to his hip.” One of the brothers is said to have corroborated this. The policeman killed the man who was supposed to have the gun but did not stop there. He immediately fired another shot at one of the others, hitting him in the arm.
It is claimed that this shot went through this man’s arm and lodged in the head of one of the brothers who was standing in line, causing his death. This cop was having a real field day with his target practice on the heads, arms and bodies of these Negro ex-GI’s. With bullets doing such queer things as going through one man’s arm and lodging in the skull of another standing at his side, it is to be wondered how this cop escaped shooting himself.
Furthermore the “investigator” did not answer the question as to why the cop fired the second shot. Charles Ferguson had already been killed. Joseph was standing next to him. The cop fired at Joseph and struck him in the arm. Alphonso was standing beside Joseph and this same bullet after passing through Joseph’s arm entered Alphonso’s skull killing him! Greenbaum, the “investigator” could not account for the movement of this erratic bullet.
There are some pertinent questions to be asked. Why did this cop fire the second shot. The men were said to have been standing in line with their hands over their heads. Charles had already been shot and killed. Why was Joseph shot with his hands up over his head? Furthermore if Joseph did not have his hands over his head how could the bullet go through his arm and strike Alphonso in the head even though Alphonso had moved from beside Joseph to his rear? The “investigator” is puzzled about this. Only two shots fired but two men are killed and one wounded.
Perhaps Joseph and Alphonso did move after Charles was shot. “... there must have been a movement out of line by one or two of these men,” says Greenbaum. They must have disobeyed “the order of the officer to stand in line with their, hands up.” What would Greenbaum expect? Here are four men lined up with their hands up. The policeman begins shooting and kills one. It is conceivable that the men became frightened and started to run. At least one would expect some sort of movement on their part to try and escape being murdered in cold blood. But Greenbaum seems to think that the normal thing for a human being under such conditions is to stand perfectly at ease and have one’s body made into a sieve. One further question: if the three who were still alive were running or beginning to run, why did this cop find it necessary to shoot them down?
 
Investigation a Fraud
This so-called investigation by Greenbaum was a farce and a fraud. It was a whitewash of the District Attorney of Nassau, the grand jury and of the killer, Romeika. Greenbaum may as well have said, in the Georgia manner, that the Ferguson brothers met their death “at the hands of persons unknown.” The only basis on which Greenbaum’s investigation makes any sense is to say that the Ferguson brothers were shot down and murdered because they were Negroes. If they had been white there would have been a real investigation and a real attempt to establish the facts and the responsibility in such a way that all decent human beings would have been satisfied.
This case has been hushed by Dewey because the Ferguson brothers were Negroes. Despite his pious but hypocritical protestations that “there is no evidence to establish that the officer, who thought his life was in danger, would have acted in any different manner had the four men before him been white and not colored.” This is a lie! Greenbaum knows it, and Dewey knows it. Greenbaum gives the whole thing away when he says that the grand jury “concluded that there was no reasonable chance of a conviction by a trial jury.” Greenbaum agrees with the grand jury and says: “... it is difficult for me to see how there could be any reasonable chance of a conviction ...”
Here were two men killed who had only committed a misdemeanor, and there was no chance in Nassau County to convict the policeman who had killed them. Therefore Greenbaum, the “investigator,” feels that it was just well that no trial by jury be held.
Greenbaum’s whole report to Dewey is hedged about with the quibbling and technicalities of a shyster lawyer who is not really conducting an investigation, but who is protecting someone and someone’s interests. He closes his nauseating report with more pious and disgusting rubbish. “Each community must by itself work out decent livable relationships among its members, and thereby integrate itself into our American way of life.” The dead Ferguson brothers have been “integrated into the American way of life.” The integrator, Romeika, is free to continue his integration. There are more bullets in his gun.
We would like to ask investigator Greenbaum: would he take the same attitude if the two murdered men had been native white Americans and not Negroes?
 




In last week’s article we discussed the situation in the South as pertains to its economic poverty, the domination of the economy by Northern capitalism and the efforts of the Southern bourgeoisie (capitalists) to raise themselves to some sort of independent status. It was remarked that a drive such as that contemplated by the CIO would be desperately opposed by the Southern industrial, agricultural rulers. This makes necessary the most careful and cautious planning. Many tactical procedures which would be taken for granted in the North would have to be modified for the South.
 
Special Instructions to Organizers
Some of the instructions issued to organizers are interesting and enlightening. Organizers are to make special efforts to become a part of the community; they must act as though they were local people and not “outsiders.” They should go to church on Sundays and participate in other activities of the native population. If an organizer calls at a home and the man is away, he is to call again when the “head of the house” is at home. It is not so much that these procedures are not of value in the North but that they are imperative and of general advantage in organizing in the South. As a rule, the organizers must be Southerners. There will be a minimum of Jewish and Negro organizers and they will be greatly limited in their field of operations.
The CIO would not have to give special attention to these things in the North. Northern business men, editors and workers would not concern themselves with the fact that an organizer is a Southerner and had lived in Monroe, Ga., all the years before he came to New York to organize clothing or textile workers. A Southern organizer working in Ohio would not have to resort to extraordinary efforts to demonstrate that he was not an infidel, atheist or freethinker. While one should at all times be careful about such conventions as not paying undue attention to the woman in the family while the husband is away. Northern women exercise a far greater degree of freedom in such matters than do Southern women.
A white Southerner working in Illinois would not risk being run out of town if he addressed a Negro man as Mr. Jones or a Negro woman as Miss Smith, if he decided to have white and Negro workers together in one local there would be no danger that the whole organizing campaign would have to be suspended for months or years.
In order to deal adequately with the many questions which are raised in connection with organizing in the South, those mentioned above and in last week’s article, it it necessary to inquire how the South came to be what it is. Why is this section of the country so backward? Why is its political life of such a low order? Why is there so much ignorance? Why does virtually all of the political, social and economic thinking and acting revolve around the place of the Negro in Southern society?
In the first place, the South expends an astonishingly small amount of money for free public education. While the South has a higher proportion of children of school age than any other section of the country, it appropriates less, far less per capita, than any other section. For the U.S. as a whole the average expenditure per pupil is about $80 annually. For ten Southern states the average is about $60 for white children and only $18 for Negro children. This is the average for the ten states, but in Georgia and Mississippi the expenditure runs respectively about $8.00 and $9.00 for Negro children. Obviously, this means that the quality of instruction is poor. This is bad enough but added to this is the fact that teachers, white and black, are severely restricted in the subjects they are permitted and in the manner of treating these subjects. One can imagine, for instance, what is taught to white youth about the Civil War, slavery, trade unions, the rights of Negroes and the social position of women and children.
That is not all. It is not unusual, in the rural and small town areas, for a female Negro teacher to have demands made on her that she become the concubine of a white school official if she retain her job. Negro men teachers often have demands made that they either pay in advance for teaching jobs or agree to “kick back” part of their meager monthly salary. As a rule this is handled by some “Uncle Tom” Negro who also demands that he receive some honorarium from the hapless teacher in the form of cash or a hunting or fishing trip to be paid for by the teacher.
It should not be forgotten, too, that the school year is only an interlude between cotton-chopping and picking, in these areas school is closed and parents, pupils and teacher go to the fields to work until the harvesting is over. The economic basis for this educational poverty and degradation is the low income and per capita wealth of the South. There are also political, social and economic reasons.
The ruling class of the South perpetuates itself and retains its power and prestige through the maintenance of ignorance, stupidity, superstition and poverty among the masses. It is here that economic exploitation is the most barbaric. It is here that the social customs are the most outmoded. It is here that political life is, the most corrupt and rotten.
Life in the South is cheap; homicide flourishes; and “law,” particularly in the rural sections, is largely a matter of personal taste and inclination. This is the section where one literally finds capitalism “dripping blood and dirt from head to toe, out of all pores.”
 
Unionization Attacks Social Structure
The South does not have a high regard for education of the masses, their participation in politics, of any aspirations of the masses for a higher standard of living, but the South does have its traditions, its taboos and its own peculiar social institutions. The organization of the workers, even the white workers, into industrial unions is, and must be, a direct assault on the whole structure of southern economic, social and political life and customs.
The very concept of industrial unionism and the proposal to organize workers into such unions is a direct attack on the whole southern social structure. It is this, not alone for the reason that it is a plan to raise the wages of these lowly workers and toilers, but because it is a plan to organize in such a way that the Southern overlords will not be able to defeat the plan. They will not be able to defeat the plan primarily for the reason that the CIO must organize the Negro workers along with the white workers. No matter how cautious the CIO is, and caution is indicated, it will not be able to escape carrying the campaign to the Negroes, even if there were any intention to proceed with the white workers alone. But even if in the beginning the overwhelming majority of the new unionists are white, this will not save the situation for the ruling class. Because to elevate the wage standards of the poor white workers and to give them a sense of security and power will of itself tend to lessen their enmity toward the Negroes. These white workers will learn eventually, out of their experience, that they must include the Negroes in order to consolidate their new economic and political gains.
On the Negro’s part the awakening will be far more profound and pregnant. What Negroes need more than any other section of the population is what they have had the least of: organization as workers, into distinctly workers’ organizations which are striving for their advancement as wage-earners. Ever since their emancipation Negroes have been beguiled into multitudinous and variegated organizations which have attempted to free them from Jim-Crow and secure for them their democratic rights. These organizations have been of limited value. Some of them have been and are of dubious worth. None of them has approached the problem from the point of view that they were dealing with a group which was overwhelmingly proletarian or semi-proletarian, thereby indicating the nature of the program necessary, as well as the type of leadership needed to carry that program into action.
 
Organizing the Negro Worker
The NAACP, the organization with the largest Negro membership, aside from the church and fraternal societies, boasts of a membership of over 500,000. These members are all over the U.S. in 1,000 branches. The majority of them are Negro workers. But they really have nothing much to do. Thousands of them are in the South. Five hundred thousand Negroes in trade unions in the South would be able to do more for “the advancement of colored people” than many thousands more could do for the same ends in any organization such as the NAACP.
That section of the resolution of the Workers Party on the U.S. adopted at its last convention, dealing with the Negro has the following to say:
“... the organization of the Negroes in the South into the CIO cannot but have the most revolutionary consequences for the developments of the Negro people and their struggle ... The indispensable prerequisite to a fighting unity of the Negro people on a progressive and effective basis is the political and ‘organizational’ differentiation of the Negro people into class organizations, tendencies and movements. In the course of this differentiation the Negro proletarians, allied with white proletarians, will be in a position to take the leadership of the whole Negro people, a leadership without which the struggle of the Negroes for equality is doomed to petty-bourgeois ineffectualness, capitulation, or outright sterility. The unity of the Negro people, in other words, can and must be established first by the separation of the Negro people into class movements and then by its realliance under the leadership of the proletariat.
“From, the standpoint of this perspective and this necessity, the CIO drive into the South is of the most vital and even of historic importance for the development of the class struggle in the U.S. and for the development of the Negro people for equality.
“For the same fundamental reasons the Party (Workers Party) while supporting the struggle, no matter how limited, of the Negro people today in the direction of social equality and against white oppression, seeks at all times to separate out of the Negro people the Negro proletarians and to help organize them into their own class organizations or into organizations in which their class leadership is firmly established. Only by proceeding with this fundamental conception is it possible for revolutionists to join and participate in the work of the present-day bourgeois or petty-bourgeois Negro organizations. Any other analysis or approach to the Negro question in the U.S. leads to opportunism, and helps delay the crystallization of the Negro proletarian leadership which, allied with the proletarian movement in general, is alone capable of fructifying the democratic struggle of the Negro people as a whole against white oppression and for full, unrestricted social equality.”
(David Coolidge will contribute another article on this subject in next week’s Labor Action)
 




These articles are to be about the campaign now being conducted by the CIO and the AFL to organize the South. The articles will be largely a discussion of the CIO campaign for reasons which will be discussed later. The articles will deal not so much with the CIO itself but with the South. It is necessary to know something about the South if one is to understand the meaning and significance of this campaign. Such a venture as “Operation Dixie” is no common garden variety of trade union organizing drive. In many important respects it is something quite different, from a trade union organizing drive in the North.
While it is true that any trade union organizing project must be carefully and cautiously planned and carried through with the utmost attention to correct strategy arid tactics, these factors must have special attention in the case of the South. This is particularly true in relation to the CIO. The CIO is the outstanding example of the notion and the practice of industrial unionism, vertical trade union organization, over against the craft or horizontal organization, such as one finds with the AFL.
The CIO finds and has its base among the mass production workers both in industry and agriculture. That is, the CIO draws its support mainly from the semi-skilled and unskilled workers and toilers. Among these are the workers in the textile, garment, automobile, mining, chemical, lumber, furniture and rubber industries, as well as the millions of semi-proletarians engaged in capitalist agriculture. The CIO, therefore, particularly in the South, will be conducting an organization drive among the genuine proletarians and toilers and not among the skilled workers: the “aristocracy of labor.”
 
The Nature of Southern Economy
The southern section of the capitalist ruling class does not take kindly to any form of aggressive or effective trade unionism. This is true of the industrialists, the planters, the financiers, the politicians and their satellites in the schools, church and press. This section of the national ruling class is not only still on the make in its own name but it is at the same time the representative of, and a committee of management for the big northern capitalists who operate extensively in the South.
Both northern capitalism and its native southern representatives are interested primarily in the recovery of the South’s tremendous natural resources and raw materials for the production of manufactured goods, at the lowest possible cost of production. This means that the northern capitalists desire that the South remain predominantly an agricultural region and a producer of raw materials. This means that the southern economy will be operated with the lowest possible capital investment and with a minimum of surplus wealth for investment in industry.
The economy of the South therefore remains somewhat of a colonial economy: producing raw materials, opportunities for the investment of northern capital and a market for the sale of manufactured articles processed and fabricated from those raw materials. Such a system makes the South a great debt ridden area. It has small financial reserves of its own, so to speak. The financing of its industries and its agriculture is done by the North. A large part of the profits from agriculture and industry go to the North and are not used for the social, economic and cultural improvement of the South.
 
Backward Agriculturally and Industrially
Such a system demands that the wages of the masses of the people be kept at the lowest level compatible with existence. With the bulk of the wealth drained off by the big capitalists of the North, the native southern industrialists, financiers and planters, in order to get their share, resort to the harshest economic, political and social measures against the masses of the southern people.
Not only is the South a predominantly agricultural area but it is even the most backward agricultural area. It “is an agricultural area in the midst of an industrialized nation. It derives its living mostly from the soil while the rest of the nation obtains its from manufacturing, service, distribution and management.” The per capita income from all farm areas is far lower than industrial per capita income, but in the South the farm income is the lowest in the nation.
The situation in what there is of southern industry is about the same. There are scattered concentrations of industry in the South. There is a large concentration of textile manufacture, iron and coal in Alabama, tobacco manufacture, and numerous chemical, rubber, aircraft and other manufacturing plants scattered over the area. The dominant capitalist enterprise however is agriculture. Agriculture with its sprawling cotton plantations, rice and cane fields and its tobacco culture. To this must be added the other sources of raw materials; the forests and the lumber industry and all the multitude of raw materials produced for chemical manufacturing.
Not only are wages lower in the South than the rest of the country, but the wage level is in part determined by the situation in agriculture, the dominant capitalist enterprise. To raise wages in the industrial centers and the manufacturing enterprises means to encourage migrations from the plantations, the forests and the fields. This will necessitate increasing the wages of agricultural workers in order to maintain the supply. Another factor encouraging the leaving of the farm in the South is the heavy debt and mortgage burden on the farms, and the exhaustion of land by erosion and lack of the necessary knowledge and capital to carry on agriculture in the modern way.
 
What CIO’s Entry Would Mean
All of these factors which we have mentioned only briefly help to explain the reasons for the opposition to the organization of the masses on the part of the southern industrialists, financiers and planters. As we said before, the local southern capitalists operate not only in an independent way but also as the local managers for the big northern capitalists. They try to retain as much of the wealth produced in the South as they can in order to build their own fortunes, prestige and power.
The coming of the CIO into such a situation is filled with danger for them. They have not arrived yet. They are in constant conflict with the northern capitalist ruling class over the division of the wealth produced by the southern masses. They strive to have an ever increasing portion of this remain in the South. They have inner conflicts among themselves. There are southern patriots among them who wish to throw off the “yoke of the North,” and establish an industrial economy in competition with the North. There are others who are satisfied to remain direct and exclusive hirelings and representatives of northern capitalist enterprise. These proponents of the industrialization of the South are in conflict with the planter interests, who do not believe that the way out of the swamp of debt and mortgages, held by northern banks and insurance companies, is to be faced with the competition of urban industry for “hired hands.”
All of them: planter, industrialist and southern financier, resent and will oppose vigorously the CIO with its industrial unionism, coming to upset the status quo. These leaders know and understand that the root problem of the South is its economic backwardness; its poverty and, to them, the accompanying necessity for maintaining low wages. The organization of the southern masses is a direct attack on the wage scale. Not only a direct attack on the wage scale but an attack on low wages and the lowest standard of living in the country, by mass organization of the bulk of the population: skilled and semi-skilled, craftsman and common laborer, city worker and rural worker. This will be the result even though the present CIO drive is confined in the concrete to the industrial areas. The reverberations of such an organization campaign will be felt in the rural sections; on the plantations, in the cane breaks, the forests, the rice and tobacco fields and in the lumber camps.
 
The Awakening of Southern Labor
The raising of the standard of living of the urban workers will either draw the rural workers away or create an insistent demand from them for an improvement of their own standard of living and working conditions.
This is what the leaders of the South and their retinue of political demagogues are talking about when they speak of the CIO as “Communist,” “foreigners,” “outsiders,” and “trouble-makers.” This is why they would prefer the AFL with its outmoded craft structure and indifference to the problems of the masses of the workers. These leaders and their political managers and arrangers know also that an organization such as the CIO cannot confine itself to the purely economic disabilities of the mass of the people. Due to’ the poverty of the masses, their low cultural level and their complete lack of organization, they have no way of improving their situation. They cannot participate in politics in any effective way. They can have no say in the levying of taxes; they can only pay the taxes set by those who can engage in politics. They cannot put pressure on for educational, health and cultural facilities because they are virtually impotent in the political area.
They cannot organize themselves because of their poverty, lack of experience and an age old lethargy which has been induced by the conditions under which they have existed. The coming of the industrial union movement, however, with its relatively broad and enlightened program, will provide not only the medium of trade union organization; but an educational, cultural and potential political apparatus for the southern masses as they have never known before. Such an awakening is what is known as “Communism” in the ranks of the southern capitalist ruling class.
(Another article by David Coolidge on “Operation Dixie” and its problems will appear next week. – Ed.)
 




White mobs are still at it in the South, where “white supremacy” is maintained by the poll tax, murder, the rope, the club and the shotgun. This time they are upholding the glory of the white race in Alabama. Two white war veterans, who evidently did not see enough action against Hitler and Hirohito, decided to keep in condition for the next imperialist war by beating up a Negro resident of Athens, Ala. The two men were arrested, but were released by the mayor of the town when a mob gathered at the jail. I suppose the mayor decided that it wasn’t worth while to uphold “law and order” and then be found hanging from a tree. So when the mob promised to disperse, the mayor released the two white assailants.
PM, Marshall Field’s paragon of liberal virtue, reports that some little county judge handled the mob almost single-handedly at the beginning. The little judge insisted on “sanity,” says the PM account. And what was the “sanity”? The judge “talked the mob into electing six leaders to search a theater for the Negro whose disappearance had touched off the violence in the streets.” This, of course, was a terrible thing for this Negro to do. Get beat up and then run. He should have hung around until the mob came. He had no business to disappear and touch off “violence” in the streets. After a lone Negro is assaulted by two white men in Alabama, he is expected to remain on the spot until a mob gathers to finish the job.
The little judge was certainly an advocate of “sanity.” He quieted the mob by inducing it to wait until six of its leaders located the Negro. Then they could have taken him quietly to the outskirts of the town, tied him to a tree, saturated him with kerosene and had a nice quiet man-roast in the good old Southern tradition.
Why should the mob mill around when there was a more democratic way? They might wreck the theater or other property. They might storm the jail or burn it down. That’s not good for the taxpayers. They might go out to the Negro section and lay it waste. That’s not good for the white folk who own the property.
PM is jubilant over the progress of civilization in Alabama. It carries a map showing Columbia, Tenn., with the caption: “Race disturbance flared here last February. Twenty-five Negroes held for trial.” Monroe, Ga., is there with the caption: “Four Negroes lynched July 25; murderers still at large.” And Athens, Ala.: “White ringleaders of mob molesting Negroes Saturday night held for hearings.” PM’s story says that “authorities said that it was impossible to determine the number of Negroes injured, since they fled from the town or went to their homes.” This is what is known to liberal journalism as “molesting” Negroes. A few of them were accosted on the street. They were only called bad names. The mob of 500 was only trying to scare them.
 
A Little Education
PM closes its hopeful account with a statement from a native which “heartened those who deplore the outbreak.” Said the native: “We’ve got to stop doing it this way. It ain’t right. Maybe we’d just better educate ’em and let ’em earn a decent living.” “This from a man,” says PM, “who in the twenties might have been a member of a lynch gang. To Alabama’s liberals, it is better than they expected this year or next.”
I suppose that all of us should rejoice and be thankful along with PM and the Alabama liberals. Alabama lights the way to “sanity.” Furthermore, we tend to agree with the native. Education might help and a “decent living” for all in Alabama would do wonders.
But before education gets a chance or a “decent living” is the rule for all, we have an idea that there will have to be several thousand funerals in Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee and elsewhere. The little judge said that next Saturday they will be prepared to “turn the fire hose on any mob – nobody with wet clothes wants to lynch anybody.” We don’t know about this but we suspect that some mass ACTION in the South would be a far better deterrent to lynching than wet clothes. We think it would have a wonderful educational effect!
 




A monstrous crime has just been perpetrated and a horrible tragedy was performed at Lawrenceburg, Tennessee. I refer to the Columbia, Tennessee, trials which have just been concluded and in which 25 Negroes were being tried for attempted murder. Before the trial of the 25, 103 Negroes were kept in jail and two of them were killed by “officers of the law” for “attempting to escape,” for attempting “violence” while being questioned, or for some equally vague offense in the presence of the “guardians of the law” such as it is in Tennessee and the entire South.
What is the crime and what is the tragedy? The perpetration and the organization of the crime began on February 25 in this year of Lynching, the Four Freedoms and the American Way of Life. On that night in Columbia, following a simple altercation between a Negro and a white man, a white mob composed of uniformed policemen and armed white civilians organized for the purpose of “mopping up” the Negro section of the town, with all the usual savagery and blood-lust of the Southern white mob on a recurrent campaign of “teaching the Niggers to stay in their place.”
 
Negroes Fought Back
The Negroes, who knew what to expect after some brave Negro had dared be a man and defend himself against insult, withdrew to their section and armed themselves for the defense of their persons and their homes. Such action of course is not tolerated from Negroes in the United States. These courageous Negroes huddled in the darkness of “Mink Slide” and waited for the white mob. During the night four white “officers of the law” were shot. And during the week the State of Tennessee and the mob carried on a reign of terror in the Negro section. Negro business establishments were destroyed and 103 Negro men and boys were jailed. White supremacy had triumphed, the nobility of white manhood had been demonstrated, and white womanhood had been given full protection!
The state’s case against these Negroes was based on the fact that four white policemen had been shot. Who shot them was of no concern to the state or of its “decent white citizens.” All that concerned these white people was the fact that Negroes had armed and were determined to die with the dignity of human beings and not like vermin tramped under foot or burned at the stake. Of the 103 arrested, the state selected 25 for trial on the charge of “attempted murder.” Ten of these 25 Negroes had only recently returned from service in the armed forces, making the world safe against Hitler or any future Hitler. They thought they were fighting against fascism, and for freedom and equality.
It is really not strange that the state included 10 Negro ex-service men among the 25. Above all, Negroes who have seen other countries and other peoples, not as savage as white Southerners, must be taught a lesson. They must be taught that Jim Crow still rules in the U.S. and that where Negroes are concerned, the mob is the law.
Vincent Sheean, in his reports on the trial to the New York Herald Tribune, was surprised at the way the trial was conducted. He need not have been. This trial was conducted as the trial of Negroes is usually conducted in the U.S. and particularly in the South. It must especially be borne in mind that this was no ordinary trial. It was the trial of Negroes who had dared defend themselves and not run like scared rabbits. These Negroes armed themselves and shot back. Nowhere in the U.S. does the law of self-defense apply to Negroes as it does to white men. In this country the usual legal procedure about self-defense is distorted, twisted and perverted whenever and wherever Negroes are involved. This perversion is covered over with unctuous and hypocritical talk about “law and order,” seeking the protection of the “law,” and a pretended concern with attempts to discover whether or not one’s life and home were really in danger.
 
A Kangaroo Court
The trial was conducted in a manner to make even the most hard-boiled and corrupted shyster lawyer blush. The court permitted the state prosecutor to do and say pretty much as he pleased. The procedure was a frame-up procedure and the trial was a mere imitation of the proceedings of a lynch court, just before the victim is burned at the stake. All the rules of cross-examination were violated in the case of the defense. The defense not only had to contend against the prosecutor but the judge. Any evidence or tactic which would have put the best face on the case for the defendants was ruled out. The judge barked and snarled at the defense attorneys. No limit was put on the prosecution but some of the most telling evidence attempted by the defense was ruled out. The state’s witnesses lied and lied, but the defense was not permitted to demonstrate that they were lying.
In his closing address to the jury the prosecutor, one Bumpus, called for the elimination of “rats,” “lice,” “skunks,” “punks,” and “pimps” who had come into the South from the North. He demanded more hangings because the Nuremberg trials were not going to cause enough hangings, he was against people with such names as “Stinkski” and “Eleanorski.” This was the way this little shyster and ignorant blatherskite addressed a jury which was expected to decide the fate of 25 Negroes according to the law and the evidence.
After the deluge of filth, venom and malignity the jury decided that two of these 25 Negroes were guilty as charged. Not one of them had been proved guilty and not one of them had had the opportunity to be properly defended. Their lawyers were on trial in this court of “law” along with the 25. It was an offense in this trial for a defense lawyer to be presumptuous enough to demand either the right of cross-examination or the right to present relevant evidence. Furthermore, no one on the side of the State was interested in the fact that these Negroes had been attacked by a mob, that they were defending themselves, that two of them had been murdered, that their stores had been smashed in and that the whole Negro population of Columbia had been intimidated and brow-beaten for weeks and months.
 
Saving Face
But the sovereign State of Tennessee had saved its face. ALL of the hated victims had not been acquitted. At least some lesson would be taught to Negroes who dared shoot at white men. This court would teach them to cry for mercy and be shot like rats the next time a white mob decided to invade the Negro section.
Vincent Sheean, who wrote some excellent articles on this trial before the verdict, succumbed to the usual liberal pap and nonsense after the verdict was in. He was elated that only two of the men had been convicted. Democracy had triumphed: only two innocent men were to be railroaded to the state’s dungeon. It might have been 25. The jury was composed of men of “courage and decency.” It had the opportunity to send all 25 up for 21 years and had courageously and decently refrained.
The New York Times was also jubilant at this demonstration of the democratic spirit, the American Way of Life. Only two innocent victims were convicted. We must have patience. The Negroes of Columbia and of the nation must have patience. It’s not as bad as it might have been. The South has done better in days past. Things are improving. All the Negroes need do is turn their guns over to the “decent” white citizens, work harder and pray more.
We say again: a monstrous crime was perpetrated at this, trial and conviction. Only fools, scoundrels of “good will” and cowards can rejoice over the outcome. But tragedy was present also. There were Negroes present testifying for the state. This was the tragedy. Not the fact that Negroes appeared as witnesses for the state but the way in which they became the state’s witnesses. Everybody knows how they got there. They were intimidated, terrorized and maltreated. They were made to sign statements and give evidence which had been prepared for them. We have no quarrel with these Negroes. Even if they went voluntarily, we still have no quarrel with them. They live under a constant reign of terror, intimidation and brutality. Anyone, black or white, who casts a stone at these Negroes who testified for the state at that trial, is a man or woman not fit to live; or suited for the association of any decent human being.
There is only one bright spot in this whole sordid affair. It is the Negroes of Columbia who defended themselves and shot back on February 25. The Workers Party and this paper salute these brave Negroes.
 







Address by Ernest Rice McKinney, national secretary of the Workers Party, and its candidate for Congress in the 22nd Congressional District of New York, over Station WLIB on Saturday, October 5, at 1 p.m.



*
We live in a strange country.
Thousands of head of cattle graze on the cattle ranches.
There are tons and tons of meat available on the hoof. But the ranchers won’t sell it.
The multi-million dollar meat packing companies won’t slaughter it.
Only the very rich can afford to buy it on the black market. And you and I can’t get any of it.
This situation has not prevailed for two days; it has prevailed now for more than two weeks.
What has the government in Washington done to see that you and I get some meat? Have they seized the million dollar meat packing plants? No. They have not even THREATENED to do so. The packers do not want any government control.
They want you and me to pay black market prices for their meat. And by doing nothing, the government is permitting the meat packers to smash OPA control of meat. You and I know how weak and ineffectual this control has been lately. But the corporations don’t even want this little bit of control. They want to charge prices as they please.
I live in a part of the Borough of Manhattan called Harlem. Most of the people living in Harlem are Negroes. Negroes are among the poorest people in New York City. When jobs are scarce, Negroes are among the last to get jobs. When meat is scarce, Negroes are among the last to get meat.
I am running for Congress from the 22nd Congressional District, namely, from Harlem. The people of Harlem have had a representative in Congress for the past two years. He is a Democratic Party congressman. You and I would think that he, in particular, would want to do something drastic about the meat situation. You would think that he would propose nationalization of the meat industry.
If you thought these things you would be wrong. Neither he nor the Democratic Party is willing to take any drastic steps to solve the meat shortage. None of the capitalist politicians, Democrat or Republican are willing to take any drastic measures against the meat shortage.
But the Workers Party does propose such drastic action. The Workers Party proposes nationalization of the meat industry under workers’ control. The Workers Party proposes housewives’ committees and trade union committees to police prices.
The Workers Party proposes that the people do not depend on Democratic and Republican politicians to solve the meat shortage.
The Workers Party proposes that the people form a genuine Labor Party independent of the Democratic and Republican politicians.
We cannot in this short talk give you our complete program. We will gladly send you a copy of our election platform if you send your name and address to the Workers Party, 114 West 14th Street, New York 11, N.Y.
A vote for the Workers Party candidates, Max Shachtman in the 15th Congressional District, Brooklyn, and Ernest Rice McKinney in the 22nd Congressional District, Manhattan will show that you too want action, not words.
 




In its Sunday, September 8 edition, the New York Times discusses the strike situation under the heading, A Threat to Liberty. The editorial begins:
“Since the end of the war it has become more and more evident that the industrial strike has ceased to be primarily a contest between employers and workers and has become primarily a test of the public endurance.”
What do they mean by “a test of the public endurance?” What do they mean by the “public?”
There are approximately 15 million workers in the country organized into trades unions. Are these 15 million a part of the “public” as the Times understands it? Of the 140,000,000 million inhabitants of the U.S. fully 100,000,000, to be conservative, are wage-earners of one sort or another. Are these 100,000,000 a part of the “public?”
 
Labor Against Capital
Obviously, the Times considers the “public” all those who are not members of trade unions. The Times thereby puts organized labor into one category and all others into another. This is a favorite trick of the capitalist press. They refuse publicly to recognize the fact that there is a working class and a capitalist class. They make it appear that the trade unions are not representative of the working class.
The capitalist class likes to make workers believe that unions represent only the relatively few who are members of a union and that these unions often do not even represent their members.. Therefore strikes have become not a contest between workers and employers, but a contest between the 15 million members of unions and the remainder of the population.
This is an attempt to make white collar wage-earners, non-organized industrial workers and middle class persons believe that they should not place any confidence in the organized labor movement.
The strikes today are contests between the owners and those who are forced to labor for the owners. The strikes are not a contest between some mythical entity known as the “public” and the unions. Strikes are a struggle between the two main classes in capitalist society: the working class and the capitalists. The situation is more complicated today because in the present precarious state of capitalist society it is necessary for the government to intervene more directly in the interest of capitalist society. This was the mission of Roosevelt and the New Deal.
Roosevelt never made any pretense that he had had any other purpose than to “save capitalism.” In 1936 Roosevelt told the “economic royalists” who were opposing him for re-election; “I saved you ...” Roosevelt then went on to say that it was the measures which his administration had taken which had avoided “rioting in the streets.”
 
A Political Struggle
The Times goes on to say that strikes of the type occurring today, particularly the trucker and seamen strikes are not “altogether new. The railway strike of 1877 and the Pullman strike of 1894 were in the pattern.” There is a difference, however, according to the Times. There is something new: “... more men and more occupations have been organized, so that the impact is greater; that the organization is more effective, that strikes are conducted with an almost military sense of strategy, and that such struggles have taken on a political complexion.”
Every plodding, bungling and blundering trade union leader in the country should read that statement. That is, all of the trade union leaders should read it. The capitalist owners of the Times understand the situation better than the labor leaders.
Labor has learned something in the fifty years since the railway and Pullman strikes. More industries have been organized, there are more workers in unions, strikes are a sort of military operation. This means that the organized workers have far greater defensive and offensive power today than fifty years ago. And, “such struggles have taken on a political complexion.” This is the phrase the labor leaders should read and ponder over. What does it mean?
The Times is saying that at certain periods and under certain conditions, what appears to labor as merely an economic struggle is in reality a political struggle. Perhaps the owners of the Times have been reading from Karl Marx. Of course they would not need to read Marx to understand when, how and under what conditions the struggle of a class becomes a political struggle. The capitalist ruling class engaged in a long and savage struggle against feudalism for the purpose of overthrowing that class and establishing capitalism and the social and political rule of the present day capitalist class.
The struggle which the new capitalist class ‘waged against the feudal landlords was not a peaceful struggle: it was real warfare: national wars, international wars and civil wars. Northern industrial capitalism did not free itself from the political, social and economic threat of slave society at the ballot box but on the battle field. The capitalists of today of course defend all these wars and revolutions. That is, they defend their past mass strikes and their wars. The capitalists are great defenders of all past revolutions. That is, all except the Great October Revolution in Russia because that was a workers revolution.
 
Only the Beginning
The capitalist class did precisely what the workers are attempting to do today. Capitalism and feudalism reached a “deadlock.” “Neither side” would “give in,” There was “wild talk” from the capitalists (and still is) “like that of the agent of the Seafarers International Union.” The capitalists organized “more men and more occupations ... so that the impact” could “be greater.” They made their organizations “more effective” and conducted their struggles against the defenders of feudalism with a “military sense of strategy.” What is the capitalist press howling about. The working class hasn’t really hurt them yet. WE HAVE ONLY MADE THE BAREST BEGINNING.
The Times says that the present struggles of the workers and the unions is beginning to look political. That’s true but the Times must know the reason. All the ruling class must know the reason. Didn’t they go through a similar experience? Isn’t it true that the young rising capitalist class discovered that its economic struggles against the feudal landlords threw that class face to face with the government of the feudal landlords? Isn’t it true that the young capitalist class finally discovered that in order to protect and consolidate its economic gains it had to have political power; a political party of its own and a government of its own?
And is it not true that the present capitalist class overthrew feudalism and the feudal landlord regime in one civil war after another? Isn’t it true that after this the capitalists established capitalism and the political and social domination of the capitalist class?
Why does the Times think it so strange that the workers should begin moving in the same direction? This big capitalist paper really is not so surprised. They understand. It is only the labor leaders who don’t understand or who don’t want to understand. They are the constant muddle-heads. They think that they can make capitalism and capitalist democracy work tomorrow just as it did yesterday. These labor leaders don’t know as much as the capitalist of 200 years ago. They didn’t try to make feudalism work. They destroyed it and established capitalism. Now when the workers begin to have some vague notions about another kind of social order the labor leaders follow the Times and orate about the glories of capitalism.
The Times closes its editorial very solemnly with the adjuration that “the unions have an especial responsibility ...” because “they have grown enormously in power.” That’s right. Our unions have the responsibility to use this power for the complete organization of the working class, to support the political organization of labor, to aid in the organization of labor for the struggle against capitalism and the capitalist class; AND FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF SOCIALISM AND A SOCIALIST SOCIETY.
 




SARATOGA SPRINGS, N.Y. – The Twelfth National Convention of the Industrial Union of Marine and Shipbuilding Workers (IUMSWA), held here last week, was a demonstration of what an inept and bureaucratic trade union leadership can do to disorient and retard the development of its members. Here was an international faced with the near wiping out of its industry, with the closing of shipyards, with mass lay-offs and unemployment, with the reduction of wages, with all-over attacks from the shipyard corporations and a government at Washington which had demonstrated its determination to hold wages to a year-old formula. Furthermore, this convention met after it had been shown that the present wage formula was a millstone around the neck of labor. This convention also met at a time when shipyard workers along with the rest of labor were without meat.
In this situation the leadership of this union came to the convention with a program which did not even approach what was necessary. Criticism for this must be directed at President John Green particularly. Throughout the convention he seemed to be in a fog of uncertainty and inertia. He did not see into understand that it was his responsibility to supply leadership to the union.
The convention was not only faced with the external problems, which I have enumerated but also with a serious internal problem. Green and the other top leaders were concerned with this internal problem: namely, what to do about the “Save the Union Committee.” Their handling of this group, however, was stupid; their proposals for dealing with such problems and situations in the future were reactionary and totally undemocratic.
 
A Stalinist Subterfuge
The earliest test of strength in the convention came on the resolution condemning the reactionary “Save the Union Committee.” This was the group which had been organized after the last convention under the direction of Communist Party members and followers to fight against the union leadership. Besides the Stalinists, the “Save the Union Committee” was composed of a few misguided and confused honest militants. Also in the group at the beginning, and associated with the Stalinists in the leadership of it, were outright conservatives who opposed the Green leadership for wholly reactionary reasons. About a month before last week’s convention this extremely reactionary group got the upper hand and expelled all the known Stalinists from the “Save the Union Committee.”
While the Stalinists were still in the leadership of the committee, it had instituted legal proceedings in the capitalist courts against the national officers of UMSWA, claiming that the 11th convention had been rigged and that its procedure was undemocratic. The committee asked the court to invalidate the convention and order a new convention. At the time of last week’s convention the case was still pending in the courts.
The resolution against the “Save the Union Committee” charged that this group had attempted to spread disunity in the international, that it was unscrupulous and undemocratic, that it had shown no tendency to discontinue its “harmful activity.” The resolution condemned the committee and instructed he General Executive Board to take such action as it deemed necessary against its “union-busting” activities.
Despite the fact that this was a resolution of the anion leadership, the leadership did. not seem inclined io give it any real vigorous defense. Here was only me of the many instances of leadership bankruptcy on he part of Green and Co. One delegate said that this issue should not have been brought to the floor of the convention in these “critical times.” It was his position that the convention should be discussing “political action.”
A delegate from Local 18, in discussing the resolution said that. Mike Shapiro, Stalinist organizer in IUMSWA had come to Mobile for the Save the Union group and had disrupted the development of good relations between the white and Negro workers by his activities. McPherson of Local 22 said that he did not start the suit in the courts but that he participated in the action because he agreed with the people who did start it. It was McPherson’s position that if the national officers did not want suits in the courts they should conduct the affairs of the union in a different way.
There was much talk about “unity” from the Stalinists. No one made any clear and adequate attack or the Stalinist “unity” talk. Even here the bureaucrats conceptions and attitudes of the top leadership were in evidence. They wanted to strike at the “Save the Union Committee.” This should have been done. But the hands of the leadership were far from clean and they just could not do an effective job. Their record of lifting charters and taking away the autonomy of locals was unenviable and reprehensible. They had sent organizers into various locals to do hatchet jobs on militants and opponents.
 
Place of Union Organizer
It was reported in the convention and not refuted by Green, Grogan and Blood, that there had been waste and inefficiency in the union’s organizing activities. Everyone knew that many of the organizers did not put in their time bringing workers into the union but spent it doing the Hatchet work of the top bureaucracy of the union. Therefore all that Green and Co. could do was to push through the resolution against the reactionary “Save the Union Committee.” They made no effort to tell the convention in an educational way, why the activities of the committee were “disruptive,” or why grievances of labor should be sent out of the capitalist courts. This leadership just used a mechanical majority to pass its resolution.
Yet, here was an excellent opportunity to give the delegates some genuine trade union education, to deliver an open blow to anti-labor Stalinism while at the same time opposing the reactionary “red-baiters.” But this leadership did not do this. It made blocs with the Stalinists many times before and may want to do it again.
The next fight arose over a proposal in connection with the appeal rights of hired organizers, who are members of the union. The proposal was that when and if fired they could have no right of appeal to the convention. It did not occur to anyone that this question might be solved by making it mandatory for all organizers to be members of the union with the same rights as any other member.
 
Issue of Local Autonomy
There was a contest over the question of lifting he autonomy of locals. It was not difficult to see that the delegates were dissatisfied with the past procedure of the national officers in lifting autonomy and placing dictatorial administrators over locals. A resolution was introduced which would require the officers and General Executive Board to use the most elementary procedure in the case of charter lifting. This amendment to the constitution would require the GEB to review the case 30 days after autonomy was suspended. A two-thirds vote of the GEB would be necessary for continuing the withholding of autonomy. At each meeting of the GEB thereafter the case would have to be reviewed and only a majority vote would be required to restore the autonomy of the local.
The position of the administration resolution was to keep the matter of autonomy in the hands of the GEB with the local involved having no right of appeal. The minority amendment was defeated by a combination of parliamentary trickery and skullduggery. A two-thirds vote is required to amend the constitution. It is required that a minority resolution or motion be voted on first. This is the customary parliamentary procedure. It was the procedure in this convention. On another question, Green had apologized to the convention for not putting the minority motion first. But on the autonomy issue he put the majority amendment first. He then announced that the “minority amendment has not carried because it takes a two-thirds vote.” Actually, the delegates were not voting on the minority amendment. As a result, the procedure was confusing and many delegates were not clear on how to vote for their real sentiments.
What is important to emphasize is that this leadership was opposed to any genuine democratic procedure in connection with taking over locals and placing them under an administrator. The attitude of the leadership of IUMSWA on this important question as on others was reactionary and bureaucratic.
The resolution finally passed was far better than the original one proposed by the leadership. It requires that in case of the lifting of autonomy that a provisional government be set up, consisting of eight members of the local. The administrator need not be a member of the local. The case may be reviewed by the GEB on appeal, by any deposed local officer or by any member.
There was one issue on which the officers were defeated. This was on the proposal to raise the dues from $1.25 to $2.00 a month. The delegates would have none if this; not even those delegates who belonged to the administration bloc. Later, however, the convention voted favorably on a proposed amendment to permit those locals which desired to set the local dues at $2.00 a month. The amendment specified, however, that the per capita to the “national office” would not be increased. Here was an extremely interesting situation. Delegates who had voted for the reactionary position of the administration on the autonomy question voted against Green on the dues question and then voted to permit locals to increase dues provided the per capita to the national office was not raised.
 
A Little Horse-Trading
It was evident therefore that the delegates were really only against the national office getting any more money. They felt that the organizational work had not been done effectively and therefore no money was necessary. But these same delegates were willing to continue the disgraceful arrangement by which the leadership could lift charters at will and maintain a dictatorship over the locals.
This wasn’t all. Delegations which were really against the motion to permit locals to raise their own dues, finally voted to permit. Local 1 with the biggest vote was against. Local 2 was against. Before the vote was completed Local 1 asked for a recess for a caucus. They returned and announced that they had changed their minds and would vote for. Local 2 did likewise. Green and the other officers voted for.
It was clear that something was going on. This something was the preparation for the forming of blocks looking to the elections the following day. Local 9 had introduced the amendment under consideration and was insistent on its passage. The administration wanted the vote of Local 9 for its GEB slate. Local 1 wanted the support of Local 9 for support to its nominees for the GEB. Local 2 also wanted support for its two nominees. It was necessary for all concerned to woo Local 9 and try for its support. The amendment was passed overwhelmingly.
There were two more contests. One was over the lowers of local executive boards and the other over he rights of members who had been fired, laid off or who had quit the industry. Here the stupidity and the bureaucratism of the leadership revealed itself again. The amendment on EBs as first presented stated that the EB had the right to appoint all standing committees. When the question was asked from the floor whether or not this was subject to review by the local the answer was “No.”
This being entirely unsatisfactory, Green took the floor to explain that, of course, the grievance and negotiating committees were to be elected. But nobody took the pains to word the amendment in such a way that it would be clear from the amendment itself. Nor did it occur to Green and Co. that there was a simple democratic way out of the objections which were raised. That was to say that all committees but the two excepted were to be appointed by the EB subject to the approval of the membership.
 
Strengthening the Bureaucracy
The next matter was the position taken by the leadership that all members who were laid off, discharged or who quit the industry could not hold office in any local or have a vote in any local. As was usual with the proposals brought forward there was no explanation as to its meaning or effect until objections were raised from the floor. There were delegates who could not understand why a member who was fired or laid off by the company should be placed in the same category as a member who left the industry. Also, it was not clear why a member should be denied the vote merely because the company laid him off of fired him.
Then the Constitution Committee and Green came forward with some lame explanations. Of course, they said, this would not apply to members whose cases were still pending before the company or to members who were only being “shaped up.” But the point is that even this lame explanation came under pressure. Obviously, the explanation was not adequate. It was one more reactionary proposal which meant that loyal members of the union were to be penalized merely because they were not momentarily employed.
The elections took place on Friday morning, the day before adjournment. The three top officers, Green, Grogan and Blood, were re-elected without opposition. Then nominations were made for the GEB. Here was the place where the Stalinists attempted to get in their licks. They nominated two delegates from Local 2, Quinn and Belcher, a Negro, and more from other locals. There was also an administration slate without any known Stalinists on it. It was an anti-Stalinist slate. There was a great deal of opposition to the re-election of Carter, the only Negro on the GEB. Among the Negroes, Carter is known as “Uncle Tom.” They took the position, however, and correctly, that Carter must not be “dumped” in any anti-Negro move or for any other reason than that a more militant Negro than Carter would get the place.
The administration slate won by about two to one. The Stalinists were defeated. On Saturday, the Daily Worker reported that “unity” had been given a slap in the face at the convention. This, of course, was nonsense. What had been given the slap was not “unity” but elementary trade union democracy and simple trade union education.
With all the caucusing and maneuvering, often over the most trivial matters, there was not much time for the consideration of a program for the international or the pressing and harassing problems before the shipyard workers. Resolutions were passed on foreign policy endorsing the Baruch plan for international control of atomic energy. The resolution was aimed at Russia and called for abolishing the present veto system in the United Nations.
There was a resolution on wage policy which no one can take seriously if it is to be carried into effect by the present officers of the union. It warned that if employers or the government agencies “fail to allow” peaceful methods “we shall have to rely on our organized strength and on the collective determination of our members. For we mean to do our utmost to see to it that each shipyard worker receives economic justice.”
This resolution means very little in a union with a leadership which is more militant at lifting charters and sending dictators to locals than it is at fighting the employers and opposing a reactionary capitalist government. Furthermore, a group of officers, who give as an argument for increasing dues that it is necessary to save the shipbuilding industry in order that there may be jobs, is not a leadership which should inspire confidence. In his speech in support of the dues increase, Blood said that there is need for a maritime industry for this country “second to none.” He did not explain how the union can save the maritime industry, if it needs saving, or how 75 cents more in dues would accomplish this. Nor did he explain how and why it, is the business of the working class to save capitalist business enterprise.
All in all, this convention saw a miserable performance by a trade union leadership. It is not a real leadership in any sense but a petty, inept and blundering little group of jobholders which is retained, in office only because the members of the union do not know what to do about it. They are bureaucratic, ignorant and inefficient. Green is the worst of all. He has gone down a long way since he was a member of the Socialist Party and a member of the Revolutionary Policy Committee in that party, which was going to make a militant revolutionary organization out of that party. One year he is crying out against the Trotskyists in the union and making a bloc with the Stalinists. Another year he is sobbing and shedding tears because the Stalinists have him hemmed in and will not consent for the militant Local 42 to get a place on the GEB. This year he is engaged in a drive against the Stalinists but has no program for the union. He just stands there, gavel in hand, turning this way and that, hoping that somehow or other, unknown to him, the delegates in their mercy . and political backwardness will return him to office.
The Stalinists at the convention were up to their usual tricks. They wanted “unity.” This means, of course, that they did not want the resolution on the “Save the Union Committee” passed. They did not want Green re-elected but they had no alternative but to support him and lie in wait with dagger poised for the stab in the back. “Unity” to them means to get enough people on the GEB and among the organizers to exercise their type of bureaucratic control, in the interests of the murderer in the Kremlin. They didn’t get far, but neither did the shipyard workers. And this is the pity of it. But perhaps by next year these workers will have learned better and will know how not to let such a stupid and undemocratic leadership hold them in check.
 




All that we have written about the South in this series of articles is for the purpose of aiding us in answering certain important questions and to show what the nature of the problems is confronting the CIO in its present drive.
What is the social, economic and political system of the South today? In the case of the North, the answer is easy to get. It can be said unambiguously that in the North we have the capitalist system fully developed to the stage scientifically described as finance or monopoly capitalism. This is a precise designation of the economic order. On the political side we have bourgeois democracy: that political system initiated by the present capitalist ruling class or bourgeoisie after its revolutionary overthrow of the ruling class of feudal society. For the purpose of this article, bourgeois society can be explained by reference to the Constitution of the U.S. and the provisions in that document about government and the rights of the people.
The people shall have the right of free speech, assembly and petition. A mail’s house is to be his castle and the people are to be exempt from illegal search and seizure. There shall be the right to vote and manhood suffrage. All forms of slavery and serfdom are forbidden. Discrimination on account of race, creed or color, or based on either economic or social standing, is either illegal or in violation of democratic principles.
The state should be a republic and the government to hold office by consent of the governed. There is to be an impartial judiciary, removed from the political struggle, sitting above the battle and dispensing justice impartially to all. All the people shall have political equality, and equality of economic and social opportunity. While there may be “the masses” and “the classes,” the classes are not to enjoy any privileges denied to the masses. Furthermore, the industrious and deserving among the masses are to have the opportunity to enter the ranks of the classes (the upper classes, to be sure).
On the economic side the worker is to be a “free worker,” not a slave, serf or peon. He has the right to organize, bargain with his employer and to strike. The worker cannot legally be bound to the factory, the mine, the farm or the plantation. He may leave at will and seek a job elsewhere. Under bourgeois (capitalist) democracy, the government is the protector and defender of all. It is the “people’s government” and the laws which are enacted apply to all the people alike.
 
Theory and Reality
In theory, at least, these are some of the distinguishing features of bourgeois (capitalist) democracy. Specifically they are the features with which we need to be concerned. It is obvious, however, that the above-named principles are violated all over the country in one way or another. They are violated particularly in connection with the working class and always and everywhere in connection with Negroes. It is necessary to emphasize, however, that there is a difference between the North and the South. That is what it is our business to explore in order to ask the question posed at the beginning.
In the South the proscriptions against Negroes are in statutory form. Segregation, discrimination and disfranchisement are the general rule and are legal. There is a backward and archaic juridical and judicial system which makes of peonage, for instance, a semi-legal institution. Sharecropping and tenant farming are carried on in practice as a combination of capitalist exploitation, paternalism, robbery, duress and starvation. In the industrial centers the spirit of the plantation prevails. The factories and other industrial establishments are plantations in the city. (With the increase in mechanization, of course, the plantations tend more and more to be “factories in the field.”) The political life is dominated by the plantation with the exception, of course, of the control by Northern capitalism, which has been discussed in previous articles. The chief struggle which goes on is that between the plantation and the city: the defenders of the status quo and the protagonists of industrialization.
The point to be emphasized is that the dominant force in the political, economic and social life of the South is the planter group and its allies. This group, which includes not only the big planters, but the political demagogues, commercial elements and many of the indigenous industrial capitalists, attempts to combine the methods and operations of modern capitalism with the most backward political and social concepts. They are capitalists who subvert bourgeois democracy in a peculiar and unique way. This is particularly true in relation to the status of the Negro in the South. They maintain an extra-legal regime with all the force and prestige of legality, of mob violence, terror, intimidation and lynching. This extra-legality is applied universally to the Negro but not exclusively. The whole procedure is openly defended. If the U.S. Supreme Court renders a decision saying that Negroes cannot be denied the right to register and vote, the South proceeds at once to take “legal” steps to disfranchise the Negro “legally.” Today in Alabama a move is under way to keep “minorities” out of the State Legislature.
 
Nature of the South
This difference between the North and the South is clear, but it is at the same time complex and often confusing. The difference gives the appearance of being fundamental, of being really a basic difference. This has created a very complicated situation and has led to all manner of theoretical muddle. For example, these are some of the phrases used in connection with the South: “The bourgeois democratic revolution has not been completed in the South.” (Communist Party.) “The South has a semi-feudal regime.” (Communist Party and others.) “The South is a colony of the North.” “The Negroes are a nation.” (CP and Garveyites.) “Negroes have the same status as a colonial people.” “Negroes are still slaves.” “The South is fascist.”
There is neither scientific nor historical foundation for any of the abovementioned theses. Any of them, except “The Negroes are a nation,” might be used for agitational purposes but that is all. They have no scientific and theoretical preciseness or accuracy and can contribute virtually nothing toward any real understanding of the South and its problems.
It is unquestionably true that in the South there are many hangovers from the slave regime. Ever since the Civil War there has been a sort of back-to-slavery movement. This has been one of the main contradictions of the South: the clash of back-to-slavery thinking with forward-to-industrialization agitation. It is necessary to emphasize that this back-to-slavery thinking is based not on the desire for a slave society in the manner of the old slave-owning aristocrats, but rests fundamentally on the desire to increase capitalist profits and in the concrete circumstances of today, that is under the overlordship of Northern monopoly capitalism.
Peonage, share-cropping and tenant farming are not ethical and religious ceremonials imposed on the people but are economic byways traversed for the purpose of capitalist profit. If this is not kept constantly in mind there can be no understanding of the South. Also in the midst of talk about the South being semi-feudal, it is necessary to emphasize that the South has never been either feudal or semi-feudal. Feudalism or semi-feudalism existed in New York State, up the Hudson, and’ not in Alabama, Mississippi or Georgia. The slave economy of the South was capitalistic in its basic aspects. The main products: cotton, tobacco, rice and naval stores were “cash crops” produced for sale in the world market. The status of these commodities was no different from that of Northern corn and other Northern commodities produced and sold in the world market. One was produced by slave labor and the other by free labor. The slave economy of the South was in fact a combination of ancient slavery and modern capitalism.
 
The Theoretical Problem
This, of course, was the source of the conflict between the North and the South. There is an irreconcilable contradiction between slavery and modern capitalism. This is a very painful and unpleasant lesson which the South is today trying to escape. The conflict between the slave economy (supported by Northern commercial capitalism) and Northern industrial capitalism was resolved in the Civil War. The war also settled the question of bourgeois democracy for the South. With the triumph of the North, bourgeois or capitalist democracy was established in the country as a whole, as the political capstone of triumphant industrial capitalism. We do not have the space or the time to go into the many historical ramifications of this development. Only the broad outlines can be sketched.
The whole debacle of Reconstruction and the struggle for democratic rights by the Negro, particularly in the South, has been a struggle, not to complete the bourgeois democratic revolution, but to capture the formal benefits of bourgeois democracy and to make effective in daily life what is already established in theory and in the Constitution. It is interesting that in the South the denial of bourgeois democratic rights to the Negro is not based formally on the demand for aristocratic privileges. The Negroes are not “the mob,” “the rabble,” such as even a democrat like Jefferson feared. They are a “race,” an “inferior race.” The formal denial is based on the demand for “white supremacy,” the demand for the domination of one “race” by another “race.”
It is pertinent, however, to remark that this “race” theory is put forward by the leaders of the most backward section of the country; the section with the most backward economy, the most poverty-stricken section. Thus, the struggle of the Negro for bourgeois democracy has been hampered and frustrated by the backwardness of the Southern economy and the attitude of Northern finance capitalism toward the South.
What we really see in the South is precisely a deviation from bourgeois democracy: the degeneration of bourgeois democracy (after Reconstruction).
(To Be Concluded)
 



Patriot’s Progress
The anti-trust division of the Justice Department has charged the American Pulpwood Association and 12 corporations with conspiracy to keep down the wages of 70,000 workers. The Association and the 12 corporations were indicted for violation of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938. The forest workers, one half of whom are Negroes, should have been paid at least 25 cents an hour but they got no more than 19 cents. This means that some probably got less.
The indicted companies control 80% of the kraft paper industry. The Association is the boss and tells the woodcutting companies just how they are to operate and how much to pay the forest workers. There are producing companies and sub-producing companies and all have plants in the South.
It is clear that the labor base of these big chiselers is southern Negro and poor white labor. It is unorganized and frightfully exploited and oppressed. If the true story were known we would have a tale of Negro-hating, labor-baiting, brutal and ignorant foremen; and workers living in shacks and existing on a half starvation diet.
Even if these workers had a sixty hour week at the set minimum of 25 cents they would get only $15.00. When the company deliberately steals six cents an hour, they pay these forest workers only $11.40 and rob them of $3.60 every week.
The indictment talks of a “conspiracy” to keep workers wages down. This is alright as far as it goes, but all workers must remember that capitalism itself is one vast “legal” conspiracy to keep all workers wages down. It was not just a nice sounding phrase when Karl Marx warned the working class many years ago that “they ought to inscribe on their banner the revolutionary watchword, ‘abolition of the wages system.’”
 
Some Get Caught ... Stealing
Another big patrioteer is Howard Hopson of the huge Associated Gas and Electric system. Hopson of course is one of the Willkie-men. He is charged with stealing $20,000,000 from his own company and then defrauding “his government” to the tune of nearly two million dollars in income taxes.
This is the usual practice among the big shot bankers and manufacturers. They steal from everything and anybody; their own companies, the workers and the government. Some of them are not as slick as others and get caught. If Hopson had not been in the clutches of the courts on July 4 he would probably have been on some D.A.R. or American Legion platform wrapped in the flag and bellowing for the workers to kick back a part of their low wages for national defense.
 
National Defense Measured by $ Sign
All of the Hopsons are supporters of the National Defense Tax Bill. This is the bill that forces’ the workers to pay proportionately more for national defense than their bosses will pay. It hits the single worker making $65 a month and the married worker getting $163. Then there is a special levy of 10%. Then come the taxes on beer, plug tobacco, movies and gasoline. There will be 2,000,000 new income taxpayers all from the group of workers whose living standards are already far too low.
There are lots of things for workers to pay attention to and remember in these days of billion dollar congressional appropriations. Nearly all of this money will go to manufacturers and bankers. Millions will go for profits and dividends. Love of country for the overwhelming majority of the big boys is determined by the size of profits and dividends. The shipbuilders have demonstrated this quite openly. Their patriotism is determined by the per cent of profit. If the profit for aiding in national defense is to be 10% above “cost” then their patriotism will glow with a pure white heat. However, if the profit is to be only 7% the shipbuilders may not be so patriotic. In fact, Captain Krause, of the Defense Advisory Commission, in testifying before the Naval Affairs Committee, said that if the profits problem is attacked too vigorously, the attitude of the shipbuilders might become one of “hesitancy or resistance.” Let every worker think this over when he is about to decide that this is not the time to strike for higher wages.
 
Here and There
Workers in the Mellon Aluminum Co. are threatening strike. The union is demanding a flat increase of ten cents an hour for 15,000 workers. The Aluminum Co. of course is one of the outfits that will cash in on the war. Just last week the company got an order from the War Department for cooking utensils and other equipment for feeding 1,000,000 soldiers ...
Remington-Rand, Inc., makers of typewriters and office equipment has agreed to demobilize its nine company unions. Also to “cease urging and warning its employees not to become or remain members” of the machinists union. The company must also post a notice telling the employees that they may join any union they wish without fear of discrimination.
The CIO and the United Rubber Workers have started a drive for the complete organization of the Akron plants of the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co. At the same time the union is carrying on an organizing drive in the Goodyear plants in Jackson, Mich., Gadsden, Ala. and Los Angeles. The union will demand a written contract in all these Goodyear plants.
 
West Coast Marine Strike Cancelled
Two and one half hours after the deadline for ending negotiations and beginning the strike, the west coast marine cooks and stewards decided to call the strike off. Negotiations had been going on for ten months. Secretary Perkins wired the union urging them not to strike and Hillman asked Bridges, CIO leader, to intervene. It is not clear from newspaper reports just what the union gained. They won a ten per cent wage “adjustment.” Does this mean a blanket 10% wage increase? From the reports it seems that the union gave up its demand for the rotation principle in hiring. The shipping; companies claimed the right to hire “key employees” in place of someone that might be next in line,
All along the line there is a great deal of stirring in the ranks of the organized workers. This is correct. Now while capitalism is organizing for more profits is the time for the workers to organize tor more wages and shorter hours.
 



A Challenge to the CIO
The National Labor Relations Board has rendered a decision against the Weirton Steel Co., Ernest Weir, his managers, superintendents, foremen and assorted thugs and gangsters. The Board charges that the company is guilty of anti-union practices in violation and defiance of the Wagner Act. Weir is the hard-boiled steel man whose lawyers got a federal court to dismiss a government suit against him in 1935, for failure to comply with the NIRA. Weir is also chief money grabber for the campaign war chest of the Republican Party.
Weir organized a company union back in 1933 known as the Weirton Steel Employees Plan. Like all company unions it was formed by the management for the purpose of defeating the plans of the works to form a real union. After the CIO arrived on the scene, Weir formed a “Security League.” Workers in the company’s plants at Weirton, W.Va., Steubenville. O., and Clarksburgh. W.Va. were “invited” to join the League. Mere invitation didn’t work however as the majority of the steel workers seemed to prefer the Steel Workers Organizing Committee. This, despite the fact that the Company paid the company union officers, spent $70,000 in three years to publish a paper for the workers, gave large sums to the Plan, hired the Central Industrial Service Company, a spy agency, to protect the “loyal” sympathizers of the company union to keep the plants from being dynamited.
The “special watchmen” did not however confine their operations to inside the plants. They roamed the streets in cahoots with sympathetic mayors and sheriffs. CIO organizers were clubbed, mobbed and kidnapped. During the 1933 strike the Weirton Steel Company’s police, gunmen and blackjack artists gave the workers a blitzkrieg long before Hitler got started.
The Board’s decision orders the Company to cease interfering with the union activities of its employees, quit supporting workers organizations, stop clubbing employees who disagree with Weir, cut loose from its spies, snoopers and provocateurs, abandon the company union and reinstate 17 employees with back pay.
The Board did not recognize the SWOC as the bargaining unit for Weirton employees and refused to order the reinstatement of 83 employees who had been fired.
This case is not ended of course. Weir has 20 day to file exceptions and 30 to file a brief with the Board. He will use both and then appeal the case to the courts. He will try to drag the case out until after the election and try in the meantime to raise enough money to buy the presidency for Willkie. With Willkie in the White House, or before. Weir will hope for revision of the Wagner Act and the dissolution of the Labor Board.
 
Something for John L. Lewis to Do
This is a challenge to the CIO to get busy and quit horsing around. Get a majority in the Weirton plants. Force collective bargaining on Weir and all the other Weirs, Tom Girdley included. Organize all the steel plants. Form an international union. Encourage the workers to run their own union and elect the officers they want. Let the union vote to accept or reject contracts. This is the only way to beat the Weirs.
If John L. Lewis would put in more time at organizing the mass production workers and less at president making, every worker in the country would be better off than he is today.
 
Holding the Poker by the Hot End
Iron City Lodge No. 1843 in the Jones and Laughlin Steel Company in Pittsburgh is playing with fire. This local union has written Steel Labor saying that the lodge “has taken the initiative in eliminating communists, nazis and other un-American subversive elements from its folds.” The letter also states that No. 1272 in Pittsburgh and No. 1211 in Alliquipa, Pa. are also cleaning house. “A committee against all foreign ‘isms’ has been formed of SWOC ex-service men to combat the 5th columnists under the leadership of John Dufy, charter member of local 1943.”
These workers will discover that they have the poker by the hot end and that they have been taken in. Who are these “communists, nazis and other un-American subversive elements” in their local? Have the rank and file of the local bothered themselves to find out? Are these “un-American subversive elements” anti-union people, spies, scabs, strike-breakers? Are they boss stool-pigeons who slipped into the union and who are opposed to high wages, short hours and strikes?
Who are these “ex-service men” and who is brother Duffy aside from being a charter member of the local? The rank and file better get busy and look into some of these questions.
There is nothing that would suit the steel barons better than to have the union itself start a witch hunt and a fifth column crusade. The steel manufacturers know damn well that whereas a stray nazi might get caught the overwhelming majority of the workers who would be hounded out of the union and out of the plant would be the most loyal and militant members of the union. Furthermore, if the union will kick out its best fighters the bosses can spend less for spies, rifles and tear gas.
The workers must remember that the terms “fifth column” and “un-American” were invented by the bosses and their literary stooges. The chief test of a good union member must be: Is he loyal to the union and the working class? Is he willing to fight against the boss and the bosses’ government for higher wages, shorter hours and better working conditions today, right now, not after the war is over? This is the only kind of worker that is worth a hoot to his class and his union. Any other type of worker is a Scissor-Bill Sam, the Boss’s Man, no matter how loudly he yells about his Americanism and even though he chant the Star Spangled Banner on rising in the morning, and at night before going to bed.
 
A State at Organized Labor
The fools in Washington who voted to deport Harry Bridges seem to hold to the belief that ideas and opinions can be transported around the world and hid away like traveling bags, whiskey and prostitutes. A congressional act to get just one man out of the country! And why? Because Bridges has carried out the Stalinist line of union wrecking and discrimination against non-Stalinist militants and dissenters? Because Bridges defended and carried the Stalinist class collaboration Peoples Front line into the maritime union? No, it is for none of these crimes against the working class that the House voted to deport Bridges. Nor is it because Bridges is an alien.
The House voted to deport Bridges because he is the leader of a workers organization with a militant rank and file. He led a big strike once. He is an experienced labor leader. The effort to deport Bridges is a blow at the unions and at trade unionism. They want to get rid of Bridges because the ship owners look upon him and the union as a threat to their peace of mind and their profits. The rank and file might get strike in their heads, refuse to listen to any compromise talk from Bridges and push him into organizing another strike.
This attack against Bridges is a stab at organized labor. It is a blow at civil liberties and an assault on fundamental workers’ rights. The defense of Bridges therefore, in this case, is the duty and responsibility of the whole working class. The bosses are not after Bridges but the union. These simple things were understood for decades in this country before the Stalinists spread their poison and treachery throughout the labor movement. It was a well established labor policy to come to the aid of any worker who was hounded by the police or who had fallen into the clutches of the capitalist courts. No questions were asked about his politics, race, nationality or citizenship. The only questions asked: is he a worker, is it a class struggle case? If so, then the workers closed ranks and organized the defense.
This is still good sound working class doctrine despite the many and criminal, violations of this procedure by the Stalinists and their GPU. The crimes of the Stalinists, including Bridges, against the working class must be taken care of by the congress of the working class and not by the congress of the ruling class at Washington.
 
Here and There
The AFL Aluminum Workers Union at Massena, N.Y. threatens to strike. They want an increase of 5 cents an hour. They get a 56 cent minimum now. The CIO aluminum workers have just been granted a 65 cent hourly minimum at the plants in New Kensington, Pa., Edgewater, N.J., Badin, N.C., Alcoa, Tenn., and Detroit. Should the Massena workers get the 5 cent increase they will still be 4 cents an hour below the rate in the CIO plants.
 
Quit Soft-Soaping the Bosses!
The CIO has announced the beginning of a national organizing campaign in the airplane industry. They better hurry or all the tremendous increase in income will be socked away in the jeans of the big stockholders. President Thomas of the UAWA announced a drive to “unionize and to insure stable labor relations in the aircraft plants of the country.” A lot of labor leaders are talking these days about “stable labor relations.” What do they mean? Profits are not stable. They are continually expanding. This means that wages should continue to go up. Hours should be shortened to assure employment to all the unemployed and leisure time for the workers.
Labor leaders should quit trying to soft soap the bosses with talk about “stable labor relations.” They can’t fool the bosses. The big boys know there is a class struggle going on even though Lewis and Green don’t. The employers will only accept stable labor relations on their terms. Their terms are low wages, long hours, company unions and no strikes.
 



The Food Stamp Plan initiated about one year ago by the Roosevelt Administration through the Federal Surplus Commodities Corporation, is now in use in over 100 cities.
The latest is Brooklyn, N.Y., where the plan will begin sometime near September. Newark, N.J. started the plan most recently in the latter part of June.
The operation of the plan in some respects is simple but in other respects somewhat complicated. People on relief, and in certain cities WPA workers and old age pensioners, are given fifty cents in blue stamps for each dollar’s worth of orange stamps they buy. The blue stamps can be used only to buy what the Department of Agriculture calls “surplus commodities.” These are the food-stuffs that the farmers can not sell.
Heretofore the government bought this food and distributed it to the unemployed as a supplement to their relief money. The government will continue buying this “surplus” food, these farm products of which there “is more than the market will absorb.” The government advertises that this distribution is made possible at a “low price due to abundant crops.” Now however, the unemployed will be given blue stamps with which to purchase such of these products as they need or want. This will eliminate the necessity of an unemployed family having to increase the small food supply with a bag of two dozen surplus grape fruits or a single man finding himself in possess of two pounds of butter.
It is also a fact that the unemployed will be able to get a little more food. It is estimated by experts in such matters that meal costing five cents can be expanded to the equivalent of one costing 7½ cents. Since this does not take into account the present direct distribution of food surpluses, the actual increase is less then 50%.
Great emphasis is placed on the provision that the Plan is voluntary. You don’t have to participate. However, if you don’t participate you will not get the free blue stamps. This means that those who do not accept the plan will be confined to the five cent meal while those who accept will have an opportunity to expand a five cent meal into a 7½ cent meal. The “clients” will therefore, and correctly, participate, in the plan.
 
A Few Things to Watch
There are a few things that the unemployed will have to keep an eye on in connection with the Food. Stamp Plan:

Stamps are issued in denominations of twenty-five cents. There may be a tendency by little store keepers to raise the price qf an article from say, 23 cents to a quarter. That is, the little fellows whose business comes largely from the unemployed, may connive to raise prices a few cents all along the line.
 
The unemployed will have to he on the alert to see to it that storekeepers do not palm off inferior and stale produce on them.
 
Under the Stamp Plan there is an increase in red tape:
a) the unemployed must carry identification cards to the store each time,
b) the whole stamp book must be taken to the store – the customer is not permitted to tear out stamps
 
Special diets and emergency orders will be more difficult to get.

The Plan as arranged for Brooklyn differs from other cities in at least one important respect. The city will purchase the stamps and there will be no Stamp Issuing Office. Instead the City will ask the relief family whether or not they would like for the City to deduct $6.00 each month from the cash relief allowance. Those who accept would then receive $6.00 in orange stamps and $3.00 in blue stamps. The “client” may refuse, of course, to permit the City to make the deduction from his relief check but if he does he will not get the $3.00 in blue stamps. Refusal will not injure his relief standing. He will only be confined to the five cent meal and will not get the extra 2½ cents worth of pork, beans, lard, cabbage etc. Mayor La Guardia says that by eliminating the Stamp Issuing Offices administrative costs will be reduced about 80%.
The main point for the unemployed to keep in mind is the reason for the existence of the surplus commodity distribution and its offspring the Food Stamp Plan. This “free” distribution of food was originally conceived to aid the farmers. Scientific agriculture on the farm combined with vast unemployment and low wages for workers in town and city produce what the government calls a “farm surplus.” The farmers can’t sell their produce. This means they will have no money. No money to pay wages which means increase of unemployment among farm workers. Also and more important there will be no money to give th’e Metropolitan Insurance Co. for interest on the mortgage held against the farm.
Secondly, the Plan is intended as a help to local grocers. Helping the local grocers means helping all other business, including the banks. When the government distributed the “surplus” food direct, the little grocer and butcher did not participate.
 
A Few Dangers
It is possible for any number of things to happen in connection with this Food Stamp Plan. The unemployed and their organization will have to be always on guard. The Plan can be turned into a scheme for cutting relief or for eliminating cash relief through the introduction of the “voucher system.” Furthermore, should conditions arise making it possible for the “market” to “absorb” more or all of the “surplus” produce the unemployed might find themselves out on a limb.
If business improves and prices rise the farmers will sell in the open market. This will mean that the main articles of food, and the most nourishing will no longer be on the Food Stamp list. Instead of 17 foods to choose from, including butter, eggs and pork, the unemployed might find themselves regularly in possession of large quantities of prunes, grapefruit and onions.
Lastly, under war conditions, whether or not the plan is in operation, almost anything can happen. Undoubtedly there will be an attempt to reduce the living standards of all the workers. The tendency will be to soak the unemployed worst of all. The bosses will feel that there is no more need to feed an unemployed worker than an unemployed mule. An unemployed worker can go into the army or starve.
 
Be On Alert!
All this is true and while accepting the Food Stamp Plan because it means an increase in Food allotment, the unemployed must remain alert and be prepared for action whenever they see any shifts in the Plan that are against their interests. The answer to any potential evils in the Plan, is strong and aggressive organizations of the unemployed, led by intelligent and militant fighters. It is especially important now, in this period of war fever and patriotic fervor that workers organizations tolerate only this kind of leadership.
 



Two Peas in a Pod
Many political commentators have been saying that there is no fundamental difference between the Republicans and Democrats on foreign policy and national defense. Certainly there is no fundamental difference on these questions. How can there be? Both parties are operated and controlled by millionaires or their stooges, for the benefit of and in the interest of the rich. Right now foreign policy and “national defense” have a definite and close relationship to profits and opportunities for increasing profits in the next year or two. Both parties are interested primarily in the preservation of capitalism and capitalist private profit. We have already pointed out how even the patriotism of the big bankers and industrialists grows hot or cold depending on the size of profit permitted by the government.
Furthermore one party will be just an anxious, as the other to protect the investments of U.S. millionaires in Europe and Asia and to protect and help extend their investments in South America. Both parties are willing to give business a little more freedom to exploit workers and thereby increase profits. That’s the chief reason for the existence of both parties.
 
Eye to Eye on NLRB
One interesting instance of seeing eye to eye is the fact that both parties favor amending the National Labor Relations Act. The only difference between them is that the Republicans are more outspoken, while the Democrats pussy-foot. The Republicans want the Act “amended in fairness to employers and all groups of employees so as to provide true freedom for, and orderliness in, self-organization and collective bargaining.” The Democrats pledge themselves “to maintain the principles of the National Labor Relations Act.” This means of course that they favor its amendment. They too want an act fair to employers and “all groups of employees.” Both parties are prepared to open the door for the extension of company unions. The AFL should note this while they are fighting to have this Act changed. Bill Green seems to be of the opinion that all he has to fight is the CIO. He forgets that all of the big employers are not as stupid and open as Weir and others in their company union procedure. They are learning new tricks.
Last but by no means least the Democrats will “work always for a just distribution of our national income among those who labor.” To get the full flavor of this workers should think it over in connection with the Republican claim that “the Republican Party has always protected the American worker.”
From time to time we hazard a guess on how long the U.S. workers will continue to fall for this Republican and Democratic tripe. Always protected the American workers! Work for a just distribution of the national income among the workers! This is what Morgan, Rockefeller, Ford, Girdler, Weir, Young, DuPont are aiming at when they hurl their thugs and gunmen at the workers. This is what Roosevelt, Willkie and all the other Morgan-Rockefeller-Young deputies are aiming at when they agree that wages shall be as low as $15 a week while the big shots may go as high as $10,000 a week. This is what they mean by “just distribution.”
In the midst of all this one remembers with a shock that the first labor party (Working Men’s Party) in the world was formed right in this country, in Philadelphia, 112 years ago this month. Despite the fact that over a century ago the workers of the United States began realizing that the parties of the bosses did not and could not represent them, they are still jumping back and forth from one boss party to the other.
 
And Again – Patriotism Pays Dividends
All workers who are satisfied with their wages, the wages system and capitalism would probably get mad as hell if they took a little time off to read more about what is really going on. For instance let’s look again at corporation profits for this year: the grand year of national defense and patriotism. The New York Times reports that 100 corporations increased their earnings by 60% over the first half of 1939. These 100 Corporations had total net income of $113,658,828 for six months, an increase of $70,818,876 over the first six months of 1939. Republic Steel (Tom Girdler) increased from $1,083,311 to $6,449,453 or 495%! General Electric (Morgan, Young) from $16,370,192 to $25,871,572, or 58%. Atlantic Refining, (Rockefeller) $1,353,000 to $5,266,000 or 289%.
American Telephone and Telegraph (Bell Telephone Companies, Morgan) net income for 12 months ended, May 31 was $203,549,917, an increase of $35,446,093 over 1939.
This is the huge corporation which advertises that no one person owns as much as 1% of its stock. This is just as much a sucker advertisement as the old gold mine “ads” or the patent medicine stuff. AT.&T. has 18,686,794 shares of stock outstanding. Each share of this stock “earned” $10.89 a share the past year. (This doesn’t mean of course that dividends are $10.89 a share). However any stockholder who owned even one half of 1% of A.T.&T. stock would have 93,433 shares. The real situation in 1928 (according to Berle and Means: The Modern Corporation and Private Property) was that the 20 largest stockholders held 515,485 shares; George Baker leading individual owners with 53,522 shares.
It is very easy to see that with its tremendous monopoly earnings the dividends of A.T.&T. are large. Furthermore they are regular and constant. This means that there is a small group of individuals and corporations, such as the Sun Life Insurance Co. with over 70,000 shares in 1928. that have nothing else to do but sit and wait for telephone workers to create wealth for them to pocket. We leave out of consideration here any discussion of the fact that the control of the company is in the hands of a very few large shareholders. The main point is not the per cent of stock owned by any one person, but the total number of shares owned, and the fact that these shares are concentrated in the hands of a few powerful corporations and individuals.
Here are a few newspaper headlines for the past week: “EARNINGS AT RECORD LEVEL, Eaton Manufacturing Company Clears $1,008,348 in 6 months.” “RECORD CHRYSLER WEEK.” “21% GAIN IS SHOWN BY DUPONT: SECOND QUARTER TOTAL PUT AT 484,514,779.” “OLDSMOBILE SALES RISE 105%.” “PACKARD SALES JUMP 222%.” “100 CONCERNS SHOW EARNINGS UP 60.5%.”
 
But What Are the Workers Doing?
We have said before that patriotism pays the ruling class. It is paying handsome dividends today in real dollars to the owners of the factories mines, mills and the land. And what are the workers doing while the bosses are grabbing millions of dollars? Well, out in Pittsburgh some steel workers are hunting for “un-American” workers in their own ranks while the bosses give the witch hunt their blessings. One section of the labor movement is fighting to have the Wagner Act changed so that it will be fair to the bosses and company unions. That isn’t the way they put it but that is what the AFL fight against the Act means. John L. Lewis is attempting to assume the role of president maker, just as though it made any real difference to workers whether Roosevelt or Willkie is president. Dubinsky at the last convention of the ILGWU, in addition to flag-waving and war-mongering, had the constitution of his union changed so that any militant paid officer can be kicked out by the top leadership of the union. All candidates for a paid office in a local union must deposit duplicate resignations in blank with the G.S.T. of the ILGWU and the local before they take office.
Now is the time for unity among the workers, all of them, the AFL, CIO, railroad unions and the numerous other independent unions; unity for more wages, shorter hours and complete organization of all industrial and agricultural workers.
 
Cockroaches and Chiselers
The State Labor Department of New Jersey reports a “disturbing” disregard of the state labor laws by Atlantic City employers. In one day seven inspectors found 193 violations in 69 restaurants, hotels and other business places.
Fashion Lane Dress Company admitted in court that it had falsified its books to conceal its practice of scab production. Furthermore the company paid wages under the legal minimum and jumbled its records to keep this fact from being discovered.
Signal Knitting Mills of Chattanooga, Tenn. has granted a closed shop to its workers. After the NLEB had ordered the Company to disband its company union the outfit organized another company union and announced that it had signed a “closed shop contract” with the new union. Justice (ILGWU paper) reports that the “closed shop” was in effect before the union was formed.
John L. Martin writing in Justice on Union News From Dixie has the following juicy morsel: “The war fever has hit the chamber of commerce boys in Dixie with the factory bug, and every little crossroad town is whooping it up for a bigger and better war so they can get a ‘new industry’.”
Charles Hardy, president of the American Car and Foundry Co. had a little difficulty at the last stockholders meeting. Last year Hardy’s salary was $73,695. It was also revealed that a law firm headed by Hardy got $112,825 in fees from the company. One stockholder felt that $30,000 a year salary should be enough for their president. He was defeated however when the president announced that he had been successful in getting an order from the government for 900 army tanks. $73,695 a year is about $1,400 dollars a week or nearly $30 an hour for a 48 hour week. Hardy is probably one of the boys who believe that his workers should be satisfied with 30 cents an hour. If they want more money let them work more hours.
 



Cutting a Slice of Boloney from the Republican Platform
The first sentence in the Labor Relations section of the Republican Party election platform reads: “The Republican Party has always protected the American worker.” This will be news to workers who have been clubbed on picket lines, who have had their wages slashed, who have been set out to starve and freeze by Republican employers while their stooges in Washington were raising the tariff and lowering corporation taxes.
Are we to suppose that Hoover was protecting the American worker when he had the army shoot and gas the unemployed – including the babies – out of Washington on that Bloody Thursday in 1931? Are we expected to believe also that the GOP was protecting labor when Republican senators opposed the La Follette Civil Liberties Bill? By their opposition they defended the right of the big corporations to maintain their spies, stool-pigeons, finks, armed thugs and private arsenals to be used against the unions.
Another sentence reads: “When differences arise (between employer and employee) they should be settled directly and voluntarily across the table.” This of course came right out of the mouth of Sam Gompers and was picked up by Bill Green. Gomper’s position was that strikes are out of style. The Republican platform agrees with Gompers. When the worker and the boss have a difference over such little matters as wages, hours, charged barbed wire or stool pigeons, they should get together with the boss in his mahogany office, forget such trivial matters, kiss and make up.
The final paragraph says that the National Labor Relations Act should be amended. The present act is not fair to the employers and some groups of employees. Some groups of employees of course include the company unions, the scabs and the stool pigeons.
The Republicans also shed a few tears over the unemployed. They want the unemployed to get a larger share of the money appropriated. They want relief on a “fair and non-political basis.” And how do they propose doing this? By turning relief administration back to the states with “Federal grants-in-aid.” That is, the federal government will continue to put up some money (not much of course) but it will be handled exclusively by each state.
If we can understand this it means that the Republicans are telling the unemployed workers that there are no politicians in the various capitals, not even in Louisiana! Furthermore the Republicans seem to believe that the workers have very short memories. At the beginning of the thirties, the states had complete charge of relief. The unemployed were nearer to starvation than they are now. They went into the streets (”not across the table”) and fought. This forced the New Deal administration to appropriate money from the federal treasury. The Republicans intend to return to the Hoover era and the Hoover methods.
We will have to wait until August to see what the Democrats hand out. We know however that their platform will not be in any important way different from the Republican. They will use other words to put over the same line of bunkum.
 
Did Bill Green Get an Honorary Degree from the Federal Bureau of Investigation?
There was a queer piece of news hidden away in the New York Times on Sunday. Tacked on to the article informing us that the President had signed the bill to finger print all aliens was the information that Bill Green had attended the graduating exercises of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. He made a speech but the report did not say whether or not he was the commencement orator wishing the graduates success in their careers. Nor was anything said as to whether or not Mr. Green received an honorary degree.
 
There Is No Doubt About It – Patriotism Is a Paying Profession
If workers have any doubts that patriotism, as practiced by the bosses, is a paying profession they can cast an eye at some profits for the first quarter of 1940. Aircraft went up with a roar. Douglas profits were $771,552 in the first quarter of 1939 and $1,804,877 in the first quarter 1940, an increase of 134%. Glenn Martin rose from §682,496 to $2,162,670, an increase of 218%. In automobiles GM was $53,177,928 in 1939 and $60,028,461 for the first quarter 1940. Studebaker profits increased 800%.
U.S. Steel made $660,551 in the first quarter of 1939 and $17,113,195 in the first quarter 1940, an increase of 2500%. Bethlehem, Youngstown and Republic Steel increased profits by millions. General Electric went from $7,373,431 to $11,951,450. Westinghouse profits were $2,356,150 in first quarter of 1939 and 54,041,428 for first quarter of 1940.
This is a sample of what is taking place in the war industries. These profit figures are the answer to any demands made on the workers to slow up in their demands for more wages. The workers must demand and get more and more of these huge profits (and they will increase!) in the form of wages, right now. Who makes the airplanes, the automobiles and electrical equipment? Who sweats and toils in the steel mills while the bosses play? Any employer or government official who tells workers that patriotism calls for no increases in wages or hours is a scoundrel. Any worker who falls for this blarney is a Scissor Bill Sam and a fool.
 
FBI Gives Strikers a Lesson in Democracy
President Robinson, of the Mine, Mill and Smelter Workers says that the FBI gave 20 strikers in Polk County, Tenn. “some kind of narcotic that left them with such severe headaches and so violently ill that a doctor had to be summoned for one of them while he was being tortured into ‘confessing.’” The strikers had been arrested in connection with the alleged dynamiting of TVA power lines during a strike against the Tennessee Copper Corporation. Robinson also claimed that the G-men threatened the striker’s families and put them through other cruel third degree treatments.
 
Business Doesn’t Want to be Hampered by Wage-Hour Acts
The bosses want to get rid of the Walsh-Healy Act. It interferes with their patriotism. They can’t support the national defense program if they have to pay prevailing union wages on government contracts. The Model Blouse Company, of New Jersey, has been caught chiseling and ordered to pay $18,000 in back wages. The company evaded the minimum wage rate, crooked its payrolls and employed child labor on government contracts.
Of course this sort of business is not confined to the little fellows like Model Blouse. The big steel companies all want the Wage Hour Act, the Walsh-Healy Act and the Wagner Act all put on ice – at least for the duration of the war-time big-profits period.
 



The Lesson of the Vultee Strike
The strikes in the Aluminum Co. plant at New Kensington, Pa., and at the Vultee airplane plant in California, have been ended. These two strikes, especially that at Vultee, set the whole pack of employer-wolves and their stooges in the capitalist press howling and yelping about the workers holding up the “defense” program. The Vultee strike was instigated by communists they said. In Congress, little two-by-four guys from the backwoods pool tax districts of the South, foaming at the mouth, prepared bills to make strikes in “defense industries” illegal. All this because the workers refuse to work any longer for 45 and 50 cents an hour while corporations are piling up huge profits and paying out millions in dividends to a bunch of loafers who do not work.
The chief gain of the Vultee strike, aside from the increase in wages and improvement in working condition!. was the example these workers set of refusing to return to work until at least some of their demands were granted. They stayed on the picket line until the company came across. They didn’t return to work and wait for some government “conciliator” and one of their leaders to beg the company to make a few minor concessions. This strike should be a lesson to workers in all the “defense” industries. The only thing the bosses understand is power and pressure. They and their representatives in Congress and on the press are only interested in profits. They howl about national defense being jeopardized; what they mean is that profits and dividends are being jeopardized.
Now is the time for all workers, all unions to make organized demands on the bosses, for the 30 hour week and a minimum of $30 wages.
 
On Protecting Civil Rights of Draftees
The CIO convention passed a resolution entitled “Protection of Labor in Administration of Conscription Law.” This resolution calls for the protection of the civil rights of men in the army, the right to vote, the right to communicate with their unions and families. The resolution also opposes the maintenance of “harsh and repressive discipline” in the army.
This resolution is all right as far as it goes, which isn’t far enough. In this imperialist war the workers in the army must go far beyond the CIO in making demands on the ruling class. This is not the workers’ war; they were not for conscription; they were forced into the imperialist army. The workers must have military training and this is the only interest they can have in the present imperialist army.
Soldiers in the army should demand the right to hold political discussions under their own auspices. They should have their own publications, to discuss the war and anything else connected with their interests. They should demand the right to receive any political literature they desire.
The soldiers should insist on the right to retain membership in the unions and political parties to which they belonged before being drafted. They should demand the democratic right to elect grievance committees to present grievances to their commanding officers.
The worker-soldiers should fight against all racial, political and religious discrimination in the army.
The minimum pay should be raised to $60 a month exclusive of “keep.”
 
Frances Perkins: Just a Time-Waster
Frances Perkins, secretary of labor, told the AFL convention to be on guard against influence from “dishonest or subversive sources.” Madame Perkins of course was speaking for the government and therefore for the employers. She means therefore by “dishonest and subversive” sources all those organizations and individuals which attempt to show workers how to raise their wages, and improve their standards of living to a degree commensurate with the wealth that the workers produce.
It’s all right for the workers to be chivalrous and courteous to speakers at their conventions, but these workers don’t need to believe what these speakers say, or heed their advice. Frances Perkins and the other outside speakers at the AFL convention do not represent the workers or their interests. As far as the working class is concerned such speakers as Frances Perkins and other such people are only useless window dressing and time wasters.
 
Impotence of Craft Union Set-Up Demonstrated
The NLRB has ordered an election in the airplane plant of the Curtis-Wright Corporation at Robertson. Mo. The International Association of Machinists (AFL) asked for renewal of its contract. The company then threw a dummy company union together and stalled the IAM. The company union demanded that the NLRB certify it as the bargaining unit for all employees. The dummy union had no constitution of by-laws and presented the board with the constitution of the company union in the Curtis-Wright plant at Buffalo. The craft union set-up came up against difficulties here as elsewhere.
The IAM was only interested in the skilled workers in the craft represented by the IAM. There are other workers in the aircraft industry however. There are unskilled workers in these plants not eligible for the IAM. Also in this particular plant are 800 office workers. Because of the fact that the dummy union was taking in all employees, the IAM was forced to consider, not the office workers of course, but all types of production workers, even the unskilled. This incident demonstrates once again the impotence of the craft union set-up in the modern industrial structure.
 
“Red Caps” Lose, Railroads Profit
When the minimum wage law came in, railroads were forced to pay a minimum wage to station “red caps.” The “red caps” had always existed off the tips they received from travellers. The railway companies decided that they could not pay the wage and decided to get the wages from the public. A fixed fee of 10 cents per parcel was set to be collected by the porters and turned in to the company. Out of this, the company would pay the “red cap” his minimum legal wage.
The wages and hours administration has discovered that the 10 cent per parcel system not only pays the station, porters’ wage but at the Washington, D.C. union station, returned a profit to the railroads. This year the profit will be about £50,000. On the basis of this, the wages and hours administration began an investigation of other cities, notably New York.
There has been a great deal of dissatisfaction with this system among the “red caps.” They probably didn’t know the companies were making a profit on the arrangement, but they knew that something was wrong and that they were turning in far more money than they were being paid.
 



During its two weeks of deliberation many things of importance, along with much that is trivial, were considered by the American Federation of Labor at its 60th convention in New Orleans. The main questions on which decisions were made by the convention were the attitude of the AFL toward th. war; racketeering; unity with the CIO; labor standards and the war; and the organization’s attitude toward representation on the various government war boards.
The first week, of the convention was largely consumed by the usual routine organizational matters, speeches by outsiders, and the racketeering issue which was pressed by Dubinsky of the International Ladies’ Garment Workers Union. Frances Perkins, Secretary of Labor, spoke, and asked the federation to fight against “dishonest or subversive” influences. Sir Walter Citrine appeared at the convention to represent British labor and to ask for support to England in the war against Hitler. Sir Walter was received warmly and with open arms by President Green. Another convention speaker was Milo J. Warner, national commander of the American Legion. He urged “total preparation of our defenses now as a means to avoid war,” and pledged the cooperation of the American Legion with the AFL to “promote peace” and other goals mutually beneficial to the AFL and the legion. Dan Tracy, assistant Secretary of Labor, and formerly head of the electricians, was present to make a speech. Tracy told the convention that they must go on building the Department of Labor “to the end of making it the greatest in the government.” Green replied by saying that “at long last we have a fine entrée into the Department. We can talk to Mr. Tracy as man to man. He speaks our language and we speak his.”
 
Compromise on Racketeering
Dubinsky was present to fight for the fulfillment of the promises made him by Green before the ILGWU entered the AFL. Dubinsky was promised that the executive council would ask the convention to take from the council the right to suspend unions, and to vest this authority in the convention alone. Dubinsky was also promised that the one cent per capita tax would be eliminated and that the council would recommend strong action against racketeering in the AFL. All of these proposals, except the one percent per capita tax, hit a snag in the convention. On the racketeering issue Dubinsky had presented a resolution giving the executive council power to take action against unions that did not expel racketeers. Leaders of strong international unions were against the ILGWU resolution, and Dubinsky consented to a compromise resolution which called on all affiliated unions to adopt rules and amendments to their constitutions providing for action against officers or members “found guilty of betraying their trust or of having used their position for personal or illegal gain, or who have been convicted of acts casting discredit on the entire labor movement,” The resolution continued with: “we submit with pride the record of honesty and integrity of thousands of trade union officials. A far larger number of men in the professions, in public life and in business have shown criminal tendencies and been found guilty.”
The substitution of this compromise for the Dubinsky resolution was based on the executive council’s claim that. since the internationals are autonomous, the federation cannot dictate to them how they run their affairs and administer their business. The federation, according to Green, can only exert moral pressure on its affiliates.
It should be emphasized that this mild action by the executive council is certainly no less correct than the resolution proposed by Dubinsky, That resolution vesting authority in the executive council to remove individuals or unions, ostensibly for racketeering, would give reactionaries a lever against militants and radicals who were good honest union men. Furthermore, much of the racketeering in the AFL is either directly traceable to certain union leaders, or continued because these leaders, for one reason or another, close their eyes to the activities of racketeers in their organizations.
It is interesting that in the resolution on racketeering the federation found it necessary to include the following paragraph: “the opposition of our federation to communism and all forms of totalitarianism meets with public approval and support. Every effort we may make to keep our organization clean and self-disciplined will meet with the same public support.” The convention also gave the country a promise to “keep our movement law-abiding” and demanded legislation to bar the Communist Party from the ballot in any state because it is the agency of a “foreign power.”
The war question in the convention was really opened with Sir Walter Citrine’s speech. Labor, railway brotherhood newspaper, reports that Citrine’s address “was by far the most dramatic of any given during the convention. Veteran, grizzled labor leaders found it hard to keep from weeping. The mouths of many quivered, and tears glistened in many eyes. All were deeply touched.”
Alter reading through Sir Walter’s speech it is difficult to determine just what the “grizzled labor leaders” were weeping over. After recounting the story of the “terror unloosed by Nazi hordes on Britain, of death and destruction strewn over his homeland ...” Sir Walter told how the British trade union movement had “surrendered the right to strike ...” And also that labor had agreed to unlimited extension of the working hours to as many as 80 a week. The maximum now, however, is only 60 hours a week according to Sir Walter. When we read this speech of the Secretary of the British Trade Union Congress, and learned about the weeping of the grizzled AFL veterans, we wondered whether or not the weeping was occasioned by the surrender of the right to strike and the labor’s consent to the 80 hour week? Furthermore, there was another “terror unloosed” that Sir Walter did not mention. In many respects it is the more significant terror: the terror unloosed over India and Africa by British imperialism. On this terror, the knighted labor leader made no report to the convention. Sir Walter pleaded for America’s help, the help of trade unionists in the U.S. (That was really the purpose of his journey to this country.) When he finished, “President Green responded in a voice breaking with emotion.” He said that America will produce as never before to help “our friends ... win the battle for democracy. The American Federation of Labor will make it our chief object to send a stream of war materials, of all the things Britain needs in her hour of deepest need.” The convention officially went on record for all aid to England short of war.
The convention also went on record supporting the “defense program” not only for the United States but for the whole western hemisphere. The convention fervently prayed for the victory of England because, “she stands as the last outpost in the Old World in the defense of the democratic form of government.”
 
Unity Question
On the matter of AFL-CIO unity, the convention continued its “peace committee” and instructed the committee to communicate with the CIO asking for resumption of negotiations. Green said that no conditions would be set in advance but that he did not expect anything to be accomplished because John L. Lewis was still head of the CIO miners. Green’s attitude was that not only should Lewis resign from the CIO presidency but also as head of the mine union.
The convention adopted a resolution forbidding state and local central organizations from considering communications from CIO unions. There was dissent by a few delegates who claimed that such action would hinder unity moves and close the door to any cooperation between the organizations. Another interesting commentary on the unity situation was the position of Green when he told Madame Perkins that the AFL would cooperate with her if she would recognize that the AFL, end not the CIO, was entitled to speak for American labor.
 
War-Time Demands
The convention declared that while labor is “thoroughly patriotic,” the introduction of undemocratic practices would be looked upon by the AFL as a blow at the “soul of what we would defend.” The convention said that majority rule must continue, that the war program must be in the hands of civilians, that labor must be represented by persons of its own choosing.
When the U.S. enters the war the AFL would have three demands: Universal obligation to service for defense – industrial or military – under democratic conditions. “Labor should have representation on all policy-making and administrative agencies and draft boards.” “Labor standards and other provisions for social welfare must be maintained under emergency conditions as essential to efficient production, as well to national morale.”
In condemning the Thurman Arnold anti-trust prosecutions, the convention resolution said that they were “the most vicious attack” ever made on labor in this country. The resolution said that all the prosecutions had been against the AFL and that the prosecutions were conceived in malice toward the federation. The convention said “interference with interstate commerce in restraint of trade by sitdown strikes and other activities staged by dual and rival unions, in the CIO, brought no prosecutions against these dual and rival organizations, whereas AFL unions, having engaged in peaceful activities have been prosecuted by the score.”
 
Convention Similarities
There are many things which might be said in connection with the above statement, but we will have to reserve comment to future numbers of Labor Action when we will have more to say about both the AFL and CIO conventions. The points of similarity in the demands of the two bodies must, however, be pointed out now. Both conventions were positive in the demand for the retention of the social security acts, including the forty hour week. In the consideration of the unity question both organizations said that no matter what the probability for or against unity, it was their duty to prosecute a vigorous organizing campaign among the unorganized. The AFL resolution said: “in connection with the subject of peace negotiations, attention must be called to the large number of wage-earners who are still unorganized and unable to advance their wages and improve their conditions of employment. Regardless of the trend taken by peace negotiations, it is mandatory that the AFL make use of all its agencies so that trade unionism may be brought to the assistance of those who are at present unorganized. This is a duty and responsibility which we cannot and must not evade.”
The leadership of the AFL and the CIO have before them the task of carrying their convention decisions into action. The pressure on both organizations will be the same and will come from the same sources, the government and the bosses. In their “hour of need” the bosses will make no distinction between the two unions. The interests of the workers in the two organizations are identical. Perhaps under the pressure of the war, with governmental and boss terror, and with the guidance of the politically advanced workers, the masses in the AFL and CIO will discover this. Then they will effect unity for their own protection and for winning their demands.
 



Girdler Plays Santa – Unwillingly
Tom Girdler, tough guy of Republic Steel, “played Santa Claus to 7,000 workers who had been fired during the ‘little steel’ strike of 1937 ...” says the railroad workers paper, Labor. The NLRB ordered dirty-mouth-Tom to pay $7,000,000 in back pay to these discharged workers. As is the custom with the industrial big shots. Girdler appealed the decision of the Board all the way up to the Supreme Court. He lost.
Last week Tough Tom sent out $373,000 in checks covering vacation pay which the fired workers would have gotten the past three years if they had been slaving away in Tom’s mills. There will be more later, just as quickly as the NLRB accountants cam figure out how much is coming to each of the 7,000 discharged men. Girdler is the guy who said during the days of the NIRA that he would quit and grow potatoes before he would abide by that act. Now we find him paying out $375,000 and ordered to hand over millions more to men he fired because they dared join a union and fight against his thugs and company union. Tom doesn’t mind the money so much, he just hates like hell to be forced to give anything to his workers.
 
A Kick in the Pants for Company Unionism
John Pew’s Sun Shipbuilding and Drydock Company is presumably a business for the building of ships. But it was brought out at an NLRB hearing last week that the company shops were used also for the manufacturer of blackjacks, nine inches long, and made of rubber covered wire with a lead head. These “hand-andys” as they are called, were used by Pew’s gorillas to club union men on strike in his shipyard.. Besides the plug-uglies that Pew hired, he had a company union. All this was revealed at the hearing by a “Aggie” Campbell who at one time was the commanding officer of the Sun gorillas.
Campbell said that he was employed at the yard as a boiler maker but all that he ever made was blackjacks. He also served as chairman of the “grievance committee” he said. For this “work” “Aggie” was paid $7.30 a day and expenses.
Shipbuilding Pew is the brother of the other Pew who is a leader and boss in the Republican Party in Pennsylvania. He is also the person who wanted this NLRB hearing postponed because to have the hearing now would interfere with the “defense” program. Pew doesn’t want any worker’s rights mixed up with his patriotism. The real truth is that Pew knew that what would be interfered with was his thugs, gorillas and company union. That’s why he didn’t want the hearing.
 
Blackjacks For “National Defense?”
Two more company unions have been knocked out on the railroads. The Boilermakers, Sheet Metal Workers and Blacksmiths unions, by a vote of 303 to 121, kicked the pants off a company union on the Lehigh Valley Railroad. This makes the Lehigh Valley shops 100% organized. The Brotherhood of Railway Clerks cleaned out an 18 year old company union on the Norfolk and Western. It’s really funny how the workers keep voting for real unions every time they get the chance unmolested and where they understand the value of trade unionism. The bosses try to make us believe that to join a union is to waste our money and give it to a gang of “outsiders” whose only interest in the workers is the wages they draw. The argument of the bosses is that the workers should let the boss form and finance a nice “employers association” that will take care of all our interests without any cost or inconvenience to us. They will appoint the chairman of the grievance committee, the secretary and the company treasurer will be the finance officers of the “union.” Then all the workers have to do is to remain at their machines and not waste time running to the office complaining about hours and wages. All of this will be taken care of by the bosses’ man in the company union.
 
Was There a Workers’ Son Among Them?
High School YMCA students, organized into what is called “Hi-Y” clubs, held an assembly recently at Albany, New York. This assembly, and the things it did, are an illustration of just how reactionary middle class youth can be when under the influence of such a conservative and reactionary organization as the YMCA.
The assembly had several “bills” up for consideration. By a vote of 95 to 30 the assembly adopted a “bill” to “prohibit” strikes in New York state rearmament plants used by the federal government in the “defense program.” According to these high school youths the government should appoint a mediation board to take the place of the State Labor Relations Board. This board would assume charge within two weeks of the outbreak of a dispute and render a decision within 60 days.
These youth evidently do not understand that such a proposal eliminates not only the SLRB, but the unions also. But perhaps like their leaders in the YMCA. they are against unions. The mediation board will take “charge” and “render a decision.” This evidently means that the workers will remain at work, wait for the board’s decision and abide by it no matter what that decision may be.
Not satisfied with this, the “Hi-Y” youth went further. They passed a “bill” calling for the fingerprinting of everyone past 8 years old; the prints to be filed with the state Bureau of Fingerprinting and the FBI.
It is clear that the majority of these youth do not come from trade union families or even workers’ families that are not in trade unions. They are the sons and daughters of little businessmen and other middle class parents. If they were workers’ sons and daughters they would have more intelligence and would not be playing around with serious questions in such nonsensical and stupid fashion.
 



Jim-Crow Attends The AFL Convention
A. Philip Randolph, president of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters made an eloquent appeal to the recent AFL convention to wipe out discrimination against. Negroes in AFL Unions. But Randolph would have been just as successful if he had been asking these fat bellies of the labor movement to pass a resolution supporting Hitler. We are sure that they would have listened more intently if some AFL klansmen had been asking for the total exclusion of Negroes from the AFL.
It was a disgraceful scene in these days of aid to Great Britain and the democracy which the AFL is so tearfully championing. Randolph is an excellent and eloquent speaker. He has done a magnificent and difficult job in organizing the Pullman Porters. In intelligence, he is head and shoulders above Bill Green and other AFL leaders. He spoke for forty minutes and then moved the adoption of his simple motion for the appointment of an inter-racial committee to investigate the problem of Jim-Crow in AFL unions. Randolph sat down amid a silence as thick as a London fog. Not a delegate or leader rose to speak. Woll moved the previous question. Debate was closed with a shout of “aye.” The resolution was defeated.
Randolph was lucky. He got off easier than Dubinsky with his anti-racketeering resolution. He didn’t get his face punched. Perhaps this was in part due to the fact that Negro delegates to the AFL convention were jim-crowed in all affairs; outside the convention proper, and therefore the Fays did not make contact with them.
Of course, the AFL did not make Randolph one of its 17 vice-presidents. They preferred Browne, of the theatrical stage employees who has a certain Willie Bioff as his first lieutenant.
 
Lieberson Acted According to Type
A local of the Retail Clerks International Protective Association (AFL) in Pittsburgh, signed an agreement with an automobile equipment company permitting the company to fire, without notice, any employee carrying out “subversive” or “unAmerican” activities. The business agent of the local is a Robert Lieberson, long known to us. Lieberson is a loud-mouthed, roaring shyster who at one time was a member of the Socialist Party. Later he was in the Social Democratic Federation. Once upon a time he was a leader in the unemployed movement, and from his record there we can understand the ease with which he could make such an agreement as that mentioned above.
 
Such “Praise” Calls For Investigation
The Kiplinger Washington Letter, “Circulated Privately to Business Men,” has a few comments on the AFL and CIO.
“AFL leaders are older, more experienced, more conservative, more solid, often stodgy ... self-satisfied, confident of their rightness in craft union movement. Proceedings are slow, smooth, steamrollered. CIO leaders are younger, more fiery, much fuller of hot zeal, alert, on their toes, more ‘political,’ ‘broadly social,’ ‘more radical’.”
“AFL insists on RIGHT to STRIKE, despite defense, despite everything, but we get the distinct impression that AFL actually WILL be effective in discouraging MOST strikes.”
“Cussing of employers: Not much of this in the AFL convention, not much emotionalism. (Certainly less ranting than in CIO convention.)”
“As for racketeers and criminals, the AFL frankly straddles. It talks against them, but does little, to depose them from leadership.”
“Poll tax: AFL is opposed to it, but in a perfunctory way, not aggressively like CIO which hopes to lift the status of negroes.”
 
On Pay-triotism and Scoundrels
John G. Pew, president of the Sun Shipbuilding and Drydock Company is worried stiff about the “defense” program. The NLRB has filed a complaint against his company and Pew wants the hearing postponed at least until June so that he and his corporation can do their patriotic duty in the great moral and democratic crusade that is wasting millions of dollars and thousands of lives daily. Pew says that his company can not expand its plant to build ships unless it can get loose from the NLRB and the CIO shipbuilding workers. The Sun company is charged with company unionism, espionage, coercion and discrimination. In a statement to. the Navy Department Pew asks the question: “which is more important, that the national defense program go forward on schedule or the Industrial Union of Marine and Shipbuilding Workers of America be given an immediate hearing?”
What Pew really means is: which is more important, that his company go forward with fat profits aided by his company union, spies and thugs, or that the shipyard workers should get decent wages and hours. Obviously it is more important to Pew to get the profits without having to bother with the CIO or the NLRB. Old Samuel Johnson was correct; “patriotism is the last refuge of a scoundrel.”
*
A large trucking company in Newark, N.J., has gone out of business for the reason, says the company, that labor charges are “excessive.” After the teamsters strike, wages were raised $2.00 to $6.00 a week. then the company closed shop. This is as it should be. Any business that can’t pay decent wages is a plain racket and has no reason to exist. Workers should not pay any attention to employers who make veiled threats about closing down if they insist on higher wages.
 



$1-an-Hour Minimum—That’s the Demand!
The Textile Workers Union is preparing demands on the worsted mills for substantial increases in pay for 90,000 worsted workers. The demand is to be based on the increase in business and profits flowing from government contracts. Emil Rieve, president of the Textile Workers Union (CIO), said that “the worsted industry is profitable and becoming more profitable. We will not permit employers either in the guise of patriotism or national defense to reap huge profits from lucrative government contracts without distribution of some of the profits to the workers in the form of wage increases.”
This is not only the case with the textile industry, but of all the war industries; especially the metal and aircraft industries, They are all making huge profits. The unions in every one of these industries .should be demanding wage increases. Not just a few cents an hour, but large increases in line with the large increase in profits. Workers should not be so modest when they are asking the bosses for more wages.
Profits in the war industries justify a minimum wage of $1.00 an hour. This is what the unions should demand. Technological advance and unemployment justify the demand for a maximum work week of 30 hours, a maximum of 30 hours and a minimum weekly wage of $30. The war industries can do this and still pay dividends and interests to a bunch of loafers who go by the name of members of the board, stockholders and bondholders.
 
Craft Unionism Proves Itself Outmoded
An AFL jurisdictional dispute between the carpenters and machinists was argued in the Supreme Court recently. Assistant attorney-general Arnold argued that jurisdictional disputes and strikes “suppressed competition” and were a conspiracy in restraint of trade within the meaning of the Sherman anti-trust act.
We are not so much interested in Arnold’s opinions as in the friction between two workers’ organizations, and especially two workers’ organizations in the same federation of labor. We are further interested in the fact that the AFL could not settle this dispute in its own ranks without the intervention of the Supreme Court.
The case arose over a strike called by the Brotherhood of Carpenters against the Anheuser-Busch Brewery of St. Louis. The carpenters demanded jurisdiction over mill-wright work that was being done by the International Association of Machinists.
This is an old story in the AFL. They haven’t learned yet that the advance in technology makes it impossible to clearly define in every instance, what is the province of this, that or the other craft union. This dispute is further evidence of the outmoded character of craft unionism. It is possible for a half dozen AFL craft unions to be involved in a dispute over jurisdiction. We saw this happen in the building of a vocational high school in Pittsburgh. There was a dispute about every two weeks, not over a disagreement with the boss but with each other. There wasn’t enough unity between the AFL unions to have a real fight against the contractors.
The industrial union structure is the only means of solving these jurisdictional disputes. The bosses know this and that is one of the reasons why they oppose industrial unionism. As long as the workers remain divided into two or more dozen crafts in every plant the bosses can play off one against the other.
 



The third annual convention of the CIO which closed in Atlantic City last Friday was a notable example of the virility of the labor movement in the United States. The outstanding and most persistent features of the convention was its allegiance to the principle of industrial unionism and its repeated expression of determination to press the organization of the unorganised in the mass production industries. Industrial unionism and organizing the unorganized were the main slogans of the convention, and the pivot of the convention resolutions and speeches.
This is true despite the fact that the overwhelming majority of the delegates and officers of the CIO were, at least, passive supporters of the war preparedness plans of the Roosevelt government. Many of the delegates of course, expressed open and positive support of the “defense program” and material aid to Great Britain. But war-mongering support of the “defense program” was by no means the keynote at the convention. Only two or three delegates made what could be called flag-waving speeches. Most of the delegates seem to understand that good patriotic Americans as they consider themselves to be, something more than abstract patriotism would be necessary to improve their standard of living and force union organization and collective bargaining agreements on such corporations as Ford Motor Company and Bethlehem Steel Corporation. Consequently, the response of the delegates to proposals calling for the acceleration of organizing campaigns was far more enthusiastic, for instance, than their response to that part of Sidney Hillman’s speech which advocated full support of the “defense program.”
This attitude of the delegates was brought out again in the discussion of unity between the CIO and AFL. The capitalist press has given a completely distorted view on this question of unity. They have made it appear that the only thing in the way of unity between the two organizations was John L. Lewis. This is certainly not the case. If the attitude of the delegates to the convention is representative of the attitude of the rank and file on this question – and there is reason to believe that this is so – then it is clear that the ranks of the CIO are not ready to compromise with the AFL. Anyone who attended the convention and observed the attitude of the delegates objectively would readily understand this. In the first place, the CIO In general is composed of workers who were neglected by the AFL for decades. Take the steel workers for instance: the attitude of high AFL officials toward these workers was that the steel workers did not want to be organized. Consider the packing house workers, radio, agricultural, woodworkers and others. In fact the workers in the mass production industries as a whole were either completely neglected by the AFL, put into the so-called federal unions (where the only right they had was to pay a per capita tax to the AFL executive council with no vote) or told, as in the case of the radio workers, to go into one of the craft unions.
Now there is an organization among these workers. Their living conditions have been improved and they believe that they are on the right track to greater freedom and security: Furthermore, the rank and file and the newer leaders in the CIO firmly believe that the CIO is a more democratic organization than the AFL; for example, there is wider opportunity for rising to positions of leadership. There is greater opportunity for the young men and women of the organization, they are not pushed bark by a large and solidly entrenched group of leaders such as the AFL executive council.
These delegates are also convinced that the program of the CIO is more dynamic, more up-to-date, more in line with the needs of the workers in modern society. The program is built around the needs of the workers lowest down, just such workers as comprise the membership of the CIO. Their experience tells them that the AFL is not and cannot be concerned with such a program since its base is in a different type of work.
 
Negro Attitude
Most important of all in one’s attitude toward unity must be a consideration of the Negro worker. The attitude of the Negro delegates in the convention toward this question was most illuminating. There was a Negro woman delegate from Virginia, a tobacco stemmer. In many sections of the tobacco workers are Negroes. This is a southern industry, and Negro workers are subjected not only to the usually very low southern wage scale, but to all the indignities that go with being a Negro. The AFL has totally ignored this type of worker. A white delegate from Alabama related that AFL leaders al an NLRB hearing in Birmingham had made the remark: “No we don’t want any niggers in the AFL union. We don’t want these conditions. We want to go on and build like we ought to in the south.”
The Negro woman mentioned above spoke at the convention, and her remarks were recorded in the convention printed proceedings for that day. Nothing of this kind had ever happened in her life. There was the case of the Negro machinists reported to me by a while delegate.
These Negro machinists were ignored by the AFL because the machinists union bars Negroes. But the AFL became alarmed lest these men go to the CJO so the AFL formed the Negroes into a jim-crow local. Later these Negroes left the AFL and joined the CIO. A Negro delegate from the packing-house workers spoke on unity and listed the experience of the Negro packing house workers with the AFL.
The position of all of these workers, while and black, was not favorable to uniting with the AFL. The repeated altitude of the convention was for getting ahead with what they conceived to be the all-important task; the building of the CIO by organization of the unorganized workers in the mass production industries.
 
Hillman Fails
The chief proponents of unity in the convention were the Amalgamated Clothing Workers under the leadership of Hillman. The Amalgamated submitted a resolution which called on the incoming officers
“immediately to resume negotiations with the AFL and devote their best and most sincere efforts to unite the two organizations upon a basis which will not sacrifice any of the great gains made by the CIO or compromise the principles for which it stands but which will end division in the house of labor and equip it with that unity which is essential to the realization of its maximum strength and effectiveness.”
The resolution passed by the convention said:
“Unity in the labor movement can be accomplished only if the unions in the CIO continue to organize the unorganized workers in the mass production and basic industries along industrial lines. And it must be all-inclusive. It must protect and include all the organisations in the CIO ... not one must be abandoned to the cavillings of jurisdictional claims of craft unions and the prevalent racketeering within the AFL. In short, every affiliated organization of the CIO must be chartered and included in any new united labor body that may develop ... any program for unity should involve a joint convention of all labor organizations, including those of the AFL, the railroad brotherhoods and CIO with existing jurisdictional differences lo be adjusted in such a convention.”
It should be noted that the Hillman resolution was somewhat vague and did not lay down specific conditions for unity. This vagueness con be understood in the light of Hillman’s speech to the convention. It was clear that Hillman has either voluntarily or by urging from Roosevelt. assumed the task of getting unity on any terms. Hillman said that he considered it his
“first responsibility is to see that the country is prepared to defend itself against its enemies ... I find no difficulty in reconciling the objectives of labor and the objectives of national defense, they are intertwined, they are inseparable ... I have the complete support of the President of the United States ... I do not need to tell of the need for national defense. You are not kidding yourselves regardless of your opinions ... let us use the time still available to make the defense of this country so strong and so powerful that even the maniacs of Europe will recognize that this is no hunting ground for them.”
Hillman closed his speech by a veiled attack on the Stalinists in support of the Amalgamated resolution for barring Stalinists from holding office in the CIO. He also stated several times during the speech that the Amalgamated would remain in the CIO.
Numerous speakers took the position that the important job ahead was not unity with the AFL but unity of the CIO for its organizing task. Lewis said that “there is no peace because you are not strong enough to command peace upon honorable terms. And there will be no peace with a mighty adversary until you possess that strength of bone and sinew that will make it possible for you to bargain for peace terms on equal terms.” Then Lewis told the convention that he had explored Bill Green’s mind “and I give you my word there is nothing there ... explore Matthew Woll’s mind? ... it is the mind of an insurance agent ... who used his position as an officer of the AFL ... to promote his insurance business ... explore Tom Rickert’s mind? ... I said to him that he was getting $20.000 a year graft out of the advertising monopoly in the AFL.” Lewis then said that he had explored Hutchinson’s mind, also of the AFL negotiating committee and “there wasn’t anything there that would do you any good.”
 
Stalinists Swallow Pill
The Stalinists, of course, were opposed to unity not for the reasons given by other delegates but because their difficulties would be greater in the more conservative and reactionary AFL. Furthermore they were ready, all through the convention, to submerge themselves completely to any and all positions taken by Lewis. One of the highlights of the convention, as mentioned last week, was their frantic efforts to stampede the convention into drafting Lewis for re-election. When they saw that Lewis was determined not to run, they began preparing themselves to climb on the Murray bandwagon. And, despite the fact that they were violently opposed to Murray, the Stalinists were vociferous and demonstrative in their applause after he was elected. They got quite a bit of practice in belly crawling during the convention.
The most noticeable case of the Stalinists being forced to chew a bitter pill came when the resolution on what may be called “Americanism” was presented. Unlike most of the resolutions this had no title and was simply “Resolution R-25.” This resolution read in part:
“we neither accept nor desire – and we firmly reject consideration of any policies emanating from totalitarianism, dictatorships and foreign ideologies such as Nazism, Communism and Fascism. They have no place in this great labor movement. The CIO condemns the dictatorships and totalitarianism of Nazism, Communism and Fascism as inimical to the welfare of labor and destructive of our form of government.”
As soon as the resolution was read and its adoption moved, Tom Kennedy was recognized. He said that the resolution “is not conceived in red-baiting hysteria or witch hunting ...” Kennedy then moved the previous question. Murray called for a standing vote on closing debate. (That is, for a vote to close debate since no one had spoken except Kennedy for the previous question.) The delegates stood, Stalinists and all. Then Murray called for a standing vote on the resolution, with the same response. This was the only important resolution presented to the convention on which there was no debate and the only resolution on which the previous question was called immediately after the motion to adopt.
 
Establish Talks
The general actings of the convention revolved around resolutions which were based on the 75 page report of Lewis and the previous actions of the executive board. Most of these resolutions were important and significant. They demonstrated the direction in which the CIO is oriented and what are the chief interests of the members of the organization. There was a resolution on WPA calling for greater employment and higher wages: for the elimination of the 18 months clause, and rules relating to minority political groups, and for the right of collective bargaining. The resolution on unemployment called for a program of public works. The resolution on wages and working conditions said that “labor must be ever vigilant to guard against any action which, under the pretense of furthering national defense, will seek to deprive the workers of their fair share of these increased earnings or to deny them their fundamental right to organize into unions of their own choice or to strike.”
A resolution on housing called for 300,000 new units a year and 30 million dollars additional annually from the federal government. The resolution on unity of Negro and white workers said that
“the CIO hails the advance of industrial unions which have broken down the traditional barriers of outworn union policies to the unity of Negro and white workers, and hereby pledges itself to uncompromising opposition to any form of discrimination whether political or economic, based upon race, color, creed or nationality.”
There was a resolution against the southern poll tax. This resolution was supported in speeches by Negro and white delegates from the poll tax states.
 
On the Draft
The resolution on protecting labor in the administration of conscription demanded that labor have a voice in the administration of the draft law. Furthermore
“the law must be administered in a manner so as not to discriminate against individuals because of their union activity nor to break down and destroy union standards ... the democratic spirit and practices of the American people must be preserved for conscripted men. Harsh and repressive discipline ... should give way to the encouragement of initiative and self-reliance, with ample opportunity for men in the ranks to advance. The civil rights of the conscripted men, such as the right to vote, must be protected and their right to be in touch and communicate with their families and unions must be observed.”
Vice-president Reid Robinson (Mine, Mill and Smelter Workers) who presented the report, said in his discussion:
“I do not believe that the government of the U.S. should say to any conscript that he cannot write home to his mother and say that conditions are not what they should be in this camp; I don’t think his mail should be censored; I think that if conditions are bad there that he should have the right to bargain collectively to see whether or not those conditions can be righted, and that is the intent and purpose of this resolution.”
There was a resolution on the preservation of peace and democratic institutions which read in part:
“the convention reaffirms its determination that this nation must not enter into any foreign entanglements which may in any way drag us down the path of entering or becoming involved in foreign wars ... the CIO and its members ... are determined to protect and defend this nation not only against our foreign enemies ... but also against those forces within our nation who place the profits of their financial and industrial enterprises above the well-being of the millions of common people ... national defense means the continued growth and expansion of powerful industrial unions which will protect and defend the interests and status of their members to achieve economic security ... national defense means ... protection ... of the exercise of all of our cherished civil rights of speech, press, assembly and worship.”
There were resolutions on youth, wage hour laws, home guards, war and profiteering, collective bargaining in government contracts, NLRB, aliens, lynching and a resolution demanding that labor be represented on Red Cross executive committees. Also on trade union refugees and organizing Ford’s.
The resolution on political action read
“that the CIO hereby dedicates itself to a full participation in the political life of this country, uniting its strength and resources with all other liberal and progressive forces; and that the executive officers and the executive board of the CIO are hereby authorized and directed to give serious consideration to this problem looking toward the formulation of a program which would guarantee and assure an independent political role for organized labor.”
 
In the Organization
Any discussion of the convention must give a place to consideration of some of the important general aspects of the organization as revealed at the convention. Most important of all of course was the retirement of Lewis and the election of Murray. What does this mean for the CIO? In our opinion there will be no drastic change in the policy and tactics of the organization except possibly a gradual and persistent squeezing out of the Stalinists. It is known that Murray was reluctant to take the post unless he could get a mandate from the convention empowering him to eliminate the Stalinists from official posts in the CIO. He didn’t get this, but the resolution that was passed gives Murray enough room to proceed as he did in the SWOC.
He gave an intimation of how he will operate in his acceptance speech.
“A practical demonstration of your ability to deliver the goods must be given to me during the ensuing year. I am not going to be content with a pledge of loyalty and support. I am not going to be content with the passage of a mere resolution. Deeds count! Hard work is needed! Petty bickering must stop! The tongue of the slander monger must be stilled!”
It is a safe guess that Murray will insist on this; that he will push the organizing campaigns, that he will demand a full day’s work from every organizer, that he will be rather ruthless in the enforcement of what he conceives to be correct discipline.
Murray is an outspoken patriot and a loyal member of a religious faith that has no tolerance for “radicalism.” Murray is not just opposed to Stalinists and Stalinism; he is equally against any and all forms of opposition to what he would call “our democratic institutions.” He would be just as strongly opposed to Lenin as he is to Stalin; he would make no distinction between them. Therefore Hillman will probably find it easier to work with Murray than with Lewis. Not because Lewis is any more tolerant of the ideas of communism or “radicalism” than is Murray, but because, for one reason or another, Lewis was working with the Stalinists and was far more tolerant toward them than Murray. Murray begins his administration not only free from any commitments to the Stalinists but intends to remain that way. The Stalinists understood this perfectly. That was the the reason they were so frantic in their efforts to force the re-election of Lewis.
 
Future of CIO
The future of the CIO and the place that it will assume in the labor movement can not however be judged by confining oneself to the role of Murray or the past and future role of Lewis. This is the method of the capitalist press and the AFL. Bill Green takes the position that not only should Lewis resign from the CIO presidency but also as the head of the miners. That is, Lewis should remove himself completely. The capitalist press was thoroughly disheartened by the stand that Murray took on unity. Since Murray expressed himself in accord with the sentiments of Lewis and the convention. the daily papers tearfully lamented the “tragic” situation that the workers are in because unity will not be accomplished immediately.
The CIO must be judged by its program, by the direction in which it is going and by its fundamental industrial union orientation. Anyone who ignores these factors will make a most serious mistake and miss the main point. Many adverse criticisms can be made of the organization, its program and its leadership. Labor Action has made such criticisms and will make many more. These adverse criticisms may be factual and important but to leave it at the would not be telling all of the relevant truth about the CIO. The main positive point that needs to be made again and again is the commitment or the organization to organization of the workers in the mass production industries into industrial and not craft unions.
The CIO membership is the decisive section of the working class today. It is composed of the youngest and most militant workers. The organization is fluid and not hard set like the AFL. Hundreds of thousands of CIO workers, such as Negroes, women and youth have never been in unions before. The nature of modern industry throwing masses of them together, the pressure of events and the degeneration of capitalism will inevitably make these workers responsive to progressive economic and political ideas. Militant action will be forced on them as the only answer to the situation they find themselves in.
 
Reflects Labor’s Needs
The very existence of the CIO and the program adopted at the Atlantic City Convention spring from the needs and experience of the workers in the new mass production industries. The CIO and its program did not originate as an “abstract idea” in the mind of Lewis, nor does its future revolve primarily around the private opinions of Murray whatever they happen to be.
This is a partial answer to many questions that arise in connection with the convention and the CIO. Was it a rank and file convention and did the delegates represent the membership of the organization? The answer to this question depends upon one’s assumptions and what one is looking for. It also depends on whether one looks on the CIO as a dynamic movement or a static organization like the AFL. (Of course, not even the AFL is really static). For despite the fact that the majority of the delegates to the convention were either officers of the national organization and of the various units, international and local, there were many real non-officeholding rank and file delegates present and participating in the convention.
The main fact to grasp is that these delegates regardless of their rank, or where they came from and how they got there, adopted a program thai represents the interests of the working class in a degree never before achieved by the trade union movement since the formation of the AFL over fifty years ago.
 
War the Danger
It is true that to achieve this program will require something more than the present CIO leadership is capable of. It will require increasing democratic participation of the ranks in the affairs of the organization. It will require increasing class consciousness of the membership and greater militancy. The leadership will move very slowly in this direction if at all. It will do so under the pressure of a rank and file that has acquired experience in the fire of the class struggle and that has acquired working class political education. This is the function of politically educated trade unionists. They will have to learn to do this job inside the trade union movement. It cannot be done from the outside, no matter bow correct and necessary criticism may be from time to time.
The greatest danger that the CIO faces today is the war and the regimentation of the labor movement in support of the war: the submersion of the movement in the “defense program” despite the excellent resolutions of the convention in favor of pushing the organizing campaigns. It is not that the leadership does not sense the situation, but that it will not be capable of carrying on in an uncompromising manner when the heat is turned on and the flag waving begins. Here again is a job for the class conscious and politically educated workers. They must know how to shoulder this burden and this responsibility correctly.
 



Ousting the Racketeers Is Labor’s Job
The executive council of the American Federation of Labor has finally taken some sort of stand against racketeering in its affiliated unions. Not a very strong stand mind you, but an expression of opinion. An official attitude on racketeering and gangstering in the AFL was long overdue. The record of some AFL unions in the matter of clean unionism stinks all over the land. There have been beatings and intimidation and even murder of good honest trade unionists who would not bow to the demands of some gangster outfit or some gang of sluggers that was in the leadership of the union.
The initiative should and must be taken by organized labor. The AFL should repudiate the position taken by Bill Green at the graduation of the FBI police school. In this speech he called on the FBI and the police to aid in cleaning up the AFL unions. At that time we remarked that here was an invitation cut to order for Hoover’s snoopers and gunmen. They and all the other flatfeet would like nothing better than to get at the trade union movement for “cleaning” purposes. Give this outfit a little rope and even pious old Bill Green might have his private telephone tapped and might find himself facing one of Thurman Arnold’s anti-trust charges.
The Federation will call on its affiliated unions to oust all men with “criminal records” from official posts. The executive rejected the suggestion that the Federation be given power to act if the international unions failed to kick out its racketeers, or even its officers with “criminal records” The action of the executive council is too mild and is unsatisfactory. In the first place what do they mean by labor officials with “criminal records”? Criminal is a technical legal designation meaning those who have been convicted in a court of record. Would the AFL apply this title to a trade union leader who had been convicted in a capitalist court for educating a few scabs in the course of a strike? If such an official was convicted for “murder” after some scab had died from wounds received while trying to break a strike, such an official would be a criminal according to capitalist law. The workers however would not consider such a leader a criminal and they would be a thousand per cent correct.
The people for the AFL to turn the heat on is the real racketeers and gangsters who invest many of the unions in that organization. Green knows who they are and what unions they are operating in. Constant pressure from the AFL executive council will uproot them and send them back to the dives where they belong. That is all that is necessary; merciless and unremittent pressure and publicity from the top. Is the AFL leadership going to do this or are they going to wait on Arnold and the capitalist courts? (The above was written before the question came before the AFL convention. We will comment on this separately – Ed.)
 
$30 for 30 Hours Should Be the Demand
The workers of Vultee Aircraft Co. are on strike and the company is coming forward with the usual patriotic blah and the regular hokum about losing money. This company which, along with others, refused to go forward with making airplanes until the government agreed to allow them 12% profit, is now very much concerned about the “defense program”. The workers are awful, they are unpatriotic, they are fifth columnists. The company is spilling its fake tears of patriotic ballyhoo all over the lot.
And what are the Vultee workers asking for? A minimum wage of 65 cents an hour. Awful, isn’t it? To demand a minimum wage of $26 a week. Let the officers and directors of Vultee try this $26 a week wage. The union originally demanded a minimum of 75 cents an hour. They are fools. They should have increased the minimum not lowered it. The minimum should be not less than $1.00 an hour for a 30 hour week.
The workers throughout the war industries should demand the 30 hour week and the $30 minimum pay. This should be a national demand of the CIO. They can get it. Nobody could stop them if the workers stiffened up and closed ranks. The bosses know this. That is why they come forth with the sob stories about losing money and with their usual rotten and hypocritical patriotism.
 
Oh, for Those Gold-Plated Bath-Tubs
War profits keep on soaring. The profits of 28 steel companies increased 211% the first nine months this year over the same period last year. $54,606,254 last year; $169.919,408 this year. Steel workers are getting just about the same size handout this year they got last year. Despite that 211% increase in profits, Kenneth Austin writing in the New York Times has the gall and brass to say: “Owing to the heavier labor and tax costs now prevailing, and despite the lower fixed charges, the steel industry can not expect to show earning power approaching that ENJOYED in 1929 even though production in that year may be eclipsed.” Mr. Austin feels however that “the steel results are not discouraging.” “Enjoyed” is certainly a good word to use in connection with 1929 profits that went to the ruling class. 1929 and the years before was the period that Lundberg wrote about in America’s 60 Families. (Which book we assume he has repudiated on bended knee.) These were the years when the big shots were scrubbing the dirt from their hides in marble bath rooms and gold plated bath tubs; when little miss so-and-so had a weekly allowance for hats bigger than the annual income of a steel worker; the years when a child of the bosses could spend more in one week for toys than a steel worker could spend for clothing for his child in a year.
When we refer to 1929 we don’t mean that the bosses aren’t doing the same thing now. They are. Only now they are hiding it and no one has come forward yet to catalogue their “conspicuous waste” as was done in America’s 60 Families. Now the bosses are more careful to cover up their extravagance, their licentiousness and their unlimited appetite for estates, automobiles, yachts sables: all of which they satisfy from the sweat and toil of the working class.
 
Organized Pressure Will Crack Any Boss
The workers at the Midland plant of Crucible Steel have called their strike off and returned to work. The president of the SWOC local involved said the men voted “approximately 48 to 52 per cent” to resume work pending conferences with the company. The men wanted a wage increase of 12¼ cents an hour.
There is something strange creeping into strike strategy during these days of “national defense” and big profits. Workers with a host of real grievances nurse them for a year or more. Then they strike. Before they get satisfaction they return to work while their leaders play around with the company sharks. We remember the militant days of the unemployed movement before the Peoples Front and Dave Lasser got hold of it. The practice was to go to the relief station and put in your demands. If they didn’t come across you sat there. If they still refused you took the stooge in charge to the window and showed him or her a few hundred or thousand militant unemployed workers. If they were especially obstinate you invited the hundreds or thousands of unemployed workers inside. If there was flour or clothing in the warehouse that was not being distributed, we went in an organized manner, not boisterously or rudely, took the flour or clothing and distributed it to those who needed it. At times it was necessary to use a little pressure on the warehouse door but there are no doors that will not yield to the organized pressure of the workers. Some of these things could serve as excellent examples to the AFL and CIO workers.
 
Just a Little Present for Us Workers
Professor Millis who has just been appointed to the NLRB began his career in office by giving a little advice to the workers. Just a little hint that “when an emergency situation arises it is up to everyone to buckle down and work whatever hours are needed. However we may not come to that time here.” The professor thinks that 40 hours are enough for anyone to work, but you know, an “emergency” may arise. When that time comes the corporation president and the steel laborer; the chairman of the board and the coal miner; the chairman of the finance committee and the sewing machine girl should all be willing to “buckle down” and work 60 hours a week. Everyone must help. All must pull together: the $100,000 a year executive and the laborer with a sixty pound cast iron pipe on his back. Millis is the present handed the workers by “our” hero in the White House immediate[ly after being elected.]
 



May 9th was the 140th anniversary of the birth of John Brown, “Father of the Second American Revolution.” John Brown hated slavery, and he believed that it could not be destroyed by peaceful means. He thought the North was playing around with the question and had no intention of conducting a real struggle for the liberation of the slaves. He knew that thousands of northerners were “copper-heads” (pro-slavery agitators). He had witnessed the Texas and Mexican Wars for the extension of slavery, the Missouri Compromise and the Supreme Court Dred Scott decision calling for the capture of runaway slaves and return to their legal owners. Furthermore no political party, not even the young and “radical” Republican Party, had ever put an anti-slavery plank in its platform.
 
Rifles, Not Bibles
Therefore it was necessary, in the opinion of John Brown, to pass over from the Bible to his Sharp’s rifle, from reliance on prayer to musket and ball.
His plans were ambitious. He made a trip to Europe in 1851 and studied fortifications and military tactics. He was especially anxious to learn how to fortify and fight in hilly and mountainous country.
In 1855 he went to Kansas in a covered wagon loaded with guns and ammunition gathered from various sources, private and governmental. Once in Kansas, Brown and his sons began active warfare against the defenders of slavery to make Kansas a free state.
After the bloody Kansas campaign, Brown organized a convention of free Negroes in Chatham, Canada, to prepare for the final blow. He conceived the. notion that when the call was sounded slaves all over the South would rise and join him. The convention adopted a militant constitution, formed a skeleton government with John Brown, Commander-in-Chief.
On the night of October 16, 1859, the Commander-in-Chief led his small forces into Harpers Ferry, Va. (now West Virginia) and captured the government armories, jailed some of the inhabitants and signed up the slaves for the “Army of Freedom.”
Of course this small band of untrained and poorly armed whites and slaves could not succeed. Brown fought to the last ditch but was finally captured. Ten were killed and eleven captured. Two of the dead were Brown’s sons. Brown was taken by a company of marines commanded by Robert E. Lee.
John Brown was tried for treason, conspiracy and murder. He was found guilty and hanged in Charlestown, December 2, 1859. At his trial. Brown said that if what he had done “had been in behalf of the rich and powerful ... it would have been doing very well.”
John Brown failed to accomplish the concrete things that he set out to do. He was an individual terrorist who thought all that was necessary to arouse the slaves to follow him and overthrow their masters was an example of devotion to a cause, purity of motive, courage and self-sacrifice. He did not understand for instance that a slave uprising and revolt, like any other revolution, would have to be prepared by propaganda, agitation and organization. There would have to be a program (freedom, equality, land) that the slaves could understand and would accept.
Furthermore John Brown did not understand the nature of the opposition of the North to the South. The Free-Soilers hated slavery not so much because they were interested in seeing the slaves freed, but for the reason that slavery was a threat to the development of northern capitalism and the expansion of northern business based on wage labor. The freeing of the slaves was a by-product of Northern victory.
 
Eagle of Rebellion
John Brown’s effort had very definite progressive features.


He did not hesitate to go beyond the law in his struggle against slavery. He set freedom above the law; the slaves and their friends must establish their own legality. It has always been true that only those groups, classes and races have gained their freedom that dared go beyond the law and rebel against “their government”. The leaders of liberation movements have always been “traitors”.
 
John Brown’s plan to overthrow slavery by armed violence, was the method that was later successful. It was the only method that would get results, and northern capitalism did not hesitate to resort to this method. The Union soldiers marched into the South during the Civil War, singing, “John Brown’s body lies mouldering in the grave, but his spirit marches on.”
 
The dramatic action of John Brown at Harpers Ferry was “a shot heard ’round the world.” It was really the opening gun in the second American revolution. It was the action that really pushed the North to gird itself for battle.


Despite the failure of his personal efforts, John Brown remains one of the great liberators of the poor and the oppressed. We see him as one caught up in “the inspired frenzy of of history,” which is revolution.
John Brown remains for us an eagle in the war against tyranny, oppression and injustice.
 



“National Unity” Campaign Is a Fraud
The election is over and labor papers and organizations are rejoicing over the fact that “labor” was responsible for the defeat of Willkie and the Roosevelt “landslide.” The workers and their leaders are calling the election a victory for them; democracy has been saved and the workers are secure in their rights.
Labor, organ of the railroad brotherhoods, however is constrained to add a word of caution.
“It would be a great error however to draw from Tuesday’s verdict the inference that the American workers have approved all the President has done; that they believe he has done all he might have done; or that they have blindly followed him in the past or will do so in the future.
“Quite the contrary, Many of the workers workers did not like the third term idea: some feared the President was leading us toward involvement in foreign wars; others were painfully aware of the fact that millions of men and women, willing an anxious to work, are still ‘standing idle in the market place’.”
If any labor leaders or labor editors – with the exception of John L. Lewis – had any ideas of this kind in their heads prior to the election they certainly did not let the workers know them. the workers who were standing idle in the market place may have been painfully aware that they were there, but as far as we could read we never discovered that the leaders of labor had any such awareness. (Lewis seemed to have had such awareness but his cure was far worst than the disease, as Labor Action pointed out after Lewis made his support Girdler-Willkie speech.)
What the workers may expect from the most reactionary section of the ruling class was explained by the New York Sun the day following the election. This gang, as explained in the Sun has no intention of yielding. They will carry on the fight for their ideas and principles. The New York Times announced on Saturday that “Willkie Men Plan Strong Opposition To Curb New Deal.”
“The verdict of the people is given” says the Sun, “but that verdict does not deprive the minority of its continuing and undying right to fight on for the basic principles which Mr. Willkie and his followers supported ... This was the Battle of America ... it is lost for the moment, because of the billions in money that the winner spent ... if in this hour the twilight of our ancient and honored gods seems to descend upon us, let us remember that night has not yet fallen ... if zeal, if honest anger at injustice, if enthusiasm for decent principles could have counted at the polls, yesterday would have been a victory for Willkie.”
 
The Issue Remains: Class Against Class
These are fighting words from the 60 Families, from Wall Street, from the Chambers of Commerce, from the Girdlers, Morgans, Fords: from the real masters of the country. They have lost for the moment because “decent principles” did not count at the polls. With real class consciousness they intend to carry on against this “scum of the earth” that re-elected Roosevelt.
What are these “ancient and honored gods” in whose cause the gang represented by the Sun will continue to struggle? They all can be summed up in two words: capitalism and imperialism. They will continue the struggle for the highest possible profits and the lowest possible wages. They will continue their fight against relief to the unemployed and WPA. They will fight against the unions. They will continue to demand the right to hire scabs, spies and armed thugs. They will continue to fight for complete and direct control of the government, in the name of their clique. Even if Roosevelt makes an effort to preserve the labor legislation, this gang will never consent, nor will it submit.
Here is the chief danger for the workers. They cannot trust Roosevelt to protect their interests now, anymore than they could the past seven years. Roosevelt too is a child of Wall Street and will remain so. He will bow to the will and the demands of the 60 Families. They are the masters of this country, not Roosevelt and the little “New Dealers” like Ickes, Wallace and the rest. It is the 60 Families that own and control the land, mines, mills, factories and banks. They will have their pound of flesh and all the Roosevelts in the land cannot prevail against them.
“The twilight of our ancient and honored gods seems to descend upon us” says the Sun, but “night has not fallen yet.” No; not yet. The bringing of night to this gang and the complete destruction of the ancient and honored gods is the task of the working class. This was the workers’ job before the election, it remains their main job after the election. It’s not Roosevelt’s job and he won’t do it. He will stay with his class and defend their interests.
The workers must stand guard now as never before. they did not break from the two old parties. It is not too late to assert our class independence. The main issue is the war. Keep an eye on Roosevelt and Willkie. Don’t trust a single member of the ruling class. They are all for entry into the war. Not one of them can be depended on to fight for our interests on any front. Only the workers can do that.
Don’t listen to the national unity talk. Learn from the ruling class as they have expressed themselves in the Sun editorial. They say “to hell with national unity.” They are correct. They know that “national unity” is a fraud. They know that there can be no reconciliation between the workers and the bosses. The 60 Families know that the class struggle must go on, that they must continue to fight the working class.
The only “national unity” permissible for the workers is unity of the working class on a national and world scale. Unity of the workers against exploitation, against capitalism, against the imperialist war.
 
Out of Workers’ Toil Came Huge Boss Profits
The total dividends paid by about 1,000 corporations, banks and insurance companies for the first ten months of the four years, 1937 to 1940, amount to $11,119,910,487. That is, for 40 months of 1937–40 workers produced enough wealth so that people who don’t work might get eleven billion dollars. This is what workers were voting for when they re-elected Roosevelt.
Fourteen rubber companies had profits of $37,000,000 in 1938 and $62,000,000 in 1939. In 1938 these 14 companies paid dividends amounting to $15,000,000. In 1939 these same companies paid $24.000,000 in dividends.
The workers of the Pittsburgh Plate Glass Company and the Inland Steel tolled and sweated so well for their bosses that these companies were in a position this year to pay a five dollar dividend instead of repeating last year’s $4.00 dividend.
Roosevelt said in his Brooklyn speech just before the election that he was a firm believer in “free enterprise.” And what is “free enterprise”? It is the kind of social order that grudgingly grants the workers who produce the wealth a starvation wage while it at the same time gives the idle rich owners eleven billions in four years. This is what the workers perpetuated when they voted for Roosevelt.
 



ATLANTIC CITY, Nov. 19 – The “Third Constitutional Convention” of the Congress of Industrial Organizations opened here Monday morning with the usual ceremonial prayer and address of welcome by the mayor. After this and a few other routine matters the temporary chairman worked up to the event that the convention was waiting for: the introduction of John L. Lewis. The forty-five minute ovation had been well prepared and organized by the Stalinists. I do not mean by this that the ovation was a purely Stalinist affair. This would be far from the truth. There were many delegates and other members and friends of the CIO who were sincere in their rapturous reception of Lewis. These were old associates, friends and members of the organization who are convinced
that Lewis stands for something important, vital and necessary in the labor movement in this country. They look upon Lewis as the living symbol and chief protagonist of the idea of industrial unionism. These workers are convinced that industrial unionism has given them something that they never had before and that the CIO holds great promise for the workers in the mass production industries. They attribute the results obtained during the past five years to the leadership of John L. Lewis. That is why they applauded him so vigorously.
 
Inflated by Stalinists
There is no doubt however that the ovation was pumped up and inflated by the Stalinists. They arrived here on Sunday, and by Monday were as thick as flies. They were organized to put over the re-election of Lewis. When you entered the lobby of the Hotel Chelsea, where the convention is being held, delegates and visitors were handed lapel buttons two inches in diameter bearing the legend, “Forward With Lewis and CIO.” It was evident to any of us who have seen the Stalinists in action that these buttons were a part of their “draft Lewis” campaign.
During the forty-five minute ovation the Stalinist cheering sections in the gallery and among the delegates were busy with confetti, streamers and various types of noise makers. There were cries of “we want Lewis,” and the singing of “Lewis is our leader, we shall not be moved.” The band attempted the ruse of playing the Star Spangled Banner on the assumption that at the end of the “national anthem” the delegates and gallery cheering section would, with due reverence, become silent. But nothing of the sort happened; the din continued. Finally, I suppose with fatigue approaching, and with the efforts of Lewis, order was restored and Lewis began his speech: began what he called an accounting for his stewardship for the past five year period.
 
The Speech
This first speech of Lewis wasn’t long. It was concerned with a discussion Of matters pertaining to his leadership of the CIO and some of the controversial questions that have arisen since his pro-Willkie campaign speech. He said that what he had done what was his considered judgment and that if he had it to do over he would not change his position.
“There were those,” he said, “who hoped that the Democratic Party would do something about the fifty-two million empty bellies in the country. Well go ahead and hope. I take my stand with the fifty-two million empty bellies.” This drew tremendous applause. Lewis then told the convention that he was leaving the post of CIO president and that he would be their leader only a few days longer. He attacked those who would bring discord into the organization and cause it to be weakened by internal conflict in the face of the big job to be done. (This was interpreted to mean the Hillman group.) He said that those who say that the CIO is controlled by subversive groups lie. Continuing his attack on his critics Lewis said, “I was something of a man before I became president of this organization and I will be something of a man when I leave. That’s what I think.” His answer, at least to some of the handclappers was, “your applause does not enthuse me overmuch, your attacks move me not at all.”
At the close of the speech there was another ovation. The Stalinist cheering sections however had been a little weakened and discouraged by the categorical declaration of Lewis that he would not retain his post of president. With some of them it was as though they had been ducked in the cold waters of the Atlantic just a few hundred yards away.
The Stalinists were not finished however, for all during Monday and Tuesday telegrams were pouring in from locals all over the country demanding that Lewis stay on. The overwhelming majority of these telegrams were from unions and locals either dominated by the Stalinists or where they have appreciable influence. The dullest part of the convention was sitting and listening to the reading of these “canned” telegrams. There was one telegram from a steel local demanding that Lewis resign. One from a Jewish local of the United Office and Professional Workers of America, asking the convention to accept Lewis’ resignation. This telegram also condemned the draft Lewis movement. One came from the American Catholic Trade Union Association of Detroit calling for the unity of the AFL and CIO. There were a few telegrams, praising the work of the CIO and promising continued support, but omitting the demand for Lewis to continue in office.
 
Credentials Report
The credentials committee reported on Monday that 548 delegates had been seated in the convention. The final report on the number of delegates to the convention has not been made. There are delegates from every section of the country and of every race and creed of the national population. There are miners, smelter, workers, packing house workers, cereal workers, textile, steel, agricultural, marine, radio, office, automobiles, glass, clothing, furniture, forest, cannery, oil, quarry, paper, shoe, transport, distillery, construction, utility, etc., etc.
There were men and women delegates present who know what it is to fight on the picket line from long experience and many a hard fought battle. There are Negro delegates. I saw a gnarled Negro women from the sharecroppers union – here to get something to take back to the most exploited workers in the whole country. All of them are here because they believe in the CIO. They appreciate the fact that they are better off than they were five years ago and they are determined to go out from the convention to complete the job.
 
Heated Discussion
The second day of the convention opened with the reading of more dreary telegrams demanding that Lewis stay in office. I suppose that they will continue as long as the convention is in session. The first important business was the report of the Committee on Officers Reports. This is a committee that discusses and reports to the convention on its findings in connection with the annual reports made by CIO officers. The content of these reports will be discussed later. The section of the report dealing with the CIO press brought the first heated discussion in the convention from the floor.
Baldanzi, formerly of the Dyers Federation, which has been merged with the Textile Workers Union took the floor to disagree with the evaluation of the CIO News given by the report. Baldanzi said that the News was the only paper in the United States that did not carry a picture of President Roosevelt after the election. He mentioned Len De Caux, editor of the News, whom he accused of bias in withholding items sent to the News by some sections of the organization.
De Caux was given the floor to defend his administration of the News. I thought his “defense” very weak. He didn’t seem to be very sure of himself. He contended that he had edited the paper in conformity with the decisions of the executive council and that the only position taken was laid down by that body. But we knew that DeCaux was leaving his defense to Lewis.
 
A Little Rough
Blumberg, of the Laundry Workers Joint Board (ACW) also took issue with the report on the News. Blumberg objected to the printing of the Lewis speech endorsing Willkie. Then Lewis took the floor to answer Blumberg. Sensing the situation the convention and the galleries drew up to strict attention. They expected something and they were not to be disappointed. Lewis said that his speech was printed in the News by De Caux because he (Lewis) had requested it. He said that thousands of telegrams had come in asking for copies of the speech. And then, despite the fact that Lewis had announced at the time of the speech, that he spoke only as a private citizen and not as the representative of the CIO; he decided later that the thousands of copies of the speech that were asked for should not go out privately printed, but in the official organ of the CIO.
This was strange reasoning and I was surprised that no delegate called this to the attention of Lewis. But John L. had not shot his bolt yet. He said that he fully endorsed the way the News had been conducted under De Caux and that De Caux had carried out the policies of the executive council. While Lewis was speaking there was some booing. At this point Lewis did an inexcusable and impermissible thing. He suggested that if the “gentlemen who did the booing will come to the platform we will put on an audition for them.” One of the booers sitting beside me stood to let Lewis know that he was one of them but was not observed by Lewis. Lewis then remarked that he would appoint a committee to bring the booers up and remarked: “the committee that I will appoint will bring them up.” This sounded to me like the John L. Lewis of an earlier day, the day of intimidation and rough tactics toward workers who were demanding simple democratic rights in the miners’ union.
The next part of the report of the Committee on Officers Reports was the section dealing with unity. This discussion will be reported in Labor Action next week along with a full report on the convention. The convention was scheduled to last two days but it looks no was if it will run through Thanksgiving.
There is one thing that I forgot to mention. That is the plan to have Phil Murray replace Lewis. This plan hit a snag in the negotiations of the executive council last night where Murray took the position that he would not accept unless he could get a resolution from the convention authorizing him to eliminate all communists, fascists and nazis from official posts in the CIO.
 



Don’t Take Orders From The Bosses’ Stooge
Sidney Hillman, “labor representative on the National Defense Advisory Commission” is certainly making a most inglorious record as labor leader. There is a strike brewing at the Camden plant of the New York Shipbuilding Corporation. Local 1 of the Industrial Union of Marine and Shipbuilding Workers is conducting negotiations with the company for a new contract that will give higher wages and better working conditions. There was a deadlock and the matter went to Hillman.
This alleged representative of the workers, talking like Tom Girdler or a police chief, told reporters, “there will be no strike. You can take my word for that.” Hillman told the union’s leaders that a strike would not be “tolerated” because the shipyard has $500,000,000 in “defense” contracts.
Who is this Hillman anyhow and What does he think he is? The reporters and the bosses can take his word that there will be no strike. Hillman will protect the -interests of the shipyard owners. He will guarantee continuous production and profits.
To be sure it was Sidney Hillman getting off this big talk but he was only expressing the line of Knudsen, Stettinius and the other workers’ enemies on the War Preparations Commission. The shipyard and other workers need not and should not pay attention to Hillman. They should conduct their negotiations with the employers and if they cannot come to an agreement then they should strike. They should give absolutely no heed to this little stooge Hillman.
 
How About Doing Something About It, Mr. Woll?
Mr. Matthew Well of the AFL has discovered that there may be some danger in the Conscription Act. He made this discovery after the bill was signed by the president and after registration day. He is similar to a group of “reform” preachers who organize a “clean -government league” the day after some gang of ward heelers has won an election with their participation.
Woll fears that the country will become the victim of “militarism.” After the war, the demobilized soldiers may become a “menace.” “Labor as well as capital may lose much of its peacetime freedom.” “We have already cautioned against strikes against the government.” “This may be followed by a warning against strikes in plants engaged in defense production and transportation even though under private ownership and control.”
We share all of these fears with Mr. Woll except his solicitude for the loss of “peacetime freedom” by “capital.” Capital seems capable of taking care of itself very nicely. And even if the capitalists run into a few difficulties that is all right with us.
What we would like to discover is what is Mr. Woll doing about the danger that faces labor? As far as we can discover he is doing nothing. There have been all manner of attacks, open and under cover, against labor standards already. The place for Woll to begin is in the Executive Council of the AFL and not at a futile talkfest in the Rand School of Social Science.
 
Labor Would Like a Little of This “Help”
The government has just handed over $10,700,000 to the Boeing Airplane Company for plant expansion. The headline in the New York Times reads: “$10,700,000 given to help Boeing.” The Boeing company will construct new plants and the government will repay the costs over a period of five years. At the end of the five years the company will have the option to buy the plants at costs LESS DEPRECIATION or for some negotiated sum. If the company doesn’t want the plants the government will take them; presumably to be kept for use in the next war.
This kind of thing is going on all over with the government and big business. Big corporations get money from the government to build new plants as well as a guarantee of 10% to 15% in profits. At the end of five years the plants can be bought for cost less depreciation. This “less depreciation” clause is the catch. The hired and compliant accountants of big corporations can produce tremendous depreciation over a five year period. A ten million dollar plant can depreciate to around two million for purposes of making a settlement with the government. If the workers would only get wise, they would demand a little “help” in the form of a big increase in wages.
 
They’ll Be More Careful Next Time
The National Association of Manufacturers has been caught and exposed practicing anti-Semitism. A Jewish lawyer applied for a job in the legal department of the Association and was notified that the applicant “must be a gentile” to get the job. H.W. Prentis Jr., president of the Association, is very sorry and promises that it will not happen again. He resorts to the age old buck-passing: “this requirement has been imposed by a departmental assistant in violation of the association’s policy ...” The Association will guard against “any recurrence of this nature.” That is, they’ll be more careful the next time a Jew applies for a job. They’ll reply with regret that “the position has just been filled and your application will be kept on file.”
 
Leviton Workers Showed How to Do It
As a demonstration of what a well-organized militant strike will accomplish, we cite the case of the Leviton Manufacturing Company in Brooklyn, N.Y. This factory is owned by one of that breed of fakers that substitutes big contributions to community charities for decent wages and working conditions for their workers.
He gets his mug in the papers, a big name and the reputation of being a leading and philanthropic citizen. His heart literally bleeds for the poor and “underprivileged.” That is, for all the poor except those who create the wealth he gives to the Community Chest.
The strike was lead by Local 3. Independent Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (AFL). An NLRB vote was taken and with 93% of the eligible employees voting; 1,299 voted for the IBEW to 70 against.
Before the strike, the company refused to recognize the union, top increase wages or to improve working conditions. It was the strike that changed the mind of the shyster who owns the plant.
 
A Barbaric Practice Still in Use
In South Carolina, the state still permits sheriffs to appoint company deputies that are paid by the corporations. This practice has been discontinued in most northern states. It is an extremely barbaric practice and was rampant in Pennsylvania a few years back. Most workers have heard of the “coal and iron police” in western Pennsylvania coal and steel towns. These thugs who were paid by the coal and steel companies ran roughshod over the workers, even committing murder now and then. These “deputies” although they are officers of the “law” are responsible to nobody except the company that pays them. As a rule they are taken from the ranks of crooks, gunmen, sluggers, scabs, bandits and any anti-labor scum that can be bought off by the employers. The NLRB has just reported that two of these lice, employed by the Hamrick Textile Mills of Gaffney, S.C. “used their police powers to intimidate and coerce employees and to discourage membership in the Textile Workers Union.” Of course that’s what they were bought for.
 



Union Democracy Is Antidote to Racketeers
Far too many union leaders are landing in the capitalist courts on charges of racketeering and mulcting their organizations. There is plenty of evidence at hand to show that the overwhelming majority of these charges are fact. Virtually all of the union racketeers and gangsters are in the American Federation of Labor. The reason for this lies principally in the craft structure of the AFL.
Division by craft creates a happy hunting ground for all manner of racketeering, gangsterism, and thieving by employers and corrupt trade union leaders. A corrupt union leader, or an outside muscleman, can make a deal with employers to organize a new union or split one already formed where the craft structure prevails. In the building service field it is possible to have separate organizations for elevator men, window cleaners, scrub women and male janitors. A first rate racketeer can find all manner of distinctions to make between the various types of public and private buildings. In large cities such as New York it is possible to have autonomous organizations in each borough. This same scheme can be carried out in other industries.
It is extremely difficult to operate in this manner under the industrial union structure. Here the industry is organized vertically, one union to the industry. Racketeers don’t go for this; they like to operate where they can bite off a slice and chew it in their own way and to their personal advantage.
The workers should clean out the racketeers and gangsters. They should reject the position of Bill Green who wants the FBI and the police to clean up the AFL unions. Unions should set high and rigid standards for union officers to live and act by. First is insistence on internal democracy. Almost no racketeer or strong-arm bureaucrat can live up to this test. Internal democracy means free, honest and regular elections. Regular and frequent meetings of the locals and internationals. The determination of all important procedure and action by vote of the membership after open and thorough discussion. Insistence that officers and committees carry out all decisions of the membership. This applies especially to contracts with the bosses and strike call and settlement. Where these safeguards are erected there will be little trouble with racketeers. This vermin thrives in unions where they are the whole show and are permitted to do pretty much as they please.
 
It’s Union Organization That Really Gets Results
There is another reason for the strangle hold that racketeers have on some unions. A racketeer leadership is slick enough to know that they must get something for the union members. Quite often they do get an increase in wages and improvement in working conditions. They threaten the boss with a strike, they make agreements to organize one shop or area and leave another unorganized. They connive with one boss to gyp another boss, provided “their” men get a raise. The boss and the union racketeer divide the loot, while at the same time the racketeer demands a “kick-back” from union members. What union workers must understand is that the racketeer official “gets results” for them only because he represents a mass organization of workers. It is the union that is the racketeer’s chief weapon. The boss is afraid of a strike only because there is an organized force that can actually stop production.
A democratic, militant, mass union can force far more out of the bosses than a racketeer controlled union. A union that shuns shady deals with the boss and puts up a hard clean fight will, in the long run, get far higher wages and shorter hours than can be procured by any double dealing racketeer leader. If the unions function on these principles, clean out every every corrupt leader and go to bat as genuine militant working class organizations they will save themselves many headaches and be freed from the disgrace of being successfully charged with racketeering in the capitalist courts. The bosses will drag the workers to the boss courts but let them go there from the picket line that they have voted for and that they control.
 
Beware of “No Strike” Agreements With the Boss!
Suits against unions by the bosses for “violation of contract” is [sic!] on the increase. This is part of a general drive against the unions by the bosses in league with the Department of Justice. The New Deal Department of Justice with the help of the New Deal Supreme Court has put unions in the same class as corporations under the Sherman Anti-Trust Act and the “law” of contracts.
The latest victims are the Brotherhood of Electrical Workers and the Milk Wagon Drivers Union in New York City. The electrical workers are being sued for $500,000 for striking in violation of the contract. The milk wagon drivers were fined $10,000 by the “impartial chairman” of the milk industry. The milk company accepted a reduction of the fine to $5,000 “as a means of promoting better labor relations.” The union refused to pay by the date of the dead line and the fine went back to $10,000.
As long as we have capitalist collective bargaining and capitalist contracts it will be necessary for unions to exercise some care and precaution in the observance of these contracts. In the present social order collective bargaining is a give and take between the unions and the bosses. They reach an agreement which is presumed to be binding on both sides. It is well known of course that the bosses violate these agreements far oftener than the unions.
Since the unions function as collective bargaining agencies through agreements and contracts with the bosses, it is a simple matter to understand that it is necessary to be cautious in making agreements and signing contracts. It is imperative that every agreement be presented to the before it is signed by union negotiating committees. No union should vote officials the right to sign contracts and agreements with the bosses, before approval by the union membership. Any officials who do such things on their own or who act in violation of the union decision should be severely disciplined.
There has to be flexibility in all union negotiations. Neither side can take an all or nothing attitude as a principled position. The main point for the union is to drive the best possible bargain under the concrete conditions at the time of the agreement. At a later time conditions may change and a different type of agreement may be necessary for the protection of the union and its members.
This makes it especially important that great care and foresight be exercised in the making of agreements. This applies particularly to no strike clauses. The two unions mentioned got into difficulties on this point. They are charged with striking in violation of the contract. No matter what compromises may be feasible from time to time no union should surrender the right to strike. No union official should be given power to sign a no strike agreement even for the briefest period without the expressed consent of the overwhelming majority of the union.
Unions should reject completely all “impartial chairman” set-ups. In the first place “there ain’t no such animal.” He will be for the union or for the boss. If he is for the union the boss will reject him; if he is for the boss the union should reject him. The union must not accept a status which means that its action is to be determined outside the membership.
 
A Weapon the Workers Can Use
At the recent convention of the Mine, Mill and Smelter Workers (CIO), Allan Haywood in the course of his convention address made the statement that “if you (the union) did what the corporations did recently, and sat down for more than 8% net profit, you’d be accused of being traitors.” Haywood is correct. If the workers sat down and stayed put until they got more money from the bosses they would be called traitors and fifth columnists. But Haywood didn’t make any explanations. He didn’t propose anything. He just stood there and made a sob speech. Haywood should know better; he is an old miner. He knows how the miners improved their working conditions and raised their wages. There was some shedding but it wasn’t tears.
The bosses know that the government at Washington is their government and they’ll sit down on it when they damn please. Nobody is going to call the army and national guard against the bosses because it is their army and their guard.
The employers know that society is divided into two warring classes; owners and wage workers. The bosses know, and its about time the workers learned this, that the government at Washington, in every state and city is a part of the capitalist state, the bosses, state. Karl Marx called such a government the executive committee of the ruling class. That is, the government of Roosevelt and Willkie manages the state, for the benefit of the ruling class, the bosses, just as the board of directors manages a corporation for the benefit of its owners.
The workers should learn a lesson from what is going on today with the so-called defense program. They want higher wages and shorter hours. They won’t get this by calling the bosses fifth columnists, traitors and charging them with a lack of patriotism. This is nonsense. Bill Green and John L. Lewis won’t move the the ruling class and the boss government by indignation. They’ve got to lead the workers to the sit-down and to the picket line.
 



Something to Be Remembered From the “Old Days”
Speaking at the convention of the International Association of Machinists, James A. Reynolds, who has been a dues paying member for 51 years, made the following remarks; “I remember in the old days when you did not stay at the Hollenden, boys, like you stay today, and when the international president traveled, he used to come in a caboose, and the local lodge had to pay his expenses.” We are not going to make any argument for President Brown of the machinists travelling to conventions on a freight train. Neither will we make too strenuous objection to unions picking out the swankiest hotel in town for their convention sessions. We do believe though that it would be better if the unions and union officers acted a little more like workers and workers organizations and less like business men and chambers of commerce in such matters as conventions, etc.
The time, years ago, that brother Reynolds was talking about was the days when the unions were fighting for recognition against the government and the bosses. Those were the days when the machinists, under the influence of Socialist members, recognized the reality of the class struggle and said so in the preamble to their union constitution. Those were the days before the coming of “business unionism,” huge salaries and the “stabilization of employer-employee relations.” All of the unions today would be better workers’ organizations if there were a little more of the “caboose” days and less Pullman car, swank hotel display. In the “caboose” days the union leader was one of the workers. He lived like an ordinary worker and took his chances along with the rest of the working class. A large dose of this same medicine is urgently needed today in the trade union movement.
 
Chiselers and Cockroaches
The employer chiselers are still busy. Last week the Labor Department fined the Lane Cotton Mills of New Orleans, $42,000 for chiseling on the Walsh-Healy Act. $29,000 of the fine will go to employees for unpaid overtime. $13,000 will go to the government as a penalty for violation of child labor regulations. Also, the firm is barred from bidding on government orders for three years. This patriotic firm was working on army and navy uniforms.
*
Lumber mill owners in Virginia. Maryland and West Virginia have been ordered to pay $70,000 in back wages to 3,400 workers. 370 firms were violating the Wage-Hour Act.
*
The price of meat is rising all over the country. In Washington the retail cost of round steak increased 6 cents the pound since August 9. There has also been an increase in the price of pork and lamb. The National Defense Advisory Committee is “investigating.” We hope that they complete their “investigation” in time for us to get a good steak before New Years.
 
Delegates Tell Tobin: Enough Is Enough!
After passively voting Dan Tobin an increase in salary from $20,000 to $30,000 a year, the teamsters decided that this was enough for brother Tobin between now and the next convention in 1945. It seems, from reports, that Tobin was not satisfied with the $30,000 but wanted an increase in power commensurate with a $10,000 boost in pay.
The constitution committee proposed that the president be given power to compel locals to arbitrate under penalty of dissolution. The delegates stopped the reporter, Dave Beck, after ten minutes and sent the resolution back for redrafting.
The second Tobin proposal to be defeated was one giving him supervision over strikes and lockouts and granting him authority to declare any strike or lockout illegal if not in conformity with union law.
Thirdly the delegates refused to give Tobin power to approve or disapprove wage scales and by-laws of local unions. There was heated debate over these proposals with Tobin disclaiming any desire to be a dictator over the union. He said he only wanted the confidence of the membership. The convention agreed that the president should have the power to remove dishonest officials and appoint trustees in their places.
The delegates evidently thought that to give their president a monthly salary bigger than they get in a year’s hard labor, was enough without surrendering the right to control important phases of union life and activity. Even the most passive delegates knew that to give the president the right to force the locals to arbitrate, could cripple the local and put it at the mercy of the bosses.
The delegates evidently smelled a rat in these proposals. That one about strikes sounds as though it come straight from the White House or the National Defense Advisory Committee. The proposal for power to the president to disapprove or approve wage scales has the same tint.
The delegates were willing to grant Tobin a huge salary but they were not willing for him to take over complete control of the union. They were correct in this and demonstrated a healthy attitude among the membership towards trade union democracy.
 
Who Did You Say Is Abusing the Wagner Act?
Professor Slichter, of Harvard, has been giving some advice to the unions. He fears that the government will be compelled to regulate union elections or qualifications of union representatives unless “American workers and their leaders are able to prevent the Wagner Act from becoming abused by racketeers and foreign agents. The union may select a ... Scalise ... to represent it. The employer may be an airplane factory engaged in national defense and employees may select communists or other foreign agents as their representatives. Still the employer must deal with them ... according to the Labor Relations Board ...”
Now all this is just so much hooey. In the first place it isn’t “racketeers and foreign agents” that are abusing the Wagner Act. It’s the employers. The racketeer is concerned with the Wagner Act only in so far as it aids him in getting a bigger membership in the union so that he can collect a bigger rake-off. In order to do this, however, he must increase the union membership. Suppose the employer refuses to bargain collectively. The racketeer leader will appeal to the NLRB. But this is a legal NLRB case whether appealed by a racketeer or other type of leader. Suppose the racketeer threatens to call a strike. This has nothing to do with the Wagner Act. This Act was conceived for the purpose of allaying strikes.
The same holds true for the “foreign agent” twaddle. Sure, a union may select a “foreign agent” as its representative. also the union might select a bosses agent or an FBI agent as its representative. How about this Professor Slichter? The unions today are passing resolutions and kicking “communists” out of the unions. They are also beginning slowly to move against racketeers.
We are of the opinion that Professor Slichter is not so much worried about “racketeers” and “foreign agents” in the unions as he is about the Wagner Act as such. There are a lot of people, including rich Harvard contributors who pay Professor Slichter’s salary, who would like to see the Wagner Act revoked. Furthermore, there are numerous union militants who will be labelled “foreign agents” and “Communists.”
 
A Job For the CIO and AFL at Con-Edison
The NLRB has issued a second unfair labor practices complaint against the Consolidated Edison Company of New York. This is the company where the workers thought they could do better with an “independent” union than with the AFL or CIO. They preferred to follow a couple of shysters and hungry lawyers, rather than remain in the real trade union movement. Of course, many of them didn’t know any better.
It is also a fact that the Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (AFL) and the Electrical, Radio and Machinery Workers (CIO) are partially responsible for the plight of the workers at Con-Edison. The Stalinist controlled UERMWA played around with the situation, in true Stalinist union-wrecking fashion. The IBEW got a contract from Con-Edison by very doubtful methods. There is every reason to believe that the AFL union got its contract from Con-Edison by too friendly relations with the company at the time when the company was trying to keep the CIO out. Later the workers at Con-Edison kicked both the AFL and CIO in the pants, held an election and voted for the “independent union.”
This of course was just what the company wanted: to get rid of the CIO and AFL. It’s far easier to skin a lone banana than one on a bunch. Recently the company has fired workers, refused to rehire others and refused to meet with the “independent” grievance committee. No one should be surprised at this. Con-Edison looks at the “independent” either as a company union or as an outfit too weak and inexperienced to do anything effective for the workers.
The cure for this situation is for the AFL or CIO to get busy at Con-Edison with a determined organizing campaign. Show the workers that something will be done, that the union will fight for them.
 



A “Blessing” We’d Rather Not Have
Speaking to the American Federation of Teachers, Bill Green is reported to have delivered himself of the following bright remark: “we are not opposed to compulsory industrial service, registration and training, if that becomes necessary to protect our lives and our homeland.”
We are not certain of what Green means by “compulsory industrial service” but the statement is certainly not a good one. It is of a kind with Green’s former outburst at the graduation exercises of the FBI police training school. Here he called on the police to clean the racketeers from the union and remarked that “we (the AFL and the police) can be friends and we want to be friends.”
One day Green is against the conscription act and the next day he is in favor of compulsory industrial service for the workers. The workers don’t have a tough enough time with the boss now under the system of work for what you get or starve. Green evidently is ready to accept a system that puts workers under the complete control of the government and the bosses without any say in the matter, or any opportunity for organized action for better conditions. Green thinks that such a step may be necessary to “protect our lives and our homeland.” What kind of “homeland” is it that needs labor conscription to protect it? We are against military conscription for imperialist war. How much stronger would we be against labor conscription for the Wall Street War. We would like to inform brother Green that “compulsory industrial service” is one of the “blessings” that has been bestowed on the German workers by Herr Hitler.
 
Where the Boss Can’t, the Government Tries
One of New Jersey’s vice-chancellors has delivered a “judicial” opinion of the kind that comes out of Hague’s state quite often. The vice-chancellor, one Sooey, voided the closed shop provisions in the contracts of the New Jersey oyster industry. Some little oyster company appealed to the court against the United Oystermen’s Union that had forced closed shop agreements from the oyster companies. The union controls 95% of the 2,200 oystermen in New Jersey and required workers to join the union or get permits before going to work.
The vice-chancellor held that this practice was “monopolistic” and tended to deny employment to persons who might otherwise be employed.
This incident has some important lessons. Here was a union that was strong enough to force a closed shop contract from the bosses. Scabs, stool pigeons, and union busters would have great difficulty operating. The union could force increases in wages and better working conditions. The bosses were forced to deal with the union and grant their demands. But the bosses knew they had an ace in the hole. This was the government; their government. What the bosses could not do. the government, the state, stepped in and did for them. If the workers fail to abide by the state’s decision, the boss can call in the police and the courts to throw them into jail.
Despite all this the workers must have their unions, they must have the closed shop and they must remain prepared to drag concessions from the boss. they didn’t build their unions by accepting such decisions as this one by Sooey.
 
A Taste of a Not So “Democratic Process”
We stated some time back that the fools in the Capitol at Washington evidently think they can stamp out the class struggle by some such act as sending the Stalinist Harry Bridges back to Australia. They passed a law naming Bridges specifically for deportation. Attorney-General Jackson objected to this bill as not in keeping with “American practice and tradition.”
The men on Capitol Hill later took a tip from Jackson to the effect that he could proceed against Bridges, or any other alien under the new Alien Registration Act. Dean Landis who conducted the Bridges deportation hearing had decided that Bridges was not deportable because at the time of the proceedings he was not a member of a “subversive organization.” This was based on the Supreme Court decision in the Strecker Case.
They couldn’t get Bridges under any existing law and because of Supreme Court decisions. And so shat did they do? They passed a law calling for the registration of aliens and included in this act provisions for getting around the constitution and decisions of the Supreme Court. Jackson proudly announced that “since that time (the Landis decision on Bridges) however, in the Alien Registration Act of 1940, Congress enacted legislation specifically designed to alter the rule of the Strecker decision and to make deportable an alien who at any time in the past has been a member of a subversive organization.”
What we want to impress on workers especially is the way that this thing was done. The whole business was a frame-up procedure perpetrated by the government in league with the bosses, particularly the shipping interests of the Pacific Coast. Now it is “aliens.” Later it will be any worker who dares raise his head and utter a complaint against the bosses or the government. If you are an “alien” and belonged to a “legal” working class party five years ago and later left that party you can be deported today if some government outfit decides that that party is “subversive.” This is what is known to Fourth of July orators, the White House, and to chambers of commerce as “the democratic process.” it was this same process that kept Mooney in jail 20 years and that murdered Sacco and Vanzetti.
The only way out for the workers against this sort of “democratic process” is a WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT, A WORKERS’ CONGRESS, A WORKERS’ DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE.
 
Remember The Queen’s “Let ’Em Eat Cake!”
An official of the British Ministry of Agriculture has been pandering the question of feeding the English workers this winter. Tourists who had seen the fish farms of Scandinavia suggested that England establish fish farms and pay special attention to the breeding of trout. The official replied that trout would cost about fifty cents to farm and would take three years to grow. He then said that the public should turn to catching eels.
“Millions of them are just waiting to be caught and eaten,” he said. “In East Anglia, the Fens, Sussex, Kent and many other parts of the country. In the Autumn they will be making their way to the sea. They should not be allowed to get away. They are first-class food.” The Ministry plans to organize eel catching demonstrations.
We would like to remind the Ministry of Agriculture that a short time before she was beheaded by the French revolutionaries. Queen Marie Antoinette had remarked that if the workers had no bread they could eat cake.
 
The Lithographers Have an Argument
The International Printing Pressmen’s Union (AFL) is preparing to hold its first convention in 12 years on September 9. One important issue before the convention is the 27 year old feud between the pressmen and and the Amalgamated Lithographers (AFL). The 1918 AFL convention ordered the lithographers to disband and join the pressmen and photo-engravers.
The lithographers refused on the ground that as long as the AFL is on a craft basis there is no reason for them not to have their own craft international. The lithographers said that if there was one union for the printing field they would join. They were not expelled from the AFL but are not officially recognized.
It seems to us that the lithographers have something here. They are willing to join a printing trades industrial union but so long as the industry is divided and based on craft. then the lithographers want the customary craft autonomy. The simple solution to these problems is unification of the AFL and CIO with the perspective of the complete organization of industry into industrial unions.
 



This Will Make the Bosses Cower!
Organized white street car and bus employees of the Birmingham (Ala.) Electric Company called a walk-out recently in support of 108 Negro mechanics and helpers employed by the same company. The white workers struck in order to get a higher wage scale for the Negro mechanics and helpers. The cars and buses were tied up for 48 hours. It was the first tie-up on the system for twenty-six years. It was the first strike on record in that area called by white workers in support of the demands of Negro workers.
This action of the white workers of Birmingham must have spread consternation among the employers of Birmingham. The same consternation will exist everywhere when the action becomes known to employers North and South. Because, this is just the kind of thing that employers have been organizing and fighting against in their employers associations, chambers of commerce and boards of trade. Their slogan is; “no peace but constant warfare between Negro and white workers.” For peace and good will among the workers of all races, creeds, sexes and nationalities is the beginning of the end of the rule of the bosses.
The ruling class knows this all too well. The workers have been slow learning this lesson. The destruction of every barrier; racial, religious, national or otherwise that divides the workers is the first step in strengthening the unions: in making them mass and militant organizations that can force higher wages and shorter hours from the bosses. Wiping out all the differences that have been planted in the ranks of the workers by the employers and their stooge politicians, will demonstrate the solidarity of the working class.
This solidarity will inevitably express itself in the economic struggles of the unions. More important these economic struggles will intensify the class struggle, aid in heightening the political thinking of the workers and impel them to decisive political action against the bosses. The action of the white street car workers in Birmingham is a concrete and fundamental step toward this end.
 
Something for the Machinists to Do
The International Association of Machinists (AFL) is holding its convention in Cleveland. This organization of 200,000 skilled workers have an opportunity in this convention to render a mighty service to the working class and to increase the solidarity of Negro and white labor. The IAM can remove the provision in their constitution or ritual which bars Negro machinists from membership in the union.
At the last convention of the IAM in Milwaukee, in 1936, an effort was made to wipe out this disgraceful, scandalous and anti-working class Jim-Crowism. The motion was defeated overwhelmingly. By this act IAM members served notice on Negro machinists that their union is a white man’s union just as to them the U.S. is a “white man’s country.”
 
“Business Unionism” With a Vengeance
One of the first actions of the Teamsters at their international convention in Washington was to vote increases in the salaries of the leading officers. President Tobin and the Secretary-Treasurer got their salaries increased from $20,000 to $30,000 a year. Tobin was given an assistant at $20,000 yearly.
This is an amazing performance for a workers organization. It is even more amazing that Tobin would accept an increase in the amount of money he takes from the workers in his union. This means that the president and secretary-treasurer of the union will take from the pockets of union truck drivers $576 a week; $82 a day! Tobin’s assistant will take $384 a week! These salaries, comes not from a wealthy corporation but from the pay envelopes of ordinary workers. This $82 a day comes from truck drivers, some of whom draw no more than this for two weeks work for the boss. The top scale for union truck drivers is not more than $53 a week.
The reason given for the steep increase in pay, or any increase at all is that the union is the biggest in the U.S., and of course Tobin was the chief factor in the growth of the union. This is “business unionism” with a vengeance. It’s the same conception that corporation boards of directors have when they vote a big boost in pay for the president. “Our company is the biggest in the country and our president Joe Doe is the one man to whom the credit is due.” But the union is not a corporation, it is not a business. It is not an institution ran for private profit that rewards its officers financially in proportion as the income increases. the union is an organization of the working class come together to contend with the boss for higher wages, shorter hours and better working conditions. Officers are members of the union and have no rights and privileges not enjoyed by other members of the union. They do not, or should not, have a similar relationship to the union rank and file that the corporation president bears to the workers in his factories. Furthermore these fabulous union salaries and the reasons given for granting them encourage an extremely dangerous tendency in the labor movement. This sort of thing gives an impetus to racketeering. Racketeers such as Scalise and others take the position that if the union can be milked so easily by its officers the proper thing for the racketeer is to get into a union, or organize one and start milking. Scalise too, had his rewards for building up the union but he took his directly. He got a rake off on all dues paid by new members. Furthermore, Scalise also had a big salary taken from the pockets of the workers in his union. Also this “get mine” policy penetrates the lower ranks of the union and at times results in workers landing in jail.
The whole policy of “business unionism,” huge salaries and the granting of great power to union officials tends to knock the unions off the main track and to develop a trade union bureaucracy. A gap develops between the officers and the rank and file. The bureaucracy tends to fall away from its working class past. The officers don’t think like working men any more. They are successful American business men. They have made good. They don’t live like the workers any more. They live in swank hotels, direct the union from luxuriant offices and act pretty much like a high paid corporation executive. The racketeer union leaders also live in this same manner. Scalise too had his palatial home in a fashionable New York suburb.
 
A Vital Difference Between Tobin and Scalise
Now when we mention Scalise in connection with Tobin it should be obvious that we are not calling Tobin a racketeer. Not to make a fundamental and important distinction between Tobin and Scalise is to be a nit-wit or a scoundrel. Not to be able to make a fundamental distinction between labor leaders such as Tobin, Green, Lewis, Murray and others and the bosses of the ruling class, is to fail completely to comprehend the meaning of the labor movement and the class organization of society.
Scalise and his kind are racketeers, real “labor fakers.” They “build” unions solely for personal gain and other questionable results that flow from their union activities. They have not grown up with the unions and are not genuinely union men.
 
The Kind of Leadership Workers Need
The employers of the workers are members of another class, an enemy class that conducts continual class warfare against the workers as a class. And despite their seeming friendliness at times, their surface collaboration, the bosses include Tobin, Green, Lewis and other labor leaders in the working class and look upon them as enemies. They seek to win them over and often succeed, but they know that these men are the representatives of the organized working class. The bosses are also aware that the trade union bureaucracy is subject to pressure from the union ranks. The bureaucracy cannot always do as it pleases. Furthermore the bosses know the source of the workers’ dissatisfaction and unrest. They know that it springs from his work, his living conditions, his place in society.
The workers must increase this pressure on the union leadership to bring the leaders increasingly into tune with the needs and aspirations of the rank and file. This is the kind of leadership the unions must have: men and women who are committed to irreconcilable warfare against the boss on the picket line. This type of leader will refuse to take $30,000 a year from the workers. He will put himself in the worker’s place and refuse to pay himself more than the worker in his union gets. This kind of leader will refuse to take more wages than he can get from the boss for the workers in his union.
 



We Want More Than We Have Now
Mr. Roosevelt and Mr, Willkie, the twins who are running for president on virtually twin political platforms, have been saying a few encouraging words to labor. Mr. Roosevelt wrote to Bill Green to reassure him that he need have no worries because the New Deal “shall hold steadfastly to every advance gained, and not permit present safeguards to be whittled away by yielding to the specious arguments of those whose lip service to labor is loud and eloquent before election, but whose ears are deaf to all appeals to justice the rest of the time.”
We suspect that Bill Green feels better now and can urge the AFL to throw its support and votes to FDR. Labor will not lose a thing that has been gained. Suppose this turns out to be true, which of course we doubt. But let’s assume that it will be true. So what? Labor doesn’t lose any gains during the course of preparation for war and during the war. How about further advances? Are the trade unions and the workers going to allow themselves to be trapped by sweet talk about not having a single gain taken from them? Are the workers going to adopt the policy of fight-gained? There is certainly a tendency in this direction: a tendency to pose the question of keeping what we have and not allowing it to be taken from us.
It is correct for the workers to fight like hell to hold their gains but they cannot stop there. Not only must they fight to keep the Wagner Act, the Walsh-Healy Act, the Public Contracts Act and all other legislation that benefits the workers, but right now it is necessary to make the main trade union fight the demand for higher wages and shorter hours. Standing on the advances already made the workers must gird themselves for even greater advances.
When the 12 hour day was under attack by those who wanted to return to the “sunrise to sunset” day, what simpletons the workers would have been to stop with a simple demand for holding on to the 12 hour day. Suppose in 1885 the workers had been satisfied with such an advance as the 10 hour day. Such docility would never have produced the 8-hour day.
Why should the workers of U.S. Steel and other steel corporations be satisfied merely to hold on to the 8 hour day and a $5.00 daily wage? Why not a 6 hour day at a $5.00 minimum? And if an 8 hour day why not a six or seven dollar minimum? And how about all the millions of workers who are below a five dollar minimum and who work a ten hour day. Why shouldn’t these workers organize and strike if necessary for more wages and shorter hours? This is the time for both the AFL and the CIO to demand a national six hour day and five day week with a $30 minimum wage. All time above 30 hours a week should be paid for at time and one half and double for Sundays and holidays.
There is no argument which can be made against this that any worker or workers’ organization should accept. There are millions of unemployed and part time workers. The War Preparations Program will create more work. It is necessary to continue and expand the production of consumer goods along with military planes and bombs. Shortening the hours will give every worker a job and there is ample money to raise wages and still give the bosses a bigger slice than they deserve.
This is the time for the trade unions to make these demands. Profits are going higher and higher. The bosses will surely take care of themselves and their class. Every board of directors will be raising the salaries, bonuses and dividends of the big shots.
 
Heads or Tails – It’s All the Same to Us
Mr. Willkie finds it difficult to conceal his open shop company union position even while campaigning for office. He says that “every man and woman in America must be protected in his or her constitutional right of free choice in joining or not joining a union” and “for my part I pledge myself to help the principle of free unions.”
In these two expressions is wrapped all of the union busting scab-herding philosophy of the big industrialists and bankers. What does Willkie mean by the right not to join a union? He means that he is against closed shop agreements and for company unions. What does he mean by unions being free from government control? He would favor Roosevelt sending the army to break a strike at one of his power plants. What he means by unions being free from government control is free from and [a line appears to be missing here] of the Wagner Act and the Wages and Hours Act.
Both Roosevelt and Willkie want to get the workers’ votes. Roosevelt hands out a few sugar pills. “We” (me and the workers) will not give up . our gains. Willkie posing as one just down from Sinai hopes to get votes by promising to lead “the people” out of the New Deal wilderness.
Just two “slickers” battling for the right to be front man for the 60 Families. Perhaps a few weeks before election day old J.P. with a few of his cronies will gather at the Harvard Club. Lamont will flip a coin: “heads it’s Roosevelt, tails it’s Willkie.”
 
Refuge for Rubbish in the United States?
One again the United States is about to become the land of refuge from political oppression. Of course, we are not talking about English hunting dogs or blooded stallions or the cows of Jersey. Sure these aristocrats are finding refuge here but we are talking about human beings. Not the children of the British fish peddlers of Billingsgate, of the dock workers of London, the miners of Wales or the bar maids of Southampton, but the broken down, run out ex-kings, queens, dukes, princes, countesses and pretenders from every country of Europe. The latest arrival is Prince Wladyslaw Sapieha of Poland and his helpmate Princess Mathylda. All of this horde of royalty is fleeing from Hitler. They are scattered all over the Atlantic seaboard and most of them seem to be loaded with money. Those that don’t have any are being picked up and wined and dined by our own rich at Newport and other loafing places of the bosses. The 60 Families have a few spare dollars these days because the workers here produced many millions of dollars in wealth the past six months, that went to the boss class in big salaries, dividends and interest. They have enough to feed, house and clothe all of Europe’s royalty; their children, flunkies, dogs, horses, and cats.
The workers in the U.S. have been generous enough to provide the goods out of their own sweat and blood.
Some of the workers whose toil produced the wealth that this European royal rubbish will consume, came to this country to escape oppression and terror instituted by this same royalty that is now fleeing before Hitler.
They are coming from Hungary, what was Austria, czarist Russia, Poland and all the other hell holes of Europe and Asia. It was these people, who are seeking asylum here today, and their ancestors who set up the ghetto, the pale, the yellow ticket, the pogrom. These royal cattle that are flocking into the U.S. today are the people who rode their horses over the workers, who lashed out at the workers with their royal sabers; who tortured the old women of the working class and raped their daughters. These are the gilded morons and near imbeciles who for centuries have kept the workers of Europe and Asia in ignorance, misery and degradation.
It will be a great day when these people have to run again. Not from their present hosts but from the working class of the U.S.: they and their present hosts together.
 
Beware of Falling Into the Bosses’ Trap
The Brotherhood of Railroad Signalmen has joined hands with the Maintenance of Way and other unions in passing resolutions barring “Communists, Nazis and Fascists” from membership. Anyone now in the union belonging to “either of the subversive groups” may be expelled. The resolution was passed at the recent convention in Denver. Labor reports that sentiment was unanimous for the action taken.
We suppose that all the Coughlinites, Christian Fronters, Christian Mobilizers, Knights of the White Camelia, Klansmen and unionists who are members of other native near fascist organizations vote for these resolutions barring “communists, nazis and fascists.”
What are the union leaders going to say to members in New Jersey who belong to the Klan that just held a united front meeting with the German-American Bund? What is the attitude of the union leaders toward the Klan with its black record of flogging and murder right here in the U.S.? Do these resolutions cover the Coughlinite members of the unions?
We don’t advocate expelling any worker from the unions except for anti-union activity. We are opposed to these resolutions and all that they mean. they are not union resolutions. They are FBI-Employer resolutions. In the long run they will benefit no one but the bosses, police, and a few thousand scabs, strike-breakers and private detective agencies. Union leaders in attempting to be good patriots are leading their organizations into a trap set for them by the employers.
 



David Lasser has been to Chicago and come away with another “national” unemployed organization tucked away in his hip pocket. He calls his new mass movement the “American Security Federation.” Of course, Lasser is the national president.
Not only did Lasser give birth to a brand new unemployed organization but he got the blessing of Franklin D. Roosevelt. The President wrote Lasser that his intention “to form a 100% American movement of WPA workers and other underprivileged is legitimate and laudable. It can assist the nation in securing the viewpoint of the unemployed and help to render a patriotic service to “our nation as well.” This from Roosevelt who evidently doesn’t have any knowledge of unemployed opinion after seven years in the White House. Also, from the same Roosevelt who said that the workers could not strike against the government and whose Justice Department sent striking WPA workers to jail in Minneapolis.
 
No Militancy
Lasser has had considerable experience manipulating unemployed organizations and hopping from one to the other. He led the Workers Unemployed Union in New York City. He held a “national” convention in Washington in 1935 and puffed the WUU into the Workers Alliance of America. At this time the Unemployed Councils and the National Unemployed League were already functioning as national organizations. The NUL was publishing a weekly paper, Mass Action, and leading real fights of the unemployed for the raising of relief standards.
As a leader of the unemployed. Lasser has never exhibited any tendency toward militancy. It was his policy to solve the hunger problems of the unemployed by getting the “endorsement” of the AFL and “liberal” congressmen. Mass demonstrations – even if he had any masses – and militant action at relief bureaus were not part of Lasser’s program for the unemployed. Post card campaigns to Congress: yes; conferences with congressmen and national relief officials, all right; but pounding away in mass attack at relief bureaus, in the manner of the National Unemployed League; this was activity that Mr. Lasser would never sanction if he could possibly escape it.
 
Shopped Around
Before negotiations for merger of the Workers Alliance, National Unemployed League and the Unemployed Councils got under way. Lasser dickered separately with the NUL and the NUC. At this time Lasser was a member of the Socialist Party. Lasser was ready to make a deal either with the NUC or the NUL depending on which direction would give him the greater prestige. This is important in the light of Lasser’s recent statement that he left the Workers Alliance because he discovered that it was communist controlled only after he had been its president for nearly four years.
Negotiations for the merger of the NUL and the WAA to the exclusion of the Stalinist Unemployed Councils broke down for a time. Lasser demanded that his WAA gel 11 of the 15 members of the national committee of the merged organization: president, secretary and the first three vice-presidents. The NUL was to have an assistant secretary, four national committee members and the fourth vice-president. The NUL had about five times the membership of the WAA. When the NUL representatives remonstrated with Lasser at such a monstrous proposal, he replied that he wanted to be sure that the WAA had the majority on the board. Lasser further stated that he wanted to have this decisive majority because the NUL was lead by Workers Party members who acted under discipline and functioned as a fraction. He said that as a member of the Socialist Party this was not required of him.
 
Makes a Deal
Lasser’s terms were rejected by the national committee of the NUL and Lasser turned again to the Stalinist Unemployed Councils lead by Herbert Benjamin. A deal was made for merger which, for various reasons, the NUL later decided to enter. The Councils agreed to minority membership on the national committee. Lasser was to be president and Benjamin and the Stalinist fraction twisted Benjamin’s title from Assistant secretary to Organization Secretary. The Stalinists giving a taste of the discipline that he said he feared so much from the old Workers Party, and which made it necessary to keep them a tiny minority on the national committee.
Lasser was now hand in glove with the Stalinists. This was 1936. There was one national unemployed organization. Lasser was the president and Benjamin, a shrewd and experienced Stalinist functionary was the Organization Secretary. Under Benjamin’s guidance, the Stalinists were able, the following year, to take over control of the organization. There is no record to show that Lasser ever made any protest.
 
Birds of a Feather
Why did Lasser submit to the control of the WAA by the Stalinists while he remained its nominal head, probably at wages of about $25 a week? Lasser knew, better than anyone else, that the Stalinists were in control. He knew that they could have kicked him out at any time they chose during the past three years.
One reason was that Lasser’s politics was out of the same piece of cloth as the CP political line. The Stalinists were entering their ’fourth period,” the era of the Peoples Front. Democratic Front antics. Lasser has been a class collaboration advocate ever since he has been in the labor movement. There was no reason why he should keep away from the Stalinists: both were reactionary opportunists with a basically identical political program. Furthermore, the Unemployed Councils, following the line of the CP, were entering their period of substituting postal card writing for militant mass action. This would certainly please Lasser, What Lasser objected to was not so much the discipline of the Workers Party members in the unemployed movement as their insistence on a militant class struggle policy.
 
A Stalinist Buddy
The Stalinists made Lasser a little tin horn big shot. Benjamin was really the leader and the power in the Workers Alliance. Lasser knew all of this and was satisfied. The Stalinists sent him to Russia in 1937 to represent the WAA at the 20th anniversary of the October Revolution. On this same trip he went to Spain during the Civil War. Lasser voted with the Stalinists in the WAA on all major political questions. He stuck with them through the Moscow Trials and the Stalin purges. He accepted and defended their line completely. He went before the Senate committee investigating WPA and testified that he was no believer in overthrowing capitalism. He told the senators that as president of the WAA he was “trying to make capitalism work.”
And yet this adventurer among the poverty stricken unemployed, when he finally quit the WAA, has the brass to announce in 1940 he quit because he discovered that the organization was controlled by communists.
 
Unhealthy to Stick
Lasser knows that this is a lie. He quit after the Stalin-Hitler Pact. He quit after the Stalinists changed their line again and began talking against Roosevelt. He quit when the Stalinists began mouthing about “imperialist war,” when they buried Jefferson again and a few of them put the flag back in the closet. That the Stalinists did not mean it, did not reassure Mr. Lasser. David Lasser left the WAA and the Stalinists when it was becoming unhealthy to be associated with them. There was “fifth column” talk, “subversive activities,” etc. Lasser felt that the Stalinists were no longer patriots and New Dealers. He was with them as long as they were licking Roosevelt’s boots. Politically Lasser is a reactionary and an opportunist. Added, to this he is a physical and moral coward. He was afraid that the CP might become a militant revolutionary party again (vain delusion). That would be no place for Lasser.
This is the man who has placed himself at the head of another group of unemployed workers, and received Roosevelt’s benediction. He can “render a patriotic service to our nation ...” How? By herding any unemployed workers foolish enough to follow him behind the Roosevelt war drive and into the Wall Street Army!
Lasser is in glorious company. That’s what the Klan, big business, the FBI, the police and the vigilantes will be doing. In so far as he has any influence at all he will be a first rate recruiting sergeant There is no unemployed organization today that is anything more than an empty shell and a caricature of the NUL and the NUC in its days of militant class struggle activity. Neither the Workers Security Federation, the WAA or Lasser’s new outfit amount to a pinch of snuff. The WAA is tied to the Stalin-Hitler Pact and to one of the imperialist camps engaged in the war. The Workers Security Federation is tied to the pro-British Socialist Party and therefore, eventually, to a “national defense” pro-war position. Lasser’s new American Security Federation was born fastened to Roosevelt’s war chariot.
It is time for the unemployed and WPA workers to begin thinking seriously about reforming their ranks on a national scale. This is demanded now, just as at the beginning of the depression. For now we are in the Second World Imperialist War.
 



Labor Must Fight for More Wages
For the first half of 1940 the United States Steel Corporation has announced a net profit of $36,315,443. For the first half of 1939 the net profit was $1,970.312. This means that Big Steel’s profits increased $34,344,691 over the first six months of 1939. Think of it; a jump from a little under two million to more than thirty-six million! These are certainly war times and war time profits for America’s 60 Families are here.
It is interesting that the big papers and the financial commentators did not make much fuss about the success of Morgan and Stettinius in making millions for themselves and their friends in the steel industry. It isn’t good to let the steel workers know that “their” company “earned” more than thirty-six million dollars in six months this year. Furthermore the company declared a $1.00 dividend on the common stock. this means that a bunch of big shoots grabbed all the way from $5,000 to $75,000 and over just sitting around waiting for the steel workers to produce the necessary wealth and income for the corporation. These huge profits were sweated out of the men who labor in the ore mines and the mills of the steel company.
These profits too, are the income from capitalist war. Hundreds of thousands of men, women and children were murdered on or around the battlefields of Europe in order that those millions might go into the pockets of the rich. They are blood profits.
The workers in Big Steel have received no increase in wages. They produced the wealth but they didn’t get it. They toiled like hell to make people rich who don’t work. They risk their lives daily in the ore mines; they drudge away before the furnaces and are expected to be thankful for any crumbs the bosses see fit to throw their way.
The steel workers can get at least some of this thirty-six million which the bosses have just taken from them. They can demand an increase in wages. The CIO can organize every steel worker in the country and demand higher wages. If this isn’t granted the workers can strike.
The workers should not be scared by any boloney about holding up the defense program. All they need emphasize and talk about is the profits the bosses are raking in. If any big shot faker begins foaming at the mouth about patriotism the workers can talk long and loud about the patriotism of the manufacturers and the bankers: how they are refusing to sign contracts until the government assure them that patriotism will be rewarded in the form of big profits.
 
Letting “Nature Take Its Course”
Roger Babson, who heads some sort of business statistical organization and who also has a service for supplying churches with mottoes and beautiful sayings for their outside announcement boards, has found a cure for unemployment. The President should have “let nature take its course.” Also the unemployed should be helped temporarily but “solution of the unemployment problem lay with the jobless themselves” and “if they can’t climb out after being helped, they should fail – that is nature’s method of showing them they are wrong.”
The unemployed should not get too heated over the asininities of a nit-wit like Babson. There are plenty of people who hold the same views; some with more sense than Babson. The Chicago Tribune ran an editorial expressing the same viewpoint as long ago as 1933. Also we have the opinion that the New Deal, which Babson dislikes, had just a bit of the let nature takes its course philosophy. There are still around ten million unemployed and many of them are starving.
When Babson says that the unemployed must solve their own problems, we are at least in partial agreement. All workers have to solve their own problem with such help as they can round up. In the days of the militancy of the unemployed organizations, they were on their way. But after the merger of the three national unemployed organizations under Lasser and the Stalinists things went from bad to worse. Lasser was “trying to make capitalism work” and the Stalinists were busy with the Peoples Front, the Star Spangled Banner and Thomas Jefferson. Of course, none of this helped feed, clothe and house the unemployed.
 
A Revival of the “Old Times”
The papers report that 400 unemployed workers took over the California State Relief Administration offices and held staff prisoners for more than five hours last week. This sounds like old times. We can remember instances of this kind happening daily and weekly in the earlier days of the depression. When unemployed workers seized a relief station and held it for 59 days, when they stormed the relief warehouses and carried away food and clothing, when thousands of the unemployed planted themselves on the lawn of the state capitol and forced the governor to see their representatives.
This was the Golden Age of the unemployed movement and it was the battles of those days that makes it possible for the unemployed to get even the meagre relief they receive today.
 
This and That in Labor’s Struggle
The CIO Oil Workers International announces a drive to organize the oil workers in Texas in the region between the Rio Grande and the Mississippi. The drive will center around the Humble Oil Refinery.
*
The North Georgia Mfg. Co., makers of pants and overalls has been ordered to pay $2,067 in back wages to several employees, abide by the Fair Labor Standards Act and pay the thirty cents hourly minimum wage. The company was violating the Act by the “kick-back” and by claiming that although the employees remained at the plant longer than the maximum hours, they “were free to utilize such time as they saw fit.”
*
The officers of the Fitzgerald Georgia Cotton mills have been acquitted of charges that they conspired to violate the Wagner Act. This despite the fact that the workers were intimidated, had their wages cut and kicked out of their jobs by the closing of the mill to defeat union organization.
The company had relief stopped and company thugs beat a Congregational minister who took the side of the workers. We suppose the point is that the company did not “conspire” to do any of these things, they just went ahead and did them. The law is a wonderful thing.
*
The electrical workers local at the Crosley Corporation, in Cincinnati,. makers of radios and refrigerators, has discovered a very questionable method of keeping the men folks in work. They are not going to let married women work in the shops. There is a clause in the new agreement stipulating that married women shall not be employed and should any of the female employees get married it is understood that she resign at once.
We can sympathise a little with the aims of these men workers but their fancied solution to unemployment is thoroughly reactionary. It is cut from the same piece of cloth as agreements to keep Negroes out of the union and to deny them employment. These workers do not mean it that way, but it smacks of Hitler’s motto for women, “church, kitchen and children.” If all the employed married women in the U.S. should quit their jobs and men should take them, there would be no appreciable change in family security and welfare, except that many families would experience an increase in misery and want. The only way for these workers to get relief is to get higher wages and shorter hours. Sending the women home won’t help.
 



Union Witch Hunts Hurt Labor’s Cause
Many unions are falling into a very bad trap. We refer to their so-called fifth column hunts. Here we have the Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Employees at its recent international convention in Quebec passing a resolution containing the following: “It is within the power and authority of our Brotherhood to determine whether or not the supporters and sympathizers of this savagery (fascism and Hitler’s blitzkrieg) should or should not be permitted to retain their membership in this Brotherhood.” And further: the grand lodge officers are instructed to meet with the officers of the railroads with which the union has contractual relations “for the purpose of working out an agreement under which employment on. such roads will not be provided for those found, after joint and careful investigation on the part of the Brotherhood and such managements, to be members or advocates of the Communist, Nazi or Fascist parties.”
We have already mentioned the witch hunt under way in a local of the SWOC in Jones and Laughlin Steel Co. in Pittsburgh. The same thing has occurred in the building service union in New York City. Other unions are swinging into line and soon if the trade union movement does not come to its senses there will be an orgy of reactionary activities instituted and carried on in the unions by the workers themselves.
The Maintenance of Way Employees said that they would not take a position on the war. they said nothing in their resolution about conscription, even peace-time conscription. But they did take a position on the war. Their resolution means that they took a position in support of the FBI, the employers and other anti-union groups. They even went so far as to demand that plans be worked out in league with the employers not to let people work who are dubbed communist, nazi or fascist by the employers and their officers.
Don’t the workers in the unions know that the employers, the Dies Committee and the FBI will brand every worker a communist, fascist or fifth columnist who fights against the boss for higher wages and better working conditions? Don’t they understand that the bosses will seize on this step they have taken to pound away at the Wagner Act, the Wages and Hours Act and all the gains that the workers have made? If they don’t understand this they are very simple minded indeed.
In their own protection, the only possible positions for unions to take is that there shall be no expulsions from the union except for anti-union activity. This means strike-breaking, violations of union discipline, being a boss stool-pigeon. No worker should be expelled from the union for his political beliefs and opinions. And above all, the boss should not be permitted to put his snout into the union’s affairs. His place is in the Chamber of Commerce and other boss organizations. The workers should approach the bosses for the purpose of bargaining for higher wages, not to seek his advice as to how to run their organizations.
 
Something for the Brotherhood to Think About
A situation has arisen on the railroads that illustrates one of the difficulties that beset Negro workers. Even those Negro workers who attempt to be supporters of the labor movement and good union men. The head of the Pullman Conductors organization and the Railway Labor Executives’ Association charge that A. Phillip Randolph, president of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, “ran out on them.” The Association has been campaigning for the passage of a bill to require the Pullman Company to hire conductors on all-night runs instead of using “porters-in-charge.”
The Association claims that Randolph agreed with this at one time but later changed his mind and entered opposition to the bill, thus holding up passage of the bill through congress. We know nothing of the merits of this controversy, we intend to investigate this aspect of the case. We do know something however about the tremendous difficulty that Negroes have getting jobs. We also know that Negroes are confined to making up beds, shining shoes and carrying a tray on Pullman cars and day coaches. We know too that the railway unions aid and abet the employers in keeping Negro workers chained to the beds, the shoe shine brush and the waiters tray. We know that there are no Negroes in the brotherhoods and that the unions would oppose having Negroes in “their” ranks even if by some miracle one was employed by the railroads.
We remember how the Pullman porters got organized and their organization did not come about through the initiative of the railway unions. We remember very well the long hard struggle lead by Randolph which resulted in the formation of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters. We submit all this for the aristocrats of railway labor to think about.
 
It’s Not a “Dog’s Life” for All Dogs!
Not only are the children of British nobility getting preference over the workers’ children in escaping from Hitler’s bombs but also the aristocrats of the dog, cat and horse world. Lady Mendl arrives from England by airplane. A few days later her dogs high step down the gang plank of a refugee ship in charge of her ladyship’s private secretary. The papers do not mention whether or not the dogs’ tutors and nurses arrived on the same ship. It is reported that after a few weeks rest at the estate of one of our most patriotic citizens the dogs, along with Lady Astor’s horses and Lord Percy’s cats will embark on the new liner America for a Caribbean cruise. The America will be remembered as the new United States Line ship with the most luxurious accommodations for the aristocrats of the dog society.
 
The Condemned Man Is Offered a Hearty Breakfast
The United Press announces that many employers “big and small are prepared to eliminate or soften the economic disadvantages which employees participating in National Guard training, or who might be called ordinarily, would suffer.” And what are these Good Samaritans planning to do? They are going to continue the wages of such employees while they are in the training camps. So far, the UP reports, this is the plan of Metropolitan Life, Standard Oil of New Jersey, Texas Co., Macy’s, A.T.&T., Westinghouse and others. Some of the corporations plan to give extra compensation above wages. Others will increase the vacation period for the defenders of hearth and home.
The workers who are employed by these corporations may think they have got something here. They have. They are going to get a few extra dollars for being willing to risk their lives to save the hides, the property, the wealth and privileges of the boss class. “We Who Are About To Die” are to be given a few extra days vacation before having our guts scattered over the battle fields of the Second World War.
The impudence and effrontery of the bosses is astounding. They are going to give “their” workers some “extra pay!” It is more astounding that workers swallow such tripe. The bosses give an employee getting $25 a week, $50 or $100 more. And for what reason? Because these workers have consented to go out and fight to protect the boss, his property and his profits. A few millions extra to the worker-soldiers for performing this service is a cheap price to pay. These worker-soldiers will protect all the past profits and all the profits to come as long as capitalism exists, as long as the workers permit it to exist.
We believe that the workers should learn to fight but they should fight in a workers’ army organized by a workers’ government to defend itself against any capitalist-boss state and any boss class. No fighting in the bosses’ army and the bosses’ national guard.
 



Recipe of the Month: Scalloped Scab



1 OZ. EPSON SALTS
1 PT. CASTOR OIL
2 OZ. ARSENIC
1 DOZ. YEAR OLD EGGS
4 OZ. GROUND GLASS



Mix well the above ingredients for 16 months and 27 seconds. Take one Simpering Sal or Scissorbill Sam. Roll well in the mixture. Broil, boil, stew, bake, roast and fry for three days. The result will be a Scalloped Scab, utterly delectable to the fastidious palate of any anti-union employer.
The above was taken from Loose Ends, shop paper of Local 15 TWU (CIO).
 
Bill Green Should Learn An Old Principle
President Green of the AFL has decided that the proposed amendments to the National Labor Relations Act may not be good for the labor movement, the AFL included. Green has been before the Senate Labor Committee and is reported to have said that the amendments in their present form “strike at the fundamentals” of the act. He prefers that the act “remain as it is” rather than accept the Smith amendments.
Green says he is now against replacing the present board with a new three man board and separating the board’s administrative and judicial functions. Also, he is opposed to the amendment which would remove 300,000 agricultural workers from the provisions of the act. He is also against those amendments which limit back pay allowances to strikers and which give the right to employers to discharge any striker who engaged in violence!
This is all well and good. Better to wake up late than never, but what did Bill Green think he was doing when he was playing around with the bosses’ stooges in the House who were hell bent for changing the Wagner Act? He thought in his simple way that he was hitting at the CIO. He was; but he was also stabbing his own AFL in the back. Big business is out to destroy the Wagner Act completely. They are afraid to approach the question directly so they attempt to do the job through an amendment here and there. They depended on the AFL to help them. Green fell into the trap.
There is an old principle of the labor movement that you don’t help the bosses against another labor organization or against any worker. The conflict between the AFL and CIO must be settled by the workers without the “aid” of the bosses and their deputies in Congress.
 
There Are Too Many Mike Tighes Still About
“Mike” Tighe, old time leader of the Amalgamated Association of Iron, Steel and Tin Workers, is dead. Mike started to work in the steel mills at 10, was a member of the first steel union ever organized, and was active in the labor movement for 57 years. Mike was a conservative. He was not very friendly to strikes. When asked once how he would describe the “Amalgamated” he said that it was “progressive conservative.” He was a type of leader that should not have a very prominent place in the labor movement today and in the future. That is, if the workers are to take their proper place as the leaders in the struggle for the emancipation of mankind. Tighe didn’t do much toward bringing this about. Under his leadership the “Amalgamated” wasn’t even active in the organization of the steel workers. When the CIO took over, Mike’s union had about 4,000 members.
A union leadership has several important functions to perform:

Hold the union together; increase its membership to the end that it becomes a mass organization.
 
Provide for the education of the membership in the principles, history and tactics of the trade union movement.
 
Insist on full internal democracy and the democratic rights of every last member.
 
Fight against every reactionary force in the union and for a militant program and militant action against the boss whenever the situation demands such action.

The majority of trade union leaders today are not living up to these standards. There are far too many Mike Tighes among them.
 
Workers Can Handle Vigilante Outfits
A group of 70 industrial and business leaders in Buffalo have formed an organization to “assist the police department in the event of a national emergency.” They will consider such subjects as “scientific crime detection, procedure in questioning suspects and witnesses and – POLICING STRIKES AND INDUSTRIAL DISTURBANCES.”
The last point of course is the significant one. The “scientific crime detection” of course is plain hooey. This is a budding vigilante outfit whose main activity will be strike-breaking and acting as stool-pigeons. All this, of course, in league with the Buffalo police.
There is nothing new about this, except that now this anti-union activity will take place under the cover of rampant “patriotism” and alleged upholding of the “defense” program. Many more of these outfits will be formed around the country in industrial centers. The workers need not he alarmed however, because 8,000,000 of them are organized in trade unions. They have had experience before with vigilantes, union-busters and strikebreakers. The workers know what to do.
 
Hopson Didn’t Clip the Coupon Clippers
Some weeks back we had something to say about one Howard Hopson, big shot, in the Associated Gas and Electric Company, who is charged by his government with stealing $20,000,000 from Associated Gas and Electric. Now it turns out that not only is Hopson a big time crook, but also a cheap petty thief. Hopson stole money from the company to buy himself a cigar. He stole from the company to pay for a license for his brother-in-law’s dog. He stole from the company to pay dues in his clubs and to buy topsoil for his lawns.
How did Hopson get away with all this? What about all the brains at the head of business that we hear so much about; these big shots up from, the ranks and. the Harvard School of Business Administration? These are the guys who tell us that the workers can’t operate industrial establishments and run the government. These things must be done by the Hopsons. We know at least one answer to the above questions. The big stockholders in Associated Gas and Electric don’t give a damn so long as they get theirs; so long as their interest and dividends are paid. They know that the twenty millions came out of the hides of the workers employed by the company, and the workers who use the company’s gas and electricity.
 
Full Steam Ahead in Organizing Ford!
Henry Ford, Commander-in-Chief of several private armies of bull necks and gorillas has been ordered by the Labor Board to disband these sluggers and gunmen. He must also dismantle his arsenal where he manufactures blackjacks for his armed forces. Furthermore, he must post a notice for sixty days notifying the workers in his plants that he has disbanded his goon squads, ceased labor spying and interference with the union activities of his employees. This pious old scoundrel, with all his colonial antiques and McGuffy Readers, is responsible for the maiming, clubbing and murder of numerous employees in his plants. The hymn-singing old hypocrite maintained a constant reign of terror. His plants are virtual concentration camps with the speed-up, the snooping and the violence.
The UAW’s campaign to organize Ford should go full steam ahead. Every plant should be raked by a rapid organizing campaign. That is the only way to enforce the decisions of the Labor Board.
 
These Men Need a Strong Union
Despite the fact that the United Electrical, Radio and Machine Workers (CIO) got a majority in the Pittsburgh plant of Westinghouse Airbrake Co. over three years ago the company refused to bargain collectively with the union. The NLRB has ordered the company to negotiate a written contract if the union requests it. The chief engineer of the company had no complaint to make concerning the union but he preferred to deal in a fatherly way with each employee by private consultation. We’ll wager that this chief engineer has been very busy the past three years operating a little company union. We’ll also wager that he has made many speeches about the rights of the individual worker to bargain directly with the boss, and about unions taking away his rights and charging him high dues. The 4,800 production and maintenance workers now should get together solidly in a strong industrial onion for higher wages and shorter hours.
 



What Price “Independence”?
Some time back the Independent Brotherhood of Consolidated Edison Employees, an independent union of workers in New York’s vast gas and electric system, won an NLRB election over the CIO. Previously thousands of these workers had withdrawn from the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, forcing this union to get out of the plants of the company. The independent union won the right of sole representative of the 31,299 production and white-collar employees of Con-Edison. In the elections, the CIO received a total of around 10,000 votes. The independent got around 15,000 votes. The CIO’s Amalgamated Utility Workers contested the election claiming unfair procedure. The NLRB however, handed down a unanimous decision declaring the election O.K.
Now the independent is having trouble with the company. They say that a “serious gulf” exists between it and the company. The lawyer for the “union” says that they will not be “pushed around” by the company.
The real point in the dispute is the fact that the company does not now – and has no intention of doing so in the future – look upon the “independent” as a real independent union. Oscar Fogg, Con-Edison vice-chairman, says that the union included in its program many items that “would have the effect of a complete abdication by the responsible management.” Fogg rejected the union’s plea for a closed shop, for the establishment of a joint board to pass on promotions and other personnel questions. Fogg also said that the company would not enter into any agreement that did not provide assurance against strikes and stoppages during the life of the contract. In other words, the company told the workers that it would not recognize them if they attempted to act like a real union.
The “union” replied that their proposals were “just and fair,” that other employers in basic industries and public utilities had accepted “the stabilizing influence” of the closed shop. The “union” is very much surprised and hurt that the company’ has remained silent on their request for $5,000,000 for equalizing wage scales.
If it were not for the fact that this is a matter of supreme importance for the 30,000 workers of Con-Edison and for millions of other workers in the U.S. we would be inclined to smile at the simple-mindedness of these workers. To be sure, other employers have accepted the “stabilizing influence of the closed shop.” The mine owners for instance. But the miners have a real union, not a phony. Furthermore, the miners fought like hell, in strike after strike over a period of fifty years to get their closed shop. They didn’t get a closed shop in some one or several mines, breaking away from the international and setting up a so-called independent union. Neither did they get it by agreeing in advance that they would not strike.
We have the hunch that these workers were taken in. Taken in by a group of shysters who played on their dislike of the warfare between the AFL and CIO and the Stalinist influence in the CIO Amalgamated Utility Workers. They jumped out of real unions and into what is really a company union swamp. The only way out for them in the long run is back to the AFL or CIO.
 
The Best Chiseller Is a Patriot!
The American Pulpwood Association has pleaded “not guilty” to the indictment charging them with a conspiracy to violate the law requiring a minimum of 25 cents an hour for forest workers. This $300,000,000 industry was caught chiseling 9 cents an hour on the 25 cent starvation minimum. We said when we commented on this indictment before, that while the Association was discovered paying some workers as low as 19 cents an hour, we would bet an arm that if the truth came out it would be revealed that they were paying some lower than that. Now the truth is out. This gang of big chiselers, all loud mouth patriots, pay some workers as little as ten cents an hour; $4.20 for a 42 hour week. Now let them wave the flag, now let the eagle scream.
The pious and God-fearing native Americans who run the lumber industry have agreed to give the lumber workers $315,000 in back wages that they stole from them through violations of the wages and hours act. Col. Fleming, the administrator, said his bureau uncovered about 800 violations.
Two companies in Minnesota were fined $10,000 and ordered to pay $30,000 .in back wages to 700 employees. This is an average of nearly $43 for each employee; a month’s rent, or a month’s food.
These two chiselers, had children as young as 8 years working in their lumber camps and “others as young as 12 ... felled trees, loaded lumber and did other dangerous work.” Whole families worked and the family average for the summer was about $9.66 a week. OF COURSE THESE WORKERS HAVE NO UNION.
There are so many chiselers and cockroaches being unearthed these days that it is difficult to keep up with them. We will have to ask the editor for space to advertise them in. We want to point out to workers however that this word “chiseler” attained quite some prominence a few years ago in connection with the hungry unemployed who sought to supplement their starvation relief with a little part time work. These hungry men and women of course were not good citizens. Many of them were sent to jail. Workers should remember this and not be anxious to grab on to another invention of the ruling class: “fifth columnist.”
 
Some Miscellaneous Items
The notorious Burns Detective Agency; scab-herders, union busters and labor spies will keep its New York State license. The Workers Defense League sought to have it annulled on the ground that the agency was guilty of acts “inimical to labor.” The state Director of Licenses ruled that the license could not be revoked because the acts complained about were committed before the law making them illegal was passed. While this is probably good law, the Burns Agency remains what it has always been.
*
The appeal division of the New York Supreme Court has ruled that a union has the legal right through contracts to insist on employers buying their accessories from organized ships. Some accessory manufacturers sought an injunction forbidding such contracts. This means, we suppose, that a dress or suit manufacturer can be forced to buy his buttons from a union button factory; an aircraft union could demand that certain gadgets come from unionized plants.
*
The federal government has filed an income tax lien of $241,088 against Michael Carrozzo, leader of the Chicago Common Laborers Union. This is in addition to $500,000 that Carrozzo has paid the government for income taxes in recent years. Carrozzo is also under indictment charged with violating the anti-trust laws by excluding ready-mixed concrete from Chicago.
Now what we want to ask is, how come? How can the head of any union, any workers organization, pay $500,000 in income taxes. Where will the other $241,088 come from? Who are the big shots who helped Carrozzo pile up a fortune posing as a legitimate labor leader? The workers in this union have a big delousing job on their hands.
*
Mine, Mill and Smelter Workers Union in Utah has won a two year contract with increase in pay and a week’s vacation with pay. The union did not get a closed shop but becomes “the exclusive representative of all the employees ... who come under the jurisdiction of the union for the purpose of collective bargaining.”
The wage scale rises and falls with the price of copper, unless copper is under 9 cents a pound. $4.70 is minimum for underground and $4.20 for smelter workers. The rate increases to $7.15 for machine miners if the price of copper reaches 18¼ cents a pound.
Workers have to be careful about wage agreements of this kind. The New York Times Range of Prices for 1940 gives copper a high of 12¼ and a low of 10¼. July 27 was ten and three fourths. We do not know just what is meant by the “price of copper;” that is we do not know how the price is fixed and by whom. At any rate this is the wage scale for the miners, the smelter workers get 50 cents a shift less.
The wage scale agreed on gives machine miners $5.70 a day when the price of copper is 10 to 11.49 cents a pound. If however the price drops to 9.99 cents the miner only gets $5.45 a day, a reduction in wages of 25 cents a day or $5.00 for 20 days.
The trouble with such wage scales is that they have no relationship to the cost of living nor is the price of the company’s product the sole determiner of profit. Cost of living will not fall with the fall in the price of copper. Also, increase in profits is not directly proportional to increase in sales. This was recently demonstrated in the case of General Electric for the first half of this year. Net sales increased 31% over the same period last year, but earnings increased 59%. Earnings were 13.6% of sales while last year they were 11.1% of sales.
Workers must base their wage demands on their needs, on the profits and on the amount of wealth they are producing. They should not be modest about their needs, their standard of living. They should insist on living as well as the boss; they produce the wealth, not the boss.
These are simple things that every last worker can understand. They don’t have to know anything about the price of copper and other such things. Workers are concerned with the price of rent, food and clothing. They and their union leaders must not get sucked in by the bosses’ “experts”, with high falutin’ talk about prices, profit and loss, taxes and depreciation. Let the boss argue these points with the government “experts”.
 



The tilt in the Senate last week between Senators Holt and Minton, and the spirited defense of Col. Adler, of the New York Times, by Senator Lucas, raises some interesting questions in connection with capitalist war, conscription and the Roosevelt “defense” program.
Holt revealed that the conscription bill was fabricated at a meeting in the swank Harvard Club in New York by a group of rich men and the stooges of the rich. Col. Adler and the present Secretary of War Stimson were present at this conspiratorial meeting. Stimson had not entered the cabinet at the time of this meeting.
The draft of a conscription bill drawn up by these conspirators found its way to Senator Burke (who admires Hitler) and Representative Wadsworlh. Mr. Stimson later became Secretary of War. This means that the wealthy conspirators had two direct representatives in Congress and one at the head of the War Department in the New Deal Cabinet. Of course the Head New Dealer in the White House is not supposed to have known anything about the dark deeds carried on in the luxury and calm of the Harvard Club.
Holt, who is a sort of young man on a flying trapeze, let the cat out of the bag. He exposed this conspiracy of the rich to conscript the young men and send them to death on any old imperialist battlefield. He mentioned the fact that Col. Adler of the New York Times was a prime mover in this conspiracy.
 
Ruling Class Bravery
The day after the Holt-Minton fracas, which was dignified by such pleasantries as “rat,” “louse,” and “slacker”, Senator Lucas took the floor for a spirited defense of Col. Adler and his war record. Lucas said the colonel is a brave man. He got the Distinguished Service Cross, as they say, for “unusual and heroic action above and beyond the line of duty.” It seems that the colonel and another officer captured 50 Germans in the last world war. The argument of Lucas was that the colonel should not be criticised for framing the conscription bill: he and his friends are not cowards, for they too serve in the army.
To make the matter of personal bravery or cowardice the point of departure in any discussion of conscription is to distort the question for the purpose of fooling the workers. Whether or not an individual is or is not a brave man and willing to fight in the army is a question of no relevance or importance. We do not charge the members of the ruling class with personal cowardice. We do not attack them in this foolish way. This kind of argument has no point. This is a trick of the capitalists to throw dust in the eyes of the workers and make it difficult for the workers to see where their interests lie and how they are different from the interests of the bosses.
 
Big Business Patriotism
War to the ruling class is a method of defending their interests. They know how to do this. Watch them at work today. They are patriots but how does their patriotism express itself? In fighting for guaranteed big profits. They won’t let a wheel turn on the war orders until their government agrees to pay for expanding their plants, reduces taxes and increases their profits. Added to this they want the workers to toil longer hours and be satisfied with present or lower wages. They want the Wagner Act, the Walsh-Healy Act and the Wages and Hours Act scrapped. They want to junk the WPA. The New York Times, managed by Col. Adler, was one of the earliest leaders in this movement. On top of all this the bosses want the workers to fight in the army to protect the bosses’ property and profits.
The bravery and the physical courage of the ruling class is used in defense of their class interests. They will perform great feats of bravery to defend and perpetuate their ownership and rule. They will join the army and fight to hold on to their property, privileges and power. That is the meaning of Plattsburg and all their officers training camps. They are preparing to defend their class interests, their property and their government. They learn military tactics and strategy so that they may be competent to protect their lands, factories, mines, mills, castles, polo fields, yachts and banks. This is what patriotism means to them, this is what they mean by “our country.” And this is all they mean: me and my property and my privileges. “God Bless America” to the Adlers, Morgans and all their class means bless my dividends, my interest and my profits.
 
Army is Tool of the Rich
The workers however when they go into the army and fight in the wars made by the capitalists are not fighting in the interest of their class. They are fighting for the perpetuation of low wages, poverty. long hours, and horrible death on imperialist battlefields. In the army they place themselves under the command of the rich and the lackeys of the rich. The ruling class runs the show and the workers dance to the tune called by those who profit from capitalism and capitalist war.
The bosses know their class interests, they are very class conscious. That is what they were talking about that night in the Harvard Club when their representatives met and conspired to put conscription over. They know that workers do not want to go to war. They know too that the reason is not that the workers are cowards. They have had experience with the bravery and sacrifice of the working class at a thousand factory gates, a thousand mine pits and on a thousand waterfronts.
Yes the bosses are class conscious. They act together, in their chambers of commerce, security leagues, “save America” groups and at the Harvard Club. It is in these places that they make their decisions. In order to enforce them they have their thugs, gunmen and strikebreakers. If these are not enough they call on their government to send in the national guard and the army. This same national guard and army that they want the workers to join. The bosses don’t believe that the conflict between them and the workers can be settled by peaceful means.
The bosses of the United States say that they want to fight against Hitler to save democracy, to save civilization. They want the workers to help them. They have to have the workers help because the bosses are only a very small part of the population. If the workers refuse to help them, if the workers decide that they will only fight in a workers’ army under a workers’ government, then the bosses would be in one hell of a fix.
Of course the bosses will fight against Hitler. They’ll fight like hell to stop Hitler and Mussolini from taking their property or interfering with their profits. They don’t want the German and Italian capitalists to get the profits that come from the exploitation of the workers in the U.S. and Latin-America. That is true of the bosses of every country. They fight among themselves for profits, for colonies, for domination of the colonial people and for world markets. But they will always get together in a love feast if any section of the ruling class is threatened with the power and the might of the working class.
The workers want to defeat Hitler too. They don’t want to live under fascism. Neither do they want to live under the terror organized by their present bosses. The only road for them is the defeat of Hitler and their own bosses right here in the United States. They cannot accomplish this end in the bosses’ army. The workers have fought in many a battle against the bosses on the picket line. They must go on with this fight today. Their battle cry must be:
DOWN WITH CONSCRIPTION!
AGAINST THE BOSSES’ WAR!
FOR A WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT AND A PEOPLE’S ARMY
 









You Earned It – They Got It




Corporation


Net Profits
During
First Half
of 1940


 


Increase
Over
First Half
of 1939


 


%
Increase




United States Steel


$36,315,003


$34,344.692


1743.




Remington Arms


    1,219,000


    1,075,000


  746.




Republic Steel


    6,449,453


    5,366,142


  495.




Tidewater Oil


    5,904,865


    4,698,455


  388.




Glen Martin Aircraft


    4,291,490


    3,323,866


  343.




Youngstown


    2,423,212


    1,877,019


  343.




Minnesota Paper Co.


    1,120,788


       881,852


  327.




Atlantic Refining


    5,266,000


    3,913,000


  289.




Bethlehem


  21,698,457


  15,466,471


  247.




Douglas Aircraft


    3,388,857


    1,992,065


  142.




Commercial Solvents


    1,046,551


       608,451


  138.




Libby-Owens-Ford Gloss


    5,176,748


    2,521,935


    95.




General Electric


  25,871,572


    9,501,380


    58.




Caterpillar Tractor


    3,509,514


    1,194,134


    51.




Chrysler


  30,494,274


    5,148,503


    23.




E.I. DuPont de Nemours


  46,853,695


    6,982,160


    17.




General Motors


115,575,460


  12,588,929


    12.




American Telephone and Telegraph


  44,933,952


    4,563,033


    11.






Suck Phenomenal Profits Out of Working Class Toil
Look at the figures. They tell a story that every worker can read and understand. Those figures say – in millions of dollars profit – that war and patriotism pay in cash if you are on the right side of the fence, if you live on the right side of the railroad track, if you are a member of the ruling class. In their semi-annual reports the owners of the factories, mills and banks say brazenly and clearly that they are on their way: on their way to repeat the grab and plunder of 1914–1918.
Look at those figures again. Look at the profits of U.S. Steel. Thirty-six millions in six months! Bloody Tom Girdler, of Republic Steel, did well by his stockholders too. They, all did well; aircraft, oil, automobiles, electrical, rubber, chemicals, munitions, paper, glass and public utilities.
The fat-bellies got those huge profits out of the toil of the workers: white workers and Negro workers, male and female, “alien” and “citizen,” protestant, Catholic and Jew, little children and old men and women. They all went through the mill and while they were grinding out these profits they all looked alike to the boss.
 
Who Made the Profits?
The bosses and their stooges in Congress, on the capitalist press, in the churches and in the schools will tell you that these profits are the reward for saving and thrift, intelligence and good management. They lie. These vast profits are the result of your labor. The workers created this wealth but they didn’t get it. The workers got only a few crumbs, just enough to keep them strong enough to go on working and creating more wealth. The big shots took all the vest and called it profits.
What will the owners of the big corporations do with these tremendous profits? The Department of Labor announces that the cost of living for workers has gone up. Will these profits go for increased wages and shorter hours? No, not if the workers let the bosses get away with their present plans. The National Conference Industrial Board, employer research organization, is right now openly demanding a fifty hour work week. They say this will be “temporary” and that they have no desire to interfere with the gains labor has made. They want the fifty hour week they say, because this will increase production 25%. It isn’t production as such they are interested in, but profits and dividends. A 25% increase in production may mean as much as 40% increase in profits the next six months over the past six months.
 
Where They Go
What else will they do with these millions of dollars of profits. They will use it to pay spies, thugs and stool pigeons. They will spend part of it for barbed wire, guns and tear gas.
For million dollar election contribution to the Republicans and Democrats. They know that both Willkie and Roosevelt are their men.
An official of the Union Electric Company, subsidiary of the North American Company, has just been ordered to jail for five years in St. Louis for using the corporation’s money for political corruption. The North American Company, giant utility holding company has just announced a $21,000,000 profit for the year.
To pay for luxuriant quarters for their dogs on the new U.S. liner America. These dogs will have porcelain baths, grooming tables, clean blankets, medicine chest, and printed menu from which the dog’s food may be selected. The dog’s temperature, pulse and the condition of its eyes, nose, mouth and chest will be observed daily. Dog quarters are on the sun deck and have tiled floors. They will use these profits for million dollar weddings. For castles on the Hudson, estates on Long Island, winter homes in Florida, summer homes at Newport and town houses in New York. For yachts, automobiles and gold-plated bath-tubs.
 
They Fatten – We Starve
They will do all of these things with these war profits just as they did during and after the last war. They will seek to cover up and hide their waste and luxury by claiming that their gaudy social affairs are for the benefit of European refugees. What refugees? For the sons and daughters of the workers of England? No. The children who are coming today arrive with their nurses and governesses and tutors. J.P. Morgan comes down the gang-plank with little eleven year old Lord Primrose and takes him to his estate to be safe from Hitler’s bombs.
All of these things happen while 70,000 black and white forest workers labor for as little as ten cents an hour. While whole families work in Minnesota lumber camps for $10 a week. While thousands of Negro workers are chained to the slave farms of the South and New Jersey. While unemployment remains at 10,000,000. In a country where the mother in an unemployed family kills herself and six children because the family has nothing to eat. Their only comfort was a headstone for the graves paid for with money collected by the neighbors.
This is by no means the whole story. But this is enough. Every worker knows full well what the next move is. The main task is to get those profits into the pay envelopes of the workers. This doesn’t require long arguments with the bosses. What is required however is stronger union, unification of the labor movement, a greater militancy and determination.
The workers should demand more wages and they should not be modest in their demands. The money is there. The bosses are getting theirs.
Organized labor has one powerful weapon through which the workers can enforce their demands. This is the strike. They should not permit this weapon to be dulled or taken from them.
Big business is on strike today. They are striking for more wages (profits) for themselves. They are striking against the government. They are holding up Roosevelt’s “defense” program, refuse to make airplanes until their guaranteed profit is raised from 7% to 10%.
They are on strike all along the line: against the Wagner Act, the Walsh-Healy Act, the Wages and Hours Act, they are on strike against every single gain that the workers have made. They make a big noise about patriotism, but strike because their patriotism isn’t paying what they want.
Don’t give up the fight for higher wages! Don’t let them fool you with sly talk about patriotism and holding up the “defense program.” Don’t get caught with the “fifth column” trick and start a witch hunt in your own union and among your fellow-workers. Just keep going over those profit figures. Tell the boss that’s what you want to discuss with him.
 



Mr. Willkie on the Role of Labor
Last week Wendell Willkie journeyed to Pittsburgh to deliver a campaign speech to the workers of the nation. It was Mr. Willkie’s bid for the workers’ votes on November 5. It was a queer and interesting speech. The candidate began, as politicians have a habit of doing when they are running for office or making July Fourth orations, with a tribute to Lincoln. He quoted Lincoln’s saying that “labor is prior to and independent of capital. Capital is only the fruit of labor, could never have existed if labor had not first existed. Labor is therefore the superior of capital and deserves much higher consideration.”
Now we don’t pretend to know what Lincoln had in mind when he uttered these words. We do know that Lincoln was the leader of the young Republican Party of his day; the party of emerging northern industrial and finance capitalism. We know that this party played a progressive role during the days of the struggle between the “North” and the “South.” It was progressive then, because it was the political expression of that group in society that wanted to develop industry, expand machine production, build railroads, factories, cities and develop a market for their products. They wanted to develop their plan with the wages system, the “free worker,” the private ownership of property and their control of exchange and distribution. They would emancipate the slaves and set the workers “free.”
This was the system of capitalism entering the final conflict with the slave economy of the South. The two systems could not live together side by side. The Civil War was the result with the victory of the Republican Party and northern capitalism.
Both Roosevelt and Willkie, the Republican and Democratic Parties are the heirs and defenders of this victory of capitalism. On this platform they have moved closer and closer to each other. The industrialists and Republicans of 1860–65 took Lincoln’s words about labor no more seriously than do the industrialists and capitalist politicians of today. Despite the progressive character of the position taken by the North and the Republican Party of 1860 they had no illusions about the priority of labor or labor deserving higher consideration than capital. The northern industrialists were out to establish their own priority and that is what they did. The white workers of the North and South along with the freed slaves became “wage slaves” and that is what they remain today.
 
Worried About a House—The House of Morgan
Willkie said in his Pittsburgh speech that be stands with Lincoln, he himself has earned his bread by the sweat of his brow. He therefore understands the bond that binds those who labor. But says Mr. Willkie, “this bond should not lead to war upon business, or upon property.” You see Mr. Willkie owns some property, he is the head of a huge utilities system that has millions of dollars in property. He is backed by Ford and other people who hold millions of dollars in property. He doesn’t want the workers to misunderstand Lincoln’s words.
Mr. Willkie tells us that he sweated to earn his daily bread just like any other worker. He is one of us and we mustn’t have any ideas about taking his power plants. It isn’t nice to take the belongings of another worker. (Remember, that Mr. Roosevelt too joined the labor movement in his “we must not give up our gains” speech before the teamsters convention.)
“Property is the fruit of labor (he didn’t say whose labor); property is desirable; it is a positive good in the world.” (We don’t know as we don’t have any power plants and Fifth Avenue apartments.) “Let not him who is houseless pull down the house of another, but let him work diligently and build one for himself ...” There you are, the trouble with the workers in the U.S. and the rest of the world is just laziness. If we were diligent and thrifty (like the bee and the beaver) we too would have Fifth Avenue apartments, Hyde Park estates and power plants.
 
Apples in the Garden of Eden
Mr. Willkie, if he is elected president, will make this country into a Garden of Eden. This land will bloom and blossom like the roses of Sharon. Everybody that wants a business will get one.
Mr. Willkie will give birth to an expanding economy (all by himself), but labor must help. The workers must be willing to become partners in this grand and glorious expanding “free enterprise.” There must be “good relations” between labor and industry. He doesn’t want to change the National Labor Relations Act immediately. “The trouble lies in the main, not in the act but with its administration.” We must have a labor board that will give the free enterprisers a break, because the Willkie expanding economy will be a partnership. A just labor board would “help people to work together” say for example, the workers and Messrs. Ford, Girdler and Weir. And if we remember correctly the NLRB has stirred up a little trouble at some of Mr. Willkie’s power plants. This must be true for his workers could not possibly have any reason for complaint.
“There should be some decentralization of Federal Government activities in the labor field, because each locality knows its problems best.” You see Mr. Willkie, his finance Minister, Mr. Weir, his pal Mr. Lamont and others have plants and factories scattered through many states. The thing to do is establish labor boards, wage and hour boards, ad social security boards in every community where these plants, mines, mills and factories are. These boards should be composed of the outstanding citizens in each industrial community. There would be boards in Weirton, W. Va. (unincorporated), and in all steel centers. There should be boards in the cotton regions of Mississippi and Arkansas to handle the grievances of the white and Negro sharecroppers. There should be little boards in all the regions where Mr. Willkie has his power plants. These would be far superior to the central boards in Washington because they would be closer to the scene and “each locality knows its problems best.”
The next to the last point made by the candidate is his suggestion that “labor and management ... incorporate into their contracts, of their own volition, provisions for a cooling-off period, a delay before they commence their economic weapons’ use.” This is to permit good will and brotherly love to get under way. If the workers will just cool off and be satisfied with present wages and hours then the bosses will cool off also and refuse to buy any more tear gas, machine guns or sawed off shot guns. If the workers will mail their grievances to the boss and then refrigerate for six months, the boss on his part will also take to the ice box and forget all about the police, the national guard, injunctions and lock-outs. Mr. Willkie feels very deeply about this for “where the principles of collective bargaining are really understood and really accepted by both parties, this would seem to me to be feasible.”
After going into tears over “coercion by unscrupulous employers” and “crooked racketeers (are there any other kind?) who have found their way into the labor movement” the candidate closed his great Bill of Rights for Labor with the ringing declaration:
“I propose a triumvirate of labor, agriculture and business — one for all, all for one.”
 



Boss and Worker Mean Different Things by “Respectability”
Following the sentencing of the racketeer labor-faker, George Scalise, to Sing Sing for a minimum of ten years, the new president of the building service workers international, announced a clean-up in the union. The first step of President McFetridge was to suspend the officers of Local 32-A in New York. This local has jurisdiction in the hotel field. McFetridge asked Mayor La Guardia to appoint a “receiver” for the local. He also appointed an investigating committee to look into, the union’s affairs.
President McFetridge announced that it is his intention to establish “sound, democratic, well-directed, ethical unions ... every member’s rights must be recognized and protected ... we cannot effectively carry out our purposes, unless, we are a responsible, law-abiding organization with, self-respect and decency.” We subscribe to these sentiments. We believe that unions should be democratic institutions and that the rights of the membership should be recognized and protected. We believe that unions should conduct themselves with self-respect and decency. But in order to be clear on these things we make a few remarks. First, as a step in the direction of cleaning house in the international and establishing democracy was it necessary to ask Mayor La Guardia to intervene? La Guardia is not a trade unionist, is not part of the trade union movement. He is a boss class politician and office-holder and his interests are with the class which he represents. If it is necessary for Local 32-A to have a “receiver”, the appointment should be made by the International executive board of the union or by the Executive Council of the AFL. This is labor’s job and not the function of ruling class politicians.
Next we suggest that just because there are some racketeers in the unions many of whom have been caught and jailed by the capitalist courts/ this is no reason for union leaders to get the jitters and begin leaning over backwards to become “respectable.” What’s respectable to employers, government officials and numerous elements of the “public” might be some tame, non-militant outfit that was always ready to compromise with the bosses and never breathed a word about a picket line. Workers’ can’t afford to accept and practice this kind of respectability, and “decency.”
As members of the working class, unions, must establish their own code of “self-respect,” and “decency.” The working class has its own “morals” and “ethics” just as the ruling class has its “morals” and, “ethics.” What is decent for a trade union under certain conditions would be considered very indecent by the boss. When the boss runs scabs into a plant on strike under the protection of the police, the strikers consider it decent, ethical, responsible and self-respecting, to give the scabs some working-class education, even by the use of a little pressure. The bosses however consider such conduct very indecent, irresponsible and unethical.
Them are times, too, when the workers must establish their own legality. There are times when workers can not accept the bosses’ “law.” Workers’ organizations can not always remain passively “law-abiding.” If workers had always been “law-abiding” according to the terms, of ruling class law, there would be no trades unions in the world today. There would be no Wagner Act, no Wages and Hours Act, no Social Security. Wages would be far lower than now and hours would be much longer. Workers have made the gains they, have through the decades because they opposed the ruling class and fought every step of the way. Since nothing fundamental has changed in the relationship of the workers to the bosses, there is no reason for the workers to change from the procedure that has brought them, their victories.
 
“Energy and Devotion” – But for What Purpose?
Labor, official organ of 15 railway unions, has come to the defense of Sidney Hillman in the dispute going on. over the “informal” statement of the Attorney-General, to the effect that employers must abide by, decisions of the NLRB until those decisions are overruled by the courts. Speaking of the hearing before the notorious Smith Committee of the House, Labor said – “As a member of the Advisory Commission, he (Hillman) has served his country with exceptional energy and devotion. While Smith has been sniping at labor laws, Hillman has been building up national defense.”
We are always glad to see one labor leader come to the defense of another when one of them is attacked by the bosses or their stooges. We too will defend Hillman or any other labor leader against such attacks. But this doesn’t settle the matter.
The praise of Hillman by Labor is somewhat vague and unclear. Hillman “has served his country with exceptional energy and devotion.” What does this mean? As we have observed him, Hillman is serving Franklin D. Roosevelt, his presidential candidacy, and the bosses’ war preparations with “exceptional energy and devotion.” To us this is not the same thing as serving one’s country unless Labor means that the bosses and their government are the country. Labor, of course, being s working class paper does not hold to this view.
There are some workers in the U.S. and we hold that their interests are not being served by Hillman or any other labor man who is promoting the candidacy of Roosevelt or Willkie and their preparations to lead these workers into imperialist war. And that is what Hillman is doing, and he is doing this with “energy and devotion.”
Hillman said to the Smith Committee that his “first responsibility is to help carry out the defense program. I wouldn’t stay on the commission if I felt I impeded defense in any way.”
There’s the rob: Hillman is a leader of workers and he has no business on this alleged defense commission. His first responsibility, as a labor leader, in the present crisis is to be at the head of his union fighting for workers’ rights over against such fellows as Knudsen and Stettinius. If Roosevelt, Knudsen and Stettinius thought Hillman was this kind of person he would never have been appointed to the “Defense” Commission. On this commission he represents Roosevelt and the ruling class, not the working class.
All this came out very vividly when the big shots opened fire on Attorney-General Jackson and, Hillman. Both of them turned and began running like scared boys. Neither of them meant any harm. They had been misunderstood. Hillman agrees that the. workers should not be unreasonable, they must make concessions, nothing must be done to impede defense in any way.
It’s the old story: you can’t run with the hare and the hounds at the same time. You just can’t reconcile the interests of the workers and the interests of the bosses. Lots of labor leaders tried that and failed long before Hillman, Green, Tobin and Hutchinson.
 



You See, There Are Ways and Ways of “Helping”
Along with many of the rich and powerful who shed tears of gratitude over “our brave boys who have come to the defense of our way of life.” Governor Lehman of New York added his bit. “All of us can help in some way. We can encourage our sons in meeting their responsibilities willingly and cheerfully ... A law creating a selective service and training system has been adopted by Congress and signed by the President after full discussion and consideration. It is a thoroughly democratic system. It plays no favorites. It gives equal responsibilities to those in every walk of life ...”
A few days before the governor made this speech it was revealed in the U.S. Senate that the Lehman bank, of which the governor is a partner (of course he “resigned” when he took office), had bought thousands of shares of stock in big steel corporations. The Lehman bank bought 10,000 shares of Bethlehem, 6,000 shares of Republic Steel, 10,000 of U.S. Steel and 4,000 of Youngstown Sheet and Tube.
To be sure the governor is anxious to “insure this nation from becoming a victim of aggression.” He wants the workers in the army to protect those 30,000 steel shares. The workers created that wealth for the governor while slaving in the steel mills. Now he is anxious that they go to war and protect it. The governor and all his kind have their patriotism securely tied to their pocket books and “we who are about to die” are bamboozled into believing that we are going to war to fight against fascism and for democracy.
This speech of Lehman’s is an insult to every man in the draft and every other worker. “All of us can help in some way.” That’s right. We can go to the army for $21 a month and get butchered. Those of us who remain at home can be kicked around in the factories or in the bread lines. That’s the way we can help. Governor Lehman and his class will help too. Yes Sir. They will make millions of dollars out of the war, out of “defense,” out of the “American Way of Life.”
The conscription act was adopted “after full discussion and consideration.” Who discussed it and who considered it. Who signed it making it a law: the masses of the workers? Not these, but the rich and their stooges in Congress and the White House. The workers are against conscription and the war. They have no interests whatsoever in protecting Lehman’s 30,000 steel shares.
The Thirteen Families will agree with Lehman. He and Roosevelt are their spokesmen. Here they are and the wealth the workers hove created and permit them to keep.



Ford


 


$624,975,000




Dupont


573,690.000




Rockefeller


396,583,000




Mellon


390,000,000




McCormick


111,102,000




Hartford (A & P)


105,702,000




Harkness (Oil)


104,891,000




Duke (Tobacco)


89,455,000




Pew (Oil)


75,628,000




Pitcairn (Glass)


65,570,000




Clark (sewing machines)


57,215,000




Reynolds (Tobacco)


54,766,000




Kress (Dry Goods)


50,044,000



This is not all of the wealth of these “robber barons” but only the “value” of the stock owned by these families in the corporations they control. Their total wealth in land, buildings and bank deposits is many many millions of dollars more. It was for the benefit of these scoundrels that Lehman made his insulting speech to the conscripted workers
 
Let LaGuardia Go Chase a Fire Engine!
Last week we commented on the affairs of Local 32A. Hotel Service Employees Union (AFL). The international president, McFetridge, asked Mayor (Hop-a-Long) LaGuardia to name a “receiver” for the local and removed the officers. The officers of the local have advised Mr. LaGuardia, in polite language, to attend to his own business and keep out of the union’s affairs. We don’t know anything about the merits of this union situation. We don’t know whether or not removal of its officers was warranted or whether or not a “receiver” was necessary. But we do know that it is none of LaGuardia’s affair. The union should tell him this in such positive terms that even he would refrain from this type of meddling and confine his publicity seeking to attendance at fires, Canada and shouting for Roosevelt. We don’t have to be acquainted with the inner affairs of the union to understand that we do not turn to ruling class politicians to settle quarrels within our ranks.
 
These Boys Do All Right – Without Working
Big corporations are beginning to report on their “earnings” for the past nine months. Patriot Tom Girdler’s Republic Steel “earned” $12,633,333 the first nine months this year, over against $3,898,651 the same period last year. Libby-Owens-Ford Glass Co. “earned” $7,314,781 this nine months against $3,902,516 last year. American Telephone and Telegraph Co. (Bell System) “earned” $204,093.251 for the 12 months ended August 31, 1940. This is $27,956,344 over last year’s profits. AT&T sent out dividend checks amounting to $48,045,287.
The profit of AT&T for each of the 18,686,794 shares was $10.92. The regular dividend rate of this corporation is $9.00 a share.
In order to befuddle workers and to cover itself, the AT&T puts out a fake story that no one owns more than one per cent of the corporation’s stock. Perhaps so, but what does this mean? There are 18,686,794 shares outstanding. One half of 1% therefore would be 93,233 shares. Even one fiftieth of 1% of the total shares would be about 3,737 shares.
These simple figures illustrate what a fake this corporation attempts to put over. They try to make it appear that the company is owned by hundreds of thousands of people including employees of the company. Of course there are thousands of people who own a few shares of AT&T. There are many people who own a hundred, 200, 500 shares. The fact is however, that AT&T is owned and controlled by the few people who own twenty-five, fifty and 75 thousand shares each. Furthermore, these big stockholders are the bandits who pocket nearly all of the forty-two millions in dividends just paid.
A workers government and a workers army would destroy this racket. The wealth created by the workers would be returned to them in wages, houses, schools, hospitals, parks, theatres, etc. They would get enough to eat and clothing to wear. Not a damned cent would be paid out in dividends and interest to the 13 Families, the “60 Families” or the “200 Families.” If they got anything to eat, or a house, or clothing they would have to work like any other human being.
 
Hijacking – By the Best Means and People
As an illustration of the manner used by the ruling class to accumulate wealth without working for a living we call attention to a bond issue on which New York City is forced to pay interest until the year 2147.
A community that was later absorbed by New York City issued 7% bonds in 1867 amounting to $278,000. These bonds are now an obligation of New York City. By “law” the bonds do not mature until 2147. The securities found their way to the strong boxes of some of the “old families” and today are held by their their estates and descendants.
The total interest payments on these $278,000 worth of bonds will amount to $2,468,435. This amount of money goes to the “old families” and their estates. The “people” can do nothing about this piece of fancy hijacking. The “law” says the city must pay interest for 206 years longer.
 



A Point Raised by Jimmy Walker’s New Job
The appointment of ex-Mayor Walker as “impartial chairman” of the garment industry in New York brings up the whole question of trades unions and arbitration. Walker is to get $20,000 a year. No announcement was made on this point but if the usual practice is followed the salary will be met jointly by the International Ladies Garment Workers Union and the industry. The steel workers union follows this same procedure whenever “arbitrators are appointed;” the unions meeting one half of the bill.
Unions should get rid of this business of “impartial chairmen and arbitrators.” There ain’t no such animal as an impartial chairman in the conflict between the workers and the boss. The “impartial chairman” is always a member of the ruling class and therefore a stooge for the bosses. It makes no difference whether the so-called impartial chairman is a shyster with a shady past like Walker or some lily pure “liberal” outside the labor movement. The workers’ representative will be outvoted 2 to 1. This for the reason that the two things just don’t mix: the interests of the workers and the interests of the employers. They are two different camps and cannot be reconciled. The workers must deal directly with the bosses through committees of their own choosing. They must present their own demands to the boss. If the negotiations break down, then they must decide themselves what to do next. They may decide to strike. They may decide that the time is not right for a strike. Whichever is the decision it should be made by the union without the assistance of any alleged impartial arbitrator from the ruling class.
The unions cannot delegate this decision to anyone outside their ranks, not even to the government. If the workers had not pursued this independent course in the past they would not even have the right to organize today. Because at one time they were jailed for the terrible crime of “conspiring to raise their own wages.” In New York City it is becoming increasingly customary to call in Mayor La Guardia to settle disputes between the workers and the employers. The “Little-Flower” “settled” the painters strike, the latest bus strike and is now busy with several disputes involving the electricians.
Whether the workers realize it or not, all this feverish haste to get strikes “settled” is tied up with the “defense” program. The government and all the ruling class leaders want to keep the workers quiet and at work. The workers want to keep steadily employed also, but there is another item they are interested in: WAGES AND HOURS. The workers want more wages and shorter hours. The bosses don’t want to pay more wages and they are against shortening the hours. The workers can win these demands however if they quit monkeying around with arbitration boards and “impartial chairmen.” We must never forget that we are the majority and it is we who man the mines, mills, factories, trains and ships. Not a wheel can turn without us.
 
Got Sick When He Was Caught
Howard Hopson, former big shot of the billion-dollar Associated Gas and Electric System has been sent to Bellevue Hospital for ten days for mental observation. Hopson is the guy who faces trial for stealing $20,000,000 from Associated Gas and Electric. He has bought up a bunch of high priced lawyers and six medical fakers. These “professional” men claim that Hopson is “mentally unfit” to stand trial at present.
We would not attempt to say that Hopson is not sick. He may be insane. But he didn’t get sick or crazy until he was caught. Perhaps the fine cigars he bought with money stolen from Associated Gas made him dizzy. After all, a man can buy a big batch of Corona Coronas for $20,000,000.
If a worker steals a loaf of bread or a pair of shoes for a barefoot child he’ll land in the hoosegow without benefit of big lawyers or six doctors. A worker steals because he is a thief and has no respect for private property. A big shot industrialist or financier steals because he is mentally unbalanced.
 
When The Shoe Began To Pinch
Having received permission from the Interstate Commerce Commission to work drivers up to sixty hours a week, the bus companies are now trying to get the sixty hour week extended to mechanics and other non-driver classifications. The International Association of Machinists and the Amalgamated Association of Electric Railway and Motor Coach Employees are opposing this step. They have the 42 hour week under the Wages and Hours Act and they want to keep it.
It seems that the IAM and the ASERMCE did not get heated up over this matter until the shoe began to pinch them. The way for the non-driver crafts to protect themselves is to make a vigorous fight for the drivers to come under the maximum Wages and Hours 42 hour week. This will protect all workers in the industry.
 



PITTSBURGH. – Once again the Communist Party and its Unemployed Councils have demonstrated themselves to be ineffectual instruments for promoting the united front with other unemployed organizations. For different reasons the same criticism can be directed against the Socialist Party and the Unemployed Citizens League in Pittsburgh.
The story begins about two months ago when the Allegheny County Emergency Relief Board decided to set up a central complaint bureau to be called the “Public Relations Office” (P.R.O.). The A.C.E.R.B. ruled that relations of the unemployed organizations should be with the P.R.O. only and that in the future no unemployed committees would be admitted to the relief stations.
Before the Public Relations Office had been publicly announced, the Relief Board called for a meeting of the unemployed organizations. The Pennsylvania Unemployed League (P.U.L.) in Pittsburgh, had information that this meeting was called for the purpose of telling the unemployed leagues of the board’s intention to establish the P.R.O. The P.U.L. immediately sent a letter to the Unemployed Citizens League (U.C.L.) which is led by the Socialist Party, suggesting that the U.C.L. and the P.U.L. get together before the meeting with the board and lay plans for meeting with the P.R.O. The U.C.L. did not reply to this letter and each unemployed organization went individually into the meeting with the A.C.E.R.B. At a subsequent meeting the P.U.L. presented a counter-plan to the P.R.O. and was the only organization to make definite and concrete counter-proposals.
About one week after the first meeting with the board Robert Lieberman, S.P. leader of the U.C.L., sent out a letter to all unemployed organizations suggesting a meeting at U.C.L. headquarters to organize a united front against the P.R.O. When Lieberman was asked why he had not replied to the P.U.L. letter his reply was to ask, “How did you know what was going to be discussed at the Board meeting?”
 
On the Line
The P.U.L. decided to go into the united front called by Lieberman and the U.C.L., along with the Unemployed Councils, and the Rank and File Veterans. We insisted that our united action must not be directed against the P.R.O. as such but must be a demand for the admission of unemployed league committees to the relief units.
The P.U.L. began to picket relief stations in support of this demand. At the East. Liberty relief station the pickets were arrested. The police contended that there could be no strike of the unemployed and that therefore they had no right to picket. Furthermore, the police took the position that the picket line of about fifteen, was a “parade” for which a permit was necessary.
 
Not a Parade
Despite the arrests the picketing was kept up. At the time the hearing for those arrested was in progress the picket line was still on duty. At the hearing, despite urging from the police, the magistrate decided that a picket line was not a “parade” and that the unemployed could not be stopped from using this form of protest and demonstration. Thus the P.U.L. established the right of its members to be on the sidewalk in front of a relief station.
While the P.U.L. was leading this militant action the Unemployed Councils in the united front committee were advocating a county-wide demonstration to be conducted both inside and outside the relief stations. Some of the unemployed were to demonstrate outside while others were to lay siege to the inside. Out of its experience the P.U.L. knew that such methods would prove futile and defeatist on a county-wide scale. We had tried them and knew that other tactics were more effective. The U.C., the U.C.L. and the Rank and File Veterans voted to ignore this experience. The P.U.L. decided not to participate in the demonstration.
 
And It Failed
The demonstration was called and was a failure. At only two stations was there any action worth while. There are 10 stations inside the city. At the South Side station about 200 workers turned out but no leader or speaker either from the U.C. or the U.C.L. showed up.
At the time these South Side workers – most of whom belonged to the Unemployed Councils – were loafing around the relief station waiting for the “speakers” to come, the two Unemployed Council leaders who had advocated laying siege to the relief stations, were busy resting in the headquarters of the U.C.L. over one mile away.
 
Forgot Rank and File
At a meeting of the Unemployed Council the next day, one leader made the statement that the demonstration was a failure because the P.U.L. had refused to participate.
After a five week’s effort the P.U.L. discovered that the rank and file of the U.C.L. and the U.C. had never been informed what the united front was all about.
 
What Councils Wanted
There was plenty of evidence for the conclusion that the U.C. was only interested to put Lieberman “on the spot” and to push their everlasting schemes for forcing merger on the other organizations.
The P.U.L. decided to discontinue participation in such tomfoolery and sent a committee to so notify the next united front meeting. In this meeting the P.U.L. delegates were surprised to discover that rank and file members of the U.C.L. and U.C. also had come to the conclusion that it was not a genuine united front. Speaker after speaker from the U.C. charged that the rank and file did not know what was going on, that their leaders had given no information or directions to the membership and that they were finding it very difficult to get the members to demonstrate. Collins, the best militant in the U.C.L., charged that the U.C. leaders only showed up on Sunday at the committee meeting.
After these speeches E.R. McKinney delivered the decision, of the P.U.L. When he had finished a U.C. member made a motion that a leaflet be distributed exposing him before the workers.
 
U.C. Hatchet Men
Then one of the U.C. hatchet-men, took the floor and made a provocative speech in which McKinney was called a “scab” and likened to a “strike-breaker”. This speaker contended that the P.U.L. was composed of “honest workers” and that they must be taken away from the P.U.L. leaders.
After this speech the Unemployed Council speakers who had severely criticized their leaders and called the united front a “fake” decided that not only were their leaders OK but that the failure of the united front could be laid solely at the door of the P.U.L. Not the “honest workers” in the P.U.L., of course, but their leaders.
The P.U.L. is going ahead with the work of organizing and fighting for relief. They are catching up on ground lost while the united front was being attempted. Three concentration points in the city have been established in which large and strong locals are being built.
 



What It Takes to Work a Farm
The editor of Nation’s Business, writing in the May issue of that magazine, says that government reports that one-fourth of the farm families are undernourished are nothing more than maudlin propaganda. The editor must have spent all his time in the office of Nation’s Business: He says: “We’ve never seen a farm family – owner, tenant or sharecropper – who couldn’t raise a vegetable garden and truck patch if they were willing to exert the necessary elbow grease ...”
Well, there is no defense against stupidity and really no way to refute it: The editor of Nation’s Business is an ass, braying around as is customary with assess. We would like to see this stooge of big business trying to raise a vegetable garden or truck patch on one of the window sills in his office. Then he would discover how easy it is for a cotton region agricultural laborer to raise a garden without land. But perhaps this gentleman has never heard of the thousands of agricultural laborers who own no land and work for 75 cents a day.
He is wrong also about the tenant farmers and share-croppers. It takes more than “elbow grease” to raise a garden or truck patch. You have to have seeds, implements and land. You have to have time to work the land and something to eat while the crop is maturing. Also, you must live in a country and under a government that does not permit tenants, share-croppers and agricultural laborers to be robbed and murdered by cotton planters.
We don’t understand how “elbow grease” can do away with these evils: unless by elbow grease one means militant and planned action against the cotton planters by the workers in the cotton fields. This is the only kind of elbow grease that will even begin to get food, clothing and shelter for the share-croppers, tenant farmers and day laborers. But of course the editor of Nation’s Business doesn’t mean anything of this sort when he talks so glibly about “elbow grease.”
 
Who Says Government Workers Can’t Strike?
The dispute between the subway workers in New York City, who belong to the Transport Workers Union, CIO, and the city government will be passed on by the courts. That is. the court will render a decision saying whether or not these workers, as city employees, have a status as to collective bargaining, different from that of workers in private industry. The union claims the right to collective bargaining with the city. Mayor La Guardia and the Board of Transportation say no, since they are civil service employees. The city as well as the Civil Service Reform Association say that these workers are “public employees” and therefore can not demand the same rights as they demand from private employers. This means that workers employed by any government have no collective bargaining rights and of course no right to strike.
This type of reasoning of course is very flabby. In the first place, the civil service set-up is by no means a guarantee of equitable treatment from the “public” employer. The Civil Service Reform Association itself in the same report in which it claims that the subway workers are not entitled to collective bargaining rights chastises Mayor La Guardia for violation of the civil service law. This body claims that the mayor, even after court orders directing him to displace certain employees of the Welfare Department, has failed to do so. The report says that “even merit system-minded executives occasionally yield to the pressure of patronage seekers.” Therefore, how can the subway workers believe that this so-called merit system will not function against their interests?
What is more important, though, is the question of the relationship between a governmental authority and the trade unions. The claim that municipal, county, state or federal employees can not form themselves into unions and bargain collectively, and strike if it is found necessary, is based on the theory that the government is some impartial and neutral body. It is a “public” authority established by the people, workers and employers alike. Workers can not bargain collectively with this authority because it is a public authority and the workers are part of the “public,” They can’t strike against the government because this would be a violation of an agreement, of a contract. Also, the government is something above the battle; it is outside and above class and class strike.
All this of course is just so much twaddle which will be hauled out for use in the case of the strike at the North American Aircraft Company in California. The bosses and La Guardia and Roosevelt know that it is twaddle. If workers don’t bargain with and strike against the government when the government is the employer, whom will they bargain with and strike against? Certainly not against some private employer for whom they are not working.
The government in a capitalist country is the government of the capitalist class, it is a capitalist government. The President, Congress and the courts are the general executive board of that capitalist ruling class. The government fights in the class struggle on the side of the bosses. That’s why there is an army, marines and police. If nobody ever went on strike against a government there would never be any basic social change. Capitalism itself could never have triumphed, if the capitalist class of the 17th century had believed it, when the feudal lords told them: “You can’t strike against the government.” The capitalists did strike against the government. They overthrew feudalism and the feudal governments and established capitalism and their own government. If, in 1775, the American colonists had submitted to the warning of the British ruling class that “you can’t strike against the government,” there would be no USA. This whole land would still be a British colony and exploited by the British ruling class. Our early capitalists decided that they and not English capitalists should exploit American workers. They went to war against the British government and the British ruling class and drove them out. They didn’t stop at a mere “strike against the government.”
The subway workers of New York City are far more modest and considerate than were the early capitalists in dealing with the feudal lords, feudal governments, and with England. They don’t want to drive La Guardia out and displace the New York City government. They only ask that government to recognize their union and bargain collectively.
Should the federal government take over the North American Aircraft plant the workers will expect the government to recognize their union and. agree to collective bargaining. The workers will also demand the right to strike if they can not come to agreement with the government. Certainly the capitalists and their government don’t expect the workers to agree to accept less.
If the workers do accept less then they will find that all the unions will be smashed. All that is necessary to accomplish this is for the government to take over a plant as soon as a strike is called. The army will move in; the picket lines will be smashed and the unions will be finished. Then the workers in the U.S. will have no more to protect them than the workers in Germany have today.
 



A national committee of Negroes, headed by Walter White of the NAACP and A. Philip Randolph of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, has issued a call to Negroes for a mass march on Washington, July 1. The committee calls on Negroes all. over the country “To March on Washington for Jobs and Equal Participation in National Defense.”
The march is to be a mass protest against Jim-Crow and discrimination: a protest against Jim-Crow and discrimination both by the federal government and private industry. The demonstration will revolve specifically around the “defense” program. The demand is made for participation of Negroes in that program without discrimination.
The Workers Party endorses these demands and the organized mass march on Washington to enforce the demands. Such organized mass protests and demonstrations will produce results for the Negro people. Militant mass demonstrations will not only influence the government but private industry as well. This is the kind of language they understand. Thousands and tens of thousands of Negroes massed in Washington will be an impressive sight. The government will know why they are there and the big employers of labor will know why they are there.
Roosevelt and his government know that there is Jim-Crow in the government. The employers in the so-called defense industries know that they are barring Negroes from employment in their factories. Both the federal government and the employers perpetrate Jim-Crow and discrimination on the Negro as a matter of national policy. Roosevelt and the employers know this all too well and it is not necessary to use much ink and paper to tell them so. The situation has been analyzed again and again. The time has come to change it.
 
All Must Participate
We hope that the committee in charge is determined to go through with the march and demonstration and that it will be a militant mass demonstration. We hope that Negroes will come from every corner of the land: sharecroppers and tenant farmers from the South; students and teachers from the Negro colleges; porters and janitors and railway employees; government workers, doctors, lawyers and preachers; housewives, coal miners and steel workers; mechanics and Negroes from every field of employment.
We wish that the statement of the committee had been clearer and more forthright on the question of the war and the economic basis of Jim-Crow and discrimination. This “Call to Negro America” says, that these are days of disaster “to democracy and freedom and the rights of minority peoples ...” The fact is that not only are the rights of minority peoples involved, but also the rights of the vast number of the majority peoples. For the present Second World Imperialist War is being fought between the great imperialist nations to determine which group of imperialists shall dominate the whole world; and not only the “minority peoples.” The Negro in the United States is caught up in the imperialist war drive just like the colonial people of Africa and India, and the workers of all the great and small capitalist countries.
Negroes can not escape from this imperialist net of misery, war and exploitation alone. They cannot by “their own power” alone “break down the barriers of discrimination against employment in national defense.” They can not alone “kill the deadly serpent of race hatred ...” or “smash through ... government, business and labor union red tape.” Jim-Crow in government and industry or in the labor unions is not a matter of “red tape” but one of the basic tenets of exploiting capitalist society in the United States. In the long run it is a fundamental operation of capitalist society that Negroes must “smash through” and not just bureaucratic “red tape.” The Negro can not accomplish this job alone.
What he can do alone is to begin a mass protest, such as the march on Washington, that will demonstrate that he is alive, awake and determined to fight militantly against Jim-Crow. This will, draw support for Negroes in their struggles, especially from the white workers.
 
Roosevelt Won’t Help
There is no question that if Roosevelt took a firm stand against Jim-Crow, there would be improvement in conditions. But an “executive order” from Roosevelt “abolishing discrimination in all government departments ... and national defense jobs” would not abolish discrimination any more than the Constitution and Civil Rights Bills “abolish” discrimination and Jim-Crow.
In the first place, neither Roosevelt nor the Roosevelt government has any real interest in abolishing Jim-Crow and discrimination, Roosevelt’s primary concern today is to lead the American imperialists to victory over the German imperialists. There can be no doubt that Roosevelt and his class plan to drop a few extra crumbs on the Negro’s plate to keep him quiet and make him a willing soldier in the imperialist war. The committee says that “We believe in national unity which recognizes equal opportunity of black and white citizens to jobs in national defense and the armed forces, and in all other institutions and endeavors in America.” The Workers Party believes firmly in that kind of national unity also but we don’t see it any place; we have never seen it, and we don’t expect to see it, under Roosevelt’s or any other capitalist government. National unity is only a cover under which the imperialists hide and conceal their real aims and intentions while the workers, white and black, do the fighting.
 
Where Is the Enemy?
The committee condemns “all dictatorships, fascist, nazi and communist. We are loyal, patriotic Americans all.” Well; we are against fascism and we are against Stalinism. We are against fascism and Stalinism in Germany and Russia and we are against fascism and Stalinism in the United States. We don’t believe however that to condemn the enumerated “dictatorships” will go far toward getting American Negroes their political, social and economic rights. It isn’t the “dictatorships” of other countries that oppress the Negro in the United States! We haven’t noticed any mobs coming over from Germany or Italy to lynch Negroes in the United States. It isn’t the fascist party of Hitler which keeps the anti-lynching bill from passing, but the Democratic Party of Roosevelt and the Republican Party of Willkie. The name of the head of the government that winks at Jim-Crow in the federal government is not Hitler but Roosevelt.
And so, condemning “dictatorships” 3,000 miles away isn’t going to aid in getting us past the dictatorship that oppresses the Negro right here in the United States.
The “Call” mentions Nat Turner, Denmark Vesey, Gabriel and Harriet Tubman. Good. We believe that these are good examples to hold up to Negroes and to all workers. The committee is correct; these Negroes “fought, bled and died” for freedom. The “Call” says they, along with Crispus Attucks, died for “the emancipation of Negro slaves and the preservation of American democracy.” However, we have the impression that Nat Turner and the others were not much concerned with “American democracy.”
”We sternly counsel against violence and ill-considered and intemperate action and the abuse of power,” says the “Call.” We are certain that there will be no violence, from the Negro demonstrators and “abuse of power” can only come from the Washington police or the Roosevelt government army. The Negro marchers will have no power to abuse. They will be in Washington, correctly, to demonstrate and protest against Jim-Crow.
 
Through Sweat and Blood
The committee points out that “our valiant and heroic forebears won the rights for Negroes to enjoy the priceless gift of freedom ... they won it through tears, toil, sweat and blood.” The “Call” points out correctly that this is a challenge to Negroes today. It is not so easy, however, to fit Nat Turner, Vesey, Gabriel and a few other Negro fighters of days past into some of the ideas of the committee. Nat Turner didn’t put in much time contemplating or condemning the oppressive governments of Europe in his day. He had an uncanny knowledge what government and what group it was that was oppressing him and the Negroes of his day. And we are of the opinion that Nat Turner, Vesey and Gabriel did not shed many tears. “Toil, sweat and blood,” yes, but not tears. That was a luxury they left to the other side.
The statement of the committee closes with a “call upon President Roosevelt, a great humanitarian and idealist, to follow in the footsteps of (Lincoln) to take the second decisive step ... and free American Negro citizens of ... Jim-Crowism in government departments and national defense.” We have never considered Roosevelt “a great humanitarian and idealist.” We remember his boast that it was he, when Assistant Secretary of the Navy, who wrote the Wall Street constitution for Haiti, after that little country had been stabbed and trodden under foot by U.S, marines. It is also Roosevelt who is leading this country into imperialist war for the benefit of that same ruling class he served when he wrote the constitution for little Haiti.
Also, we are not unmindful of the fact that Lincoln, “his noble and illustrious predecessor,” freed the slaves as a war measure. Lincoln was the servant of the rising American capitalism of his day. Roosevelt is the servant of the decadent and rotten monopoly capitalism of his day. Lincoln and the young Republican Party led the country to war against the South and the slave system in order to build the foundations of industrial capitalism in the United States. Lincoln expressed this by saying that his main task was the preservation of the Union, and that no nation could live half slave and half free: That is: two systems of labor, free and slave, could not exist side by side. The Civil War was fought to decide which system should prevail. Roosevelt, as the servant of today’s class of monopoly capitalists and imperialists, will not free American Negroes or the white workers. He will only forge stronger and heavier chains about the Negro and the white workers as a true representative of his class. This country is about to engage in a war to determine whether or not the Negro and white workers of the world and the colonial peoples shall be exploited and crushed by England and the United States or by Germany. The workers, white or black, can have no interest in choosing one group of exploiters over against another. We have already pointed out that the exploiters and lynchers of the Negroes are right here in the United Slates. Here is the place for the Negroes to do their fighting. The enemy is at home.
 
In Nat Turner’s Spirit
The Negro should fight for immediate demands just as the trade unions fight for immediate demands. He should fight for jobs and equality: against Jim-Crow, discrimination and disfranchisement. He should demonstrate and march and protest. He should prove to the country and to the white workers that he is ready to fight in mass formation. Negroes should prove to the white workers that they are ready not only to fight their own fight but the general struggle of the working class. They should call on the white workers to join them and they should join the white workers in the great struggle for the complete liberation of the working class of the world. This will carry the fight beyond any immediate demands, beyond a mere demand for jobs in capitalist war industries or for equal rights under a capitalist government. In this epoch Negroes as well as white workers can have no finer heroes than the great Negroes of the past – who fought against oppression and for freedom: Nat Turner, Denmark Vesey and Harriet Tubman.
 



Rockefeller Expects a Return on His Investment
John D. Rockefeller, who is all for United States entry into the war, has given $100,000 to the United Service Organizations. This is the organization that has as its function the providing of recreation for the army and navy. Mr. Rockefeller, speaking at a dinner in New York to raise funds for the drive, said that he had always considered giving to charity and social service organizations an “investment.” That is, such giving brings a return to the giver. Mr. Rockefeller said that the return was satisfaction in knowing that some service had been rendered to those who had missed many of the good things of life.
There is adequate basis for the belief that this is not all the returns that Rockefeller and others receive from such investments. Rockefeller came out for the war right at the time when Hitler’s troops were approaching Iraq, Asiatic country where Standard Oil owns 90,000 square miles of oil lands. Of course, therefore, Rockefeller wants to raise the morale of the troops. Morale to him means the willingness to go docilely to their death fighting to keep that oil land from falling into the hands of the German imperialists.
This must be a very pleasing outlook for the workers in the various Standard Oil plants scattered all over the United States. These workers have a fight right here to win better working conditions, union organization and the defeat of the company unions maintained by Standard Oil.
All that Rockefeller has done is give a hundred thousand dollars for checkers, dominoes and pool tables for the soldiers so that they will play instead of sit around wondering whether or not they will be sent to Asia to protect that 90,000 square miles of oil lands.
 
Another Symptom of What’s Happening in the AFL
The scrap between the Brewery Workers International and the executive council of the AFL is about to be brought to some sort of conclusion in the courts. The fight has been going on since 1933. The Brewery Workers, before the coming of the CIO, along with the Miners, was the only industrial international in the AFL. They included all the workers in and around the breweries. In 1933 the AFL executive council ordered the Brewery Workers International to transfer all drivers to the International Brotherhood of Teamsters and the brewery engineers to the Union of Operating Engineers. The brewery union refused and was suspended. The union then went to court and won. The AFL appealed to a higher court and the lower court was reversed. The brewery workers later got a stay of action. They are holding on today under that stay of action when the final court order is issued they, will be out of the AFL unless they give up the teamsters and engineers.
Should the Brewery Workers International abide by the decision of the AFL and the court their union will be smashed. That is, if they lose the drivers and engineers the union will be so weakened that the remains will be ineffective against the brewery owners: It is fairly certain that they will not submit. This means that either they will remain independent or go to the CIO.
Significant things are happening in the AFL. The International Typographical Union voted to remain independent. Local 544 of the teamsters in Minneapolis has bolted to the CIO. The brewery union will in all probability get out. AFL and CIO machinists are acting in unison in the San Francisco shipyard strike. They have just voted to remain on strike against the demands of the “Mediation” Board.
 
”Law” Makers in a Lather Against Labor
The two houses of Congress got on their white horses last week and. dashed off in all directions against the unions. The “law” makers worked themselves up into a white heat on the sins of the unions. Holman of Oregon wanted all strikers put into the army and forced to work in the plants under military command. Byrd of Virginia threw in an amendment saying that strikes during the “defense” emergency are “contrary to sound public policy and are condemned by the Senate.” This amendment passed after a little softening. It was rewritten to include lockouts and refusal by employers to accept collective bargaining. The Connally amendment then was put through. This amendment is a “rider” to the new $10,000,000,000 army appropriation bill. It directs Roosevelt to take over all plants in which strikes occur or are threatened. Even if the President suspects that labor trouble is about to occur he can take over the plant.
The final result would have been far worse if some of the congressmen with at least a minimum of common sense and decency had not interposed vigorous objection to the amendments offered by such sterling stooges as Joe Starns of Alabama and Howard Smith of Virginia. Starns wanted to bar all workers who had been on strike for ten days from receiving any portion of the appropriation. Even Hatton Sumners of Texas got scared and refused to support the Starns amendment. Sumners is the poll tax congressman who suggested electrocution for strikers. Hatton has probably discovered that the workers are not afraid of his threats.
There is no doubt that the militancy of labor had a great deal to do with the “defense” of labor put up during this debate by its “friends” in Congress. The workers must not put too much dependence on the continuation of this “support:” The bosses and of course many of their stooges are worried today. There is division in their ranks. They were heartened when Roosevelt ordered out the army but they are not certain what the reaction of labor will be. The bosses have no taste for the kind of picket lines the workers have thrown around their plants. They fear that these picket lines will swell. And, too, the workers might begin devising ways and means for dealing with the army of strikebreakers.
 
FTC Catches Ford on a Fast One
Not only has Ford been gypping the workers in his factories but the car buying public also. The Federal Trade Commission ordered the old scoundrel to stop telling lies in his advertising about the low interest rate charged purchasers of his automobiles. Ford advertised that buyers paid only 6 per cent interest when they bought one of his jalopies on the time payment plan. The FTC found that Ford really charged 11½ per cent interest. Ford appealed to the federal court but the FTC was upheld. Of course the capitalist press did not feature this. It was afraid of losing the fat Ford advertising contracts.
 
And the Cannery Workers Got Gypped Too
The canners have been holding up their government by refusing to bid on army orders for canned foods unless they- were released from the provisions of the Walsh-Healy Act. Then the government decided to buy supplies in the open market. But the jobbers were good “pay-triots” also: They ran up the prices. Then the braided stuffed shirts in the War Department decided that the only way out was to ask the cannery workers to consent to the demands of the canners.
The cannery unions, both CIO and AFL, foolishly decided to yield to the War Department generals. They keep the basic 40-hour week but give up time and a half for overtime. This really means giving up the 40-hour week. There will be overtime but it will be paid for at the straight 40-hour rate. The unions, also stipulated that this should last only during the 1941 canning season.
These unions say they are doing something to aid the “defense” program. All they have done is give the canners the opportunity to increase their profits at the expense of labor. These workers are among the most exploited in the country. Their wages are extremely low and the work is seasonal. What do the canners care today about the 1942 season? They are looking out for the season of 1941. That is what the worker’s and their unions should have done. The workers can’t eat in 1941 on what they think they are going to get in 1942.
 



Labor Should Serve Notice on Anti-Labor Bills
The war between Russia and Germany may get Congress into such a dither that the lawmakers will shift their attention from such pet items as the Vinson Bill to certain aspects of the Lend-Lease Bill and “unfreezing Russian credits.” We should not, however, let up in our vigilance in connection with the anti-labor legislation, especially the Vinson Bill. This vicious proposal imposes compulsory arbitration, a 30 day or longer “cooling off” period while a dispute is before the “Mediation” Board, revival of the court injunction and criminal penalties for violation of Board decisions. All Board decisions are final and binding.
Also, there is the Connally amendment to the Draft Act which makes striking in a “defense” industry a criminal offense. The Vinson Bill and the Connally amendment taken together would wreck every union in the country that is in any way militant. Labor would be faced with the alternatives of accept or enter into a head-on clash with the government. Every strike in “defense” industries would be “a strike against the government” with all the usual demagogy, flag-waving and hysteria. These bills would give the government and the bosses three strikes on labor and there would be no way out except open defiance of the “law.” Workers should make no mistake about this: They would have only two alternatives: shut up, or oppose the government. AND WE CAN NOT AFFORD TO SHUT UP.
The renewal of power of judges to grant injunctions is in itself enough to liquidate any effective union action. If judges had had such authority at the Ford strike, they could have killed the strike completely if the workers decided to abide by the injunction. All some judge would have had to say was that there must not be more than 25 pickets at each gate. An assault on these few pickets by thugs hidden inside the plant would have broken the strike.
Not only should the bills be defeated but labor must serve notice on Congress that the unions will not be hamstrung by any such strike-breaking devices as the Vinson Bill and the Connally amendment.
 
”Necessary?” – We Want to Know for What
The press reports that the Pacific Coast Bay Area shipyards strike may be settled this week. This is the strike that John Frey attempted to break by inviting the marines to drive through the picket lines. Frey rode through on a navy truck under the protection of the marines. Since this heroic adventure Frey has faded out and has not been heard from Since. We presume that he is vacationing in Canada.
The commandant of the 12th Naval District, one Greenslade, issued a statement saying that the navy is opposed to the use of force “unless it becomes absolutely necessary.” And so was Roosevelt in the case of the North American strikers. He only sent the army in because the workers refused to return to work until the company had come across with a wage increase. The army forced these workers back into the plant with bayonets that presumably had been given to these soldiers to use against the undemocratic Germany and other enemies of civilization.
 
No Bayonet Charge on Robber Barons
Charlie Schwab, who died a couple of years back and departed for the place reserved for pillars of the republic, is steadily and progressively being revealed for what he really was: a boss class bandit of the old school. It has just been discovered that this fine, upstanding citizen, sterling example to American youth of the successful business man, had defrauded a small Catholic college in Pennsylvania of the tiny sum of $25,000. The head of the school reports that Schwab asked the school to borrow the $25.000 for him. He never repaid the money, so now the school is stuck with the debt plus $2,000 interest.
The trustees of Schwab’s estate say that he died flat broke and that everything he left will not pay the expenses of liquidation. If this is true, it is very revealing. We seem to have another Insull and Van Sweringen affair. All this is part of the rottenness of capitalism. The workers labor and toil for the benefit of the crooks and gamblers in high places.
The Insull mines are still producing coal; his public utilities still provide heat, light and transportation. The Van Sweringen railroads still carry passengers and freight. The vast Bethlehem Steel Co. is turning out steel and ships. The workers created these things, and they are enduring. Labor could create a great deal more if it had the opportunity and was not frustrated by the boss class that uses its position to exploit, rob and steal for private profit.
Like many another “robber baron,” Schwab was always a crook. He lashed the workers to produce more and more for less and loss. He was also one of the country’s leading pay-triots during the last war. We have a poster used in that conflict which pictures Schwab standing among some of his workers and saying: “Men, you are not working for me, you are working with me.”
Early in his career, as one of the darlings of Carnegie, Schwab took some condemned armor plate, filled blowholes with putty and sold this rejuvenated plate to the navy while obliging government inspectors were out for a glass of beer. Some of the navy’s first line battleships were “protected” by this putty filled armor plate. Even after this. Schwab was placed at the head of the government shipbuilding program during the last war. In this post Schwab renewed his looting activities.
Government auditors reported that as a $1.00 a year head of the shipbuilding program Schwab cashed personal expense vouchers amounting to as much as $250,000 a month. But this wasn’t enough: Schwab’s Bethlehem Steel Co. had to get some of the government gravy also. There is a suit before the Supreme Court in which Schwab’s government seeks to recover millions of excess profits taxes withheld by the company during the First World War. Schwab gave big contracts to his own company and then cheated his government out of the excess profits taxes.
This happened during the First World Imperialist War but similar things are happening today. The bosses with the big “defense” contracts are exploiting, stealing and robbing as of old. In most instances they are not using the older and cruder methods but the results will be the same. And up to now there has been no threat to use the army against these bosses. The bayonets are reserved for workers who are asking for only a few dollars more in the weekly pay envelope.
 
Goodyear Signs Union Agreement
The Goodyear Rubber Co. has signed its first agreement with the United Rubber Workers. This is an important victory but was overshadowed by the signing of the Ford contract. The agreement provides an increase of 8 cents an hour for all workers getting less than $1.01 per hour and 7 cents for those getting over $1.01 per hour. Piece work rates are boosted 7 cents.
 



We’ve Got Our Own Idea, Mr. Roosevelt
In his speech last week threatening to start a real “shooting war” President Roosevelt gave a warning to “labor”. He said:
“The actual production and transportation of machinery of defense must not be interrupted by disputes between capital and capital, labor and labor, or capital and labor. A nation-wide machinery for conciliation and mediation of industrial disputes has bean set up. The machinery must be used promptly – and without stoppage of work. Collective bargaining will be retained, but the American people expect that government conciliation and mediation services will be followed, both by capital and labor.”
The capitalist press, the bosses and the labor haters in Congress were especially “impressed” by this part of Roosevelt’s speech. They should be, because the sentiment expressed by Roosevelt was right up their alley. That is what the bosses and their stooges have been saying for months. We will leave to Roosevelt the settlement of disputes between “capital and capital.” That’s a quarrel inside his own family. We don’t want to interfere there. But the disputes between “labor and labor, or capital and labor,” that’s our business and we don’t grant Roosevelt and the bosses the right to say the deciding word. Disputes within the working class and its organizations must be settled by the workers without the “assistance” of the bosses or the bosses’ capitalist government. This includes the disputes between the AFL and CIO, as well as the jurisdictional disputes that arise inside organized labor.
Roosevelt said that the mediation machinery must be used without stoppage of work. That is, Roosevelt demands and attempts to enforce a “cooling off” period. If the workers have grievances that have not been adjusted with the employer, they must automatically be submitted to the Mediation Board before a strike is called. This, of course is a plain strike-breaking attitude. Workers should reject this procedure completely.
The primary relationship of the workers is to the employer, not to the Mediation Board. If a union cannot reach an agreement with the boss and its demands are rejected, then the union should call a strike and go through with it. Of course production should be stopped. That is the basic method for labor to win its demands; stop production, which means stopping the bosses’ profits.
All the hokus-pocus about “defense” production is only a trick to fool labor. The bulk of the profits of the bosses now are coming from this so-called defense production; this production of war materials is for the imperialist war. Capitalist profits leap to the skies but the workers are told that they should make sacrifices. A worker making guns, airplanes and bullets gets just as hungry as one making paper novelties and silk hats. If there is to be sacrificing; let the bosses do it. They’re the one getting the big profits from the war.
Roosevelt says that “collective bargaining will be retained.” Collective bargaining will be retained if the workers insist. It wont be retained just because Roosevelt says so. Labor will “retain collective bargaining” by the use of the same methods used to get it: organization, militancy and the strike. Roosevelt didn’t give labor collective bargaining, and he cannot take it away unless labor goes to sleep and puts its case in the hands of some phony outfit such as the Mediation Board.
 
Bill Green Wields The “Big Stick”
Roosevelt showed labor the mailed fist and following his speech the Executive Council of the AFL fell in line with its own Big Stick. Against the bosses? Not on your life; not Green, Wall, Frey and Hutchinson. Green and the Council pledged the support of the AFL for aid to Britain, and as a measure of “sacrifice for the national defense” agreed to the President’s command for submitting disputes to mediation before striking.
The Council said that it would discipline all directly-chartered organizations and would urge internationals to take similar action. this is an interesting decision by the Council. No one has been able to get such positive action from Green and the others in connection with racketeering in the AFL. According to Green, the Council and the convention were helpless. Green went so far as to ask the FBI to assist the Council in cleaning out the racketeers from the AFL. The Council couldn’t rid the organization of Scalise and the other racketeers who infest the AFL. We suppose too that George A. Browne was present at the Council meeting that passed this resolution, calling off strikes in the AFL. Browne is a member of the Council and president of the Theatrical Stage Employees. He is a racketeer who has recently been indicted by a federal court for extorting $550,000 from the movie industry. That great labor statesman and incorruptible citizen, Willie Bioff was also indicted along with Browne. Willie has just completed a six months jail sentence for pandering.
Green and his Executive Council can’t clean out the racketeers, crooks and panderers from the AFL but they can get tough with the militant workers who want to raise their wages. Of course Green, the Executive Council and the racketeers in the AFL don’t need to raise their wages and shorten their hours. They are fat and well-dressed.
Green and his friends have sold out completely to the bosses on the question of supporting the imperialist war. AFL workers must be prepared for the rankest type of betrayal from this gang. They have been sold down the river. Any efforts of militant AFL workers to better their condition during the war, will have to be carried on with the full knowledge that Bill Green will be against them.
 



MY POSITION on the “Russian Question” is substantially and fundamentally the one outlined by Comrade Shachtman in The New International of December 1940. That is, I hold (a) that Russia is not a workers’ state, (b) the bureaucracy is a class, and (c) defense of the U.S.S.R. under certain conditions cannot be excluded. It is my belief that the position of Comrade Johnson – that Russia is a fascist state – must be rejected completely. Johnson’s position, in my opinion, must be rejected not only for the reason that it cannot be sustained by any of the known and accepted canons of Marxist criticism and analysis, but also for the reason that Johnson has not succeeded in giving logical or theoretical validity to his position and his arguments. In my opinion, his proof (elucidation) is inadequate. At times his presentation is inexcusably flippant and irresponsible. This is particularly the case when he is polemizing against Comrade Trotsky. I will take up some of these points in detail later.
This question of the nature of the Russian state, now being discussed by the Workers Party, is one of profound importance, not only for the party itself but also for the world working class. Involved are the validity of the struggle for socialism, the theoretical bases of that struggle, its tactics and the possibilities for victory of the proletariat on a world scale. The question therefore is not an abstract one. This is especially true today, hi the period of the Second World Imperialist War, when the world working class, disunited, shattered by doubt, and fearful of a Hitler victory, is being mobilized in the interest of the international bourgeoisie. It is our duty in the circumstances, therefore, to approach this question seriously and attentively.
 
The Nature of the Workers’ State
My first contribution to this discussion is given the title, What Is a Workers’ State? This is the principal question we have to answer. In summary, the Trotskyist movement reduced the answer to that question to the effect that a workers state is one in which the property is nationalized. According to this definition and according to numerous theses and articles on the question, the political regime was eliminated as a factor to be taken into consideration in arriving at this answer. Nationalized property was believed a sufficient condition for characterizing such a state as a workers state.
The most determined advocates of this position ignored the element of control and often hurled imprecations at all who dared insist that control of the state apparatus and the instruments of production should be considered fundamental factors in determining whether or not Russia is a workers’ state. Inquiring individuals were met in the sternest manner with such rebuffs as: “If it isn’t a workers’ state, then what kind of state is it? Marx only mentioned two kinds of states: workers’ state and bourgeois state.” This was expected to silence the inquirer, scare him away from any outlying deviations and keep him safe within the fold. If this did not succeed, the next approach was to call up all the renegades from Marxism and Bolshevism, dangle them over the head of the doubter, and then inform him that he was about to take the same road into the ranks of the bourgeoisie.
Those of us who now comprise the Workers Party rejected this approach and this attitude as bureaucratic and doctrinaire. We said that we wanted to examine and re-examine our position on the Russian question. We wanted to go over the steps and the reasoning by which we had reached our position on the Russian question. We wanted to re-appraise some of our premises and relate them to concrete historical events in the Soviet Union. This, to us, meant the application of the basic principle of Marxism, its methodology, in the analysis of the nature of the Soviet state today. This I take it is what Marx intended his theory to be and what he tried to impress on the future Marxists.
There was not then, and is not today, a doubt in our minds as to the validity of Marxism, the correctness of Bolshevik theory and practice, or the permanent eminence of Comrade Trotsky in the field of Marxian theory and practice.
 
Can Quotations Decide?
In my opinion it is not productive to approach this question by a servile appeal to quotations. A battle of quotations will not clarify and educate anybody. To proceed in this manner is to turn Marx into a Hebrew prophet and Das Kapital into sacred and authoritarian scripture. Quotations are useful when used for illumination. They fall short of their best value when injected merely to prove a debater’s point or to refute another quotation. In The New International for April 1941, Comrade Trotsky in the piece on Tradition and Revolutionary Policy, makes a significant reference to this manner of using quotations. He says:
“Leninism consists in not looking backward, in avoiding being bound by precedent by purely formal reference to quotations ... Lenin cannot be chopped up into quotations suitable for all cases in life, because for Lenin the formula is never higher than the reality, it is always the instrument that makes possible grasping the reality and dominating it. One can find in Lenin, without difficulty, dozens and hundreds of passages, which, formally, seem to contradict one another. But it is necessary to see not the formal relationship between one passage and another, but the real relationship of each to the concrete reality in which the formula was introduced as a lever. The Leninist truth is always concrete.”
The name of Marx can be substituted for Lenin in the passage quoted.
 
What Bolshevism Believed
For some, Russia will remain a workers’ state as long as the property is nationalized. No matter how much the workers are oppressed and straight-jacketed, no matter to what extent the bureaucracy seizes power and control, no matter that the Soviets are destroyed and the party transformed into an instrument of the bureaucracy, no matter that the political rule of the proletariat has been completely liquidated, Russia could be and would be a workers’ state so long as nationalized property remained. I do not believe that Lenin ever held such a view as this. As far as I have been able to learn, Lenin never based his political analyses on formal definitions divorced from concrete conditions and experience. It is difficult to believe that Comrade Trotsky held any such view as this in the post-Revolution days or at the beginning of the Stalinist régime. The leaders of the October Revolution did believe that political control of the state by the proletariat must accompany the nationalization of the property. This consideration is especially important when we – as we must – relate nationalized property to the manner of its nationalization: namely by virtue of the power of the proletariat acquired through the successful October Revolution. In my opinion, these two events go together and must not be separated.
The aim of the masses, of the proletariat was political and economic freedom: to gain political liberty and the material necessities of life. The Bolsheviks knew, however, that such a consummation was not a simple attainment. Tremendous expansion of the forces of production would be necessary. The necessary prerequisite was the revolution which would place in the hands of the proletariat the power to nationalize the bourgeois property, thus transforming it into state property. The revolution was the first step in a process leading to a classless society. The goal was socialism and all that socialism connotes: political freedom, economic security and high cultural opportunity for the masses.
For a time after the revolution the Soviets were a reality. The party was a living and potent force. The Russian proletariat had entered the “preparatory regime” that would lay the basis for the withering away of the state. If this had not been the case then nationalization would have been a fraud and a mere seizure of control by a clique. After October, Russia entered a transition period under the guidance and leadership of the Bolshevik Party. The party was dominant but it was a living and active party of the masses.
 
The Stalinist Era
With the ascendancy of the Stalinist bureaucracy the party and the Soviets were destroyed (Johnson and Macdonald would perhaps say that the party existed “in form only”). The transition to socialism was halted. In the midst of the transition period, with collectivised property as a foundation, a bureaucratic regime triumphed.
In my opinion it was at this point that Russia ceased to be a workers’ state in any sense whatever. This is not a question of dates, or of “interpreters,” but of the whole meaning and content of socialism. The victory of October was achieved under the leadership and on the program of the Bolshevik Party, and with the slogan of “all power to the Soviets.” But with the destruction of the Soviets, the liquidation of the party and the distortion of the program, Russia ceased to be a workers state, even in the sense in which Lenin had called it a “workers and peasants’ state with bureaucratic deformations.” Nationalized property is necessary but not sufficient. In the transition period nationalized property must exist jointly with political control by the proletariat through the democratically operated party and other working class institutions.
Russia is not a workers’ state but neither is it a capitalist state. Perhaps we cannot say now what kind of state it is. This would not be fatal except to those who disagree with Trotsky that “neither October, Brest-Litovsk, the creation of a regular peasant army, the system of requisitioning food products, the N.E.P. nor the State Plan were or could have been foreseen or predetermined by pre-October Marxism or Bolshevism.” It will only prove fatal for those who believe, with Johnson, that “... Stalinist Russia is the greatest affirmation of his (Marx’s) analysis of capital hitherto seen.”
 
Russia in Transition
Russia is still in the transitional period. In that sense it might be called a transitional state. I do not mean by this that the Stalinist bureaucracy is a transitional regime, that is, transitional to socialism. We can say that it is temporary but not transitional. On the foundation of the collectivized property and the removal of the bureaucracy along with the reconstituting of the party and the other organs of workers’ power, the development toward socialism can be renewed. This is what is important and meaningful, not labels and definitions.
In The New International for April 1941, Comrade Johnson, after saying that after 1936, when all power was lost by the proletariat and the social relations were such as to keep Russian economy and society “in a state of permanent crisis,” adds that “Stalinist Russia, like American capitalism, is transitional to crisis and collapse and to nothing else.” It is very difficult to understand what Johnson means here. If he is saying that the Stalinist regime is not transitional to socialism, then we can agree with him. But to say that it is “transitional to crisis and collapse and to nothing else” doesn’t tell us anything, or at least, very much. Johnson also passes over the crises and the constant imminence of collapse of Soviet economy under Lenin and Trotsky. Has Johnson ever heard of the serious crisis that motivated the trade union discussion, or that which motivated the N.E.P.? And does Comrade Johnson think that Stalinist Russia as well as capitalist America are near “collapse”? It appears that collectivized property is a far more powerful factor than Johnson thinks. Furthermore, there are yet several alternative developments possible for American capitalism which might save it from “collapse.” It seems to be Johnson’s position that the Stalinist bureaucracy adopted fascism to save Russian capitalism.
 
Twists on Wage-Labor
Comrade Johnson is out to prove that Russia is a capitalist state and is no longer in a transition period. It was a “transitional state” under Lenin. But Johnson finds that today “in Russia the proletariat is a class of wage-laborers.” And further, “this predominance of wage-labor makes the means of production capital.” But Comrade Johnson isn’t so certain about wage-labor in Leninist Russia. “Was there wage-labor in Leninist Russia? In form only; or yes and no, as is inevitable in a transitional state, but much more no than yes.” Now which was it? Was there wage-labor under Lenin. Of course there was. And it isn’t “much more no than yes.” How could it have been otherwise in the circumstances, with the struggle for existence still a stern reality: in a “bourgeois state,” albeit one “without a bourgeoisie.”
How did the transition from the Leninist to the Stalinist period take place? What was the quality of this transformation by which Russia today is a capitalist state? Johnson says:
“The rule of the proletariat created a new economy ... whereas in a capitalist society the basic relationship is on the one hand wage-labor and on the other hand means of production in the hands of the capitalist class; in Leninist Russia the relationship was: the form of wage-labor only on the one hand because on the other were the means of production in the hands of the laborer who owned the property through the state.”
What does Comrade Johnson mean when he says that the means of production are “in the hands of the capitalist class.” Means of production in the hands of the bourgeoisie has heretofore meant that they own it. This ownership by one class and the absence of ownership by the other class made it necessary for that class to work for wages. It is true that this was not the dominant form of wage-labor under Lenin. But is it the dominant form of wage-labor under Stalin? Does this form of wage-labor exist at all today in Russia? That is, does the Stalinist bureaucracy own the instruments of production in the sense of capitalist ownership?
Johnson says that under Lenin the means of production were in the hands of the “laborer” who “owned the property through the state.” Does the Stalinist bureaucracy today own the property through the state? Johnson might argue this because it is his contention that Russian collectivized property under Lenin was progressive only because it was a workers’ state. (Johnson ignores the manner of collectivization after a proletarian revolution, and confuses this with the “statification” of capitalist property by a bourgeois government.) In his reasoning he totally ignores the structural economic changes wrought by the revolution. For that reason he is unable to describe the economic mechanics of the return or degeneration to capitalism.
 
Germany and Russia
Later Comrade Johnson remarks: “In Germany and Russia the ruling class possesses, uses as its own, and for its own interests the means of production.” What does “possesses” mean here? Does he mean that the bureaucracy in Russia owns the property and in the same way that the German bourgeoisie owns German property? In the United States, do Knudsen and Sloan possess General Motors or do du Pont and Raskob? In Germany, who possesses the iron works at Essen, the Krupps or the fascist government? Unless we are ready to accept the Burnham “managerial” thesis we are forced to say that in the United States and Germany the capitalists and not the managers possess (own) the property.
In some places Johnson seems to say that there is no private property in Russia; therefore no capitalist. He writes: “Stalin, contrary, contrary to Trotsky’s persistent premonitions, strengthens state property, but if private property were restored in Russia tomorrow ,it would inevitably be statified again.” Again: “Of capitalist barbarism, Stalinist Russia is a forerunner.” What do these statements mean? Is Russia capitalist, or isn’t it?
 
Juridical Details
But Comrade Johnson hasn’t finished yet. He does a little injudicious twisting. In The New International for December 1940, Comrade Shachtman asked why Hitler, who is bold in other spheres, should halt when he faces the “juridical detail” (the quotations are Schachtman’s) represented by private ownership of the means of production. Next he wrote: “Private ownership of capital, that ‘juridical detail’ before which Hitler comes to a halt, is a social reality of the pro-foundest importance.” It is obvious that “juridical detail” is a quotation. (I think it emanates from Macdonald’s article on German fascism.) It is also textually dear that that “juridical detail” is what is known in elementary grammar as a parenthetical clause. The sentence is: “Private ownership of capital ... is a social reality of the profoundest importance.”
Now what does Comrade Johnson do in his haste? He asks of Shachtman: “... why may we not call the bureaucracy a capitalist class of the same economic type as the German bourgeoisie?” Says Shachtman: the “juridical detail” of ownership is of the “profoundest importance.” Then Johnson continues: “This is indeed the magnification of a juridical relationship into the basis of society.” And: “So capitalist society depends on Hitler’s not changing that juridical detail, in fact for Shachtman, capitalist society is that juridical detail, ownership.”
Here we have an excellent illustration of Comrade Johnson’s “method,” his hopeless confusion and the muddle which can be created when one chops Marx up into quotations and fails to understand the relationship of the quotations to the concrete reality.
 
Ownership and Private Property
Comrade Johnson ran into a rather stiff barrier in his attempt to get proof that Russia is a capitalist state. There stood the question of ownership and private property and the collectivized property in the Soviet Union. He stubbornly attempts to dodge the question per se, progressive and the necessary foundation for socialist achievement.
One can sympathize with Comrade Johnson’s horror at Stalinist barbarity, the condition of the Russian workers, the liquidation of their institutions and all the counter-revolutionary aspects of the Stalinist regime. We agree fully that the trend under Lenin was entirely different from the trend under Stalin. But none of these things can prove (explain) that Russia is a capitalist state. In my opinion all that Johnson proves is that Russia is not a workers’ state. But to say as he does that it is a capitalist state is to do violence to all the fundamental Marxian criteria by which we judge such questions. One is privileged to revise Marxism; it has been done before and will be done again, but we would like to have it straight in front of us so that we know what it is we are discussing.
 
Is Russia a Fascist State?
Comrade Johnson claims that Russia is not only a capitalist state but also a fascist state. Germany and Russia are identical types of states: both fascist. Comrade Johnson did not always believe this. In The New International for July 1940, he wrote an article, Capitalist Society and the War. In that article Comrade Johnson makes what he himself calls “the Marxian analysis” of fascism. He wrote:
“The iron law of such a method of production (capitalist) is the accumulation of profits in the form of capital leading to an ever greater concentration.” The fascists “compelled (he bourgeoisie to invest a portion of its profits in armaments. The system, however, remains a capitalist system, in the method of production, the use of labor-power as a commodity, the inevitable accumulation of capital, the need for imperialist expansion. The bourgeois investment in armaments is in reality a form of investment in colonies and new industrial opportunities which the armaments will win for them.” (Italics in original.)
Continuing, Johnson says:
“The nature of bureaucratic power and the extent of its revenues are subordinate to the essential features of capitalist production in Germany ... it (fascism) is capitalism in its last stages ... such is the Marxian analysis of the question ... it places the working class at the mercy of the capitalists in regard to wages and working conditions ... Germany needed an expansion of agriculture, but the Nazis carefully guarded the property of the Junkers ... after all, fascism is the government of finance-capital in decay.”
Johnson adds, still speaking of fascist Germany, that:
“There has been a redistribution of income and a shift in political power, which afford scope for close study, and periodic revaluation. But through all the changes, the fascist bureaucracy, even when Bonapartist-fashion it makes gestures, concrete and symbolic, to other classes, preserved the fundamentals of capitalist society in our day, the profits of finance-capital ...”
 
Johnson on Germany
This is the way Comrade Johnson described capitalism and fascism last July. He called it “The Marxian Analysis” of fascism. In Germany capitalism is one thing; in Russia it is something else. In Germany fascism is the government “of finance-capital in decay.” In Russia, however, all that is necessary to have fascism is misery, barbarism and terror. In Germany “redistribution of income and a shift in political power” produce no basic change, but in Russia they produce capitalism and fascism.
We cannot be certain, however, that Comrade Johnson really holds to his “Marxian Analysis” of last July. For in the April 1941 New International he writes: “The German capitalist with every social relation of production, wages, trade, profit, all controlled by the state, is little more than a state functionary.” How does Johnson make this statement square with his affirmations of July; with those already quoted and the following:
“It is true that the Nazis compelled the capitalists to reinvest profits over a certain amount (my italics. – D.C.) in such industries as were indicated by the state ... but the direction of these enterprises they left to the capitalists themselves and they forbade any increase in the state administration of industry.”
It seems that it has never occurred to Comrade Johnson that a state can he capitalist and not be fascist. It is not difficult, however, to detect the source of Johnson’s difficulty. Although he is profuse in the distribution of quotations from Marx, and makes constant assertions about stern Marxian analysis, he demonstrates again and again that his thinking has been warped by the brutality and terror of the Stalinist
Comrade Johnson warns us to beware of “Trotsky’s methodology on Russia applied to capitalism.” Also Shachtman’s “metaphysical and juristic” fictions, because, “this method of thinking ... is bourgeois, and will lead us straight into the camp of the bourgeoisie.”
This is strong language and I humbly urge that Comrade Johnson meditate on that last sentence about the “camp of the bourgeoisie” in connection with his claim that Russia is a fascist state. Also I believe that the following calls for some meditation also: “After nearly twenty-five years of work and thought on the Russian question, the successor of Marx, Engels and Lenin, pursuing a consistent line, invited us to enter one of the war camps and we refused. But for the accident of circumstances we would have been on one side of the barricades and the leader of the October revolution on the other.” This is pure nonsense, but what I want to emphasize is that it is highly inappropriate and inacceptable nonsense. There are many other aspects of this question that I should like to discuss but limitations of space dictate that they be left to others or to a later contribution of my own in a future number of The New International.
 



Last week the Stalinist Daily Worker and some o the Negro weeklies carried an advertisement entitled Negroes Speak Out. The Negro papers also carried a press release, presumably from the group that was speaking out for the 15,000,000 Negroes in the United States. The Daily Worker made quite a display under a two-line, five-column head. This was the Daily Worker of Tuesday, May 27. Among the “initiators” and “sponsors” of the new group are some of the most prominent Negroes in the United States. In the list of “initiators” are Dr. Sara W. Brown, a trustee of Howard Univerity; Dr. W.H. Jernagin., president of the Baptist Young People’s Union; Dr. David D, Jones, president of Bennett College; Earl B. Dickerson, alderman, city of Chicago; Dr. A. Clayton Powell, Abyssinian Baptist Church, New York; Dr. Benjamin E. Mays, president, Morehouse College; Bishop Reverdy C. Ransom, African Methodist Episcopal Church; C.C. Spalding; Prof. Doxey Wilkerson of Howard University and Bishop W.J. Walls of the African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church.
Another member of the “initiating group” is Max Yergan, who is set down as the “director, Council on African Affairs.” Mr. Yergan is also treasurer of the movement, and those interested are asked to send contributions to him.
 
And the “Sponsors”
Among the “sponsors” are: George S. Scuyler; Rufus E. Clement, president, Atlanta University; Robert P. Daniel, president, Shaw University; J.A. Cotton, president, Knoxville College; John M. Gandy, president, Virginia State College; and J.B. Randolph, president of Claflin University. Then there are numerous YMCA secretaries, other college presidents, teachers, preachers, lawyers and other Negroes in the professions.
Also among the “sponsors” are Ben Davis, Jr., editorial board of the Daily Worker; James W. Ford, Stalinist candidate for vice-president; numerous members of the Young Communist League, the International Workers Order and the International Labor Defense. Also among the sponsors and initiators are a dozen or so Negro organizers and leaders in various CIO unions.
 
Its Purpose as Stated
The statement issued by the group bears the title: The Present Position of the Negro People in America. The declaration begins: “At this crucial stage in our country’s history there are mighty forces that seek to undermine democracy in the name of defending democratic rights.” The statement then goes on to discuss “discrimination, Jim-Crowism, segregation and unemployment.” ‘’This discrimination,” says the statement, “is in clear violation of the Constitution of the United States.” Leaders of government “have taken definite steps in the enforcing of Jim-Crowism as a national policy ... today they carry this policy one step further in the exclusion of Negro workers from jobs in defense industries ... we declare ourselves unalterably opposed to Jim-Crow as a national policy.”
The ills of the Negro population increase, but “the enactment of anti-lynching and anti-poll tax laws and the removal of all discrimination would be to Negroes a clear indication of the democratic intentions of our government. But we have been given no such indication. On the contrary, in the name of ‘defense’ our condition grows worse.” The signers of the statement have the feeling that the war has something to do with the situation and “the Negro people cannot avoid the conclusion that the war drive and the rights go together ... it is impossible for us to see how a program of ‘national defense’ can become a reality, when, in the very process, constitutional liberties are denied such a large segment of the population ... the Negro people want nothing of Hitler; they detest him and all his practices. On the other hand, the British warmakers hold Africa, India, the West Indies and other colonial areas in a cruel bondage often infinitely worse than the oppression known by Negroes in America.”
 
Another Feeble Petition
It’s really very difficult to guess what this group wants to accomplish. I know what they are talking about when they are reciting the disabilities and evils under which Negroes live in the United States. But Negroes have been doing this for the past half century. Their supplications and laments have been persistent and eloquent, George Scuyler, one of the “sponsors,” has done considerable waiting on this point. Recently he has been talking about the inevitability of socialism. The ruling class, in the United States, however, does not seem to have been much influenced by these petitions and protests. The “Negroes Speak Out” group has only presented another feeble petition.
Despite the fact that the statement recites the wrongs suffered by the Negro, the signers seem completely oblivious of the fact that there are reasons for Jim-Crow and that these reasons can readily be discovered by anyone with the intelligence and courage to look capitalism straight in the face. These Negro leaders seem to be of the opinion that American democracy is all right in and of itself (whatever that means) but that it has been distorted by a group of bad men in the government and in industry.
They talk about violation of the Constitution. Of course the Constitution is violated. Whose Constitution is it? Is it the Negroes’ Constitution or any worker’s Constitution? If the Negroes or any other workers’ group had framed this Constitution they would have the power to enforce it. This Constitution is the organic law of a certain capitalist state, a certain imperialist state: the United States. The capitalist class which operates that state bends the Constitution to serve its own class purposes and protect its own class interests. It is not in the interest of the ruling class to eliminate Jim-Crow. Jim-Crow today is one of the pillars of capitalism in the United States. Its main function is to maintain and intensify the separation of the white and Negro workers so that there will be no solidarity in the working class.
 
“Our Government”
They talk about the “democratic intentions of our government.” The democratic intentions of our government are to protect capitalism and American imperialism. That’s what “democratic intentions of our government” are to get into the war, defeat German imperialism and gobble up as much as they can of the British Empire for the use of America’s “Sixty Families.” The government has given no indication that it intends to treat Negroes fairly, says the statement. Of course not. Imperialist governments don’t treat any workers fairly. Imperialism is the most intense and most vicious stage of capitalist exploitation. Negroes are treated worse because they are the weakest group among the working class, and the workers as a whole have not learned yet to close ranks against the common exploiter.
To be sure “the war drive and the denial and destruction of democratic rights go together.” This is an imperialist war and everything is subordinated to the aims and goals of the imperialists. If the interests of the ruling class are served by the elimination of Jim-Crow, then eliminated it will be. But their interests are not served in this manner so they keep it going in peacetime and in wartime.
Who are the “common people” with whom Negroes should ally themselves? The statement is very broad and general. The only “common people” whose interests are identical with those of the Negroes is the white working class. Yes, the Negro workers and the white workers must join hands and close ranks. This is the road to the elimination of Jim-Crow. We do not believe that Negro college presidents, businessmen and professionals will render very effective aid in bringing this to pass. We are just as skeptical of this being forwarded by this type of Negro as we are of the same results being sought by white business men and college presidents. And the reasons for our skepticism are the same in the case of both groups. There is a Negro ruling class in relation to Negro workers just as there is a white ruling class in relation to all the workers. The fact that the Negro ruling class is a sort of appendage to the white ruling class does not destroy the facts in the situation. The Negro leaders who issued this declaration are only saying that if the government and industry will only grant Negroes the same status as white workers, they would have no cause for complaint. This may be true of these Negro college presidents, lawyers, preachers, teachers, bishops and YMCA secretaries. But how about the great mass ot Negroes who have no such favored economic and social status? We are against Jim-Crow wherever it shows its head, in peacetime or wartime, in the army, the navy or industry. Negroes should fighl against Jim-Crow but this is not enough, especially during the Second World Imperialist War. The main enemy of Negroes as of white workers is capitalism and imperialist war.
The statement talks of setting “our compass in the direction of freedom, security and full citizenship rights.” In this period of imperialist war you can set your compass any way you please, but you need something more than steam to get to port. Your ship might be sunk by a fellow more realistically and sensibly prepared.
This is a very weak pronouncement issued by a weak and helpless group. They neither understand the realities of the present-day world nor are they prepared to go through even with the very modest demands they make. When the United States enters the war, most of them will shut up and go over bag and baggage to the warmakers just like the whites of their type. They will be flag wavers and flaming patriots. What else can they do? They are not Negro workers and do not suffer the same as the real Negro worker. As soon as the government begins to crack down they will find all manner of excuses for supporting the war. This will be easy for them because they are not against the war now. Even now they are only asking the government to give them the opportunity to support the war on equal footing with the whites.
 
As to the Stalinists
There is one other observation that we wish to make before we close. That is about the Stalinists. We pointed out in the beginning certain well-known Stalinists who are prominent in this new committee. It is clear that this is another one of the numerous Stalinist innocents’ group. The statement itself is just a mish-mash as only the Stalinists could concoct. The whole thing was probably organized by Max Yergan, who is well known as a Stalinised Negro intellectual. And then there are James Ford and Ben Davis, Jr., both Stalinist functionaries.
We object to these Stalinist organizations not because they are groups formed by a political party, or because they are “red,” or revolutionary or for the overthrow of capitalism. No, we object because they are fakes and because Stalinism is a virulent poison in the labor movement. The Stalinists corral these Negro intellectuals and attempt to turn them against the war. But the Stalinists are not against the war; they are only against the United States and England. This for the reason that Stalin is hand in glove with Hitler since the Stalin-Hitler pact. The Stalinists are not against imperialism, but only against British-American imperialism. They are in one of the imperialist camps (Germany’s) themselves, and are in no sense a revolutionary anti-war group. Whenever it serves the interests of Stalin, orders will go out and the Stalinists in the United States will begin waving the flag and shouting for the U.S. to get into the war. That is, they will return to their position of the days of “collective security” when they were singing the Star Spangled Banner and urging the “democracies” (England, France and the United States) to go to war against Germany.
We say that the Stalinists are a poison in the labor movement. Wherever they have any influence in the unions they debauch the movement and subject the workers to all the twists and turns of Stalin’s foreign policy. They encourage or retard the militancy of the workers, depending on the particular political axe they have to grind at the moment. If they are friendly to the U.S. they confine their militancy to writing protest postal cards to “liberal” congressmen. If, as today, they are in a pact with the fascist Hitler, they are against the U.S. entering the war.
 
What We Believe
The Workers Party believes that Negroes should always fight for ECONOMIC, SOCIAL and POLITICAL equality. They should fight against every manifestation of Jim-Crow everywhere and all the time. This fight must be carried on by the Negro workers, as workers. The white workers must join with the Negroes in this struggle. They must take the initiative and lead in this struggle for liberation of the Negro people.
The struggle today must center on the Second World Imperialist War. The fight against Jim-Crow is the fight against capitalism. The fight against the misery and insecurity of the Negro people is the struggle against United States imperialism and against capitalist barbarism. The victory of the Negro people can only come with the victory of the working class. The leading of the workers, Negroes included, to victory over capitalism and imperialism is a task that can be performed only by the revolutionary party of the workers. The workers in the United States must have such a party. Negro workers must join, along with the white workers. The Workers Party stands on such a platform.
FOP PEACE THROUGH SOCIALISM!
FOR THE SOCIALIST UNITED STATES OF THE AMERICAS!
FOR THE SOCIALIST UNITED STATES OF EUROPE!
FOR THE SOCIALIST WORLD FEDERATION!
 



The unholy glee and crass cynicism with which the Anglo-American imperialists received the news that Stalin and Hitler were at each other’s throats revealed not only the desperate plight of England but also something of the brazen and callous aims of the capitalist war-makers. The great satisfaction and the enthusiasm of the “democracies” was chilled only after reflection on the possibility of a quick Russian defeat. Such a consummation would be terrible to contemplate, for, said the New York Times:
“complete German victory in Russia would be a catastrophe of the first importance for England and America. It would enable Hitler to defy the British blockade, to secure petroleum and food supplies for years, to create a vassal regime in Russia, to seize India and the oil fields of the Near East, to make a temporary alliance with Japan for the seizure of China and the Netherlands Indies, and to threaten the United States from both oceans.”
Added to this is their embarrassment at being forced to soften their attitude toward the Stalinist bureaucracy. Despite all these mixed emotions the dominant effect of the Stalin-Hitler struggle was to produce, satisfaction, joy and a high degree of contentment. It is a “breathing spell” for the “democracies,” and despite their hatred of that for which they pretend Stalinism stands (socialism), they give thanks to their gods for this blessing. What they mean by a “breathing spell” is the opportunity to go full speed ahead with preparations for decisive action against Hitler. The respite, no matter how brief, is a boon to the Anglo-American imperialists.
It means also that the Anglo-American imperialists begin to get their first real taste of success, the first real glimmer of salvation and victory. But they must hurry, says the Times; no resting, no time out for intemperate rejoicing. “If Russia can be kept in the war until winter, or nine weeks instead of six, or six weeks instead of three,” says the Times, “it may make an enormous difference in the outcome of the whole conflict.” And again: “It is manifestly to our advantage to have Hitler’s campaign in russia as long-drawn-out and as costly to him as possible. This will not only give Britain precious time; it will enable us to perfect our own defenses.” There you have it: keep the Russian and German workers busy butchering each other while we prepare the Anglo-American working classes for this orgy of murder, rapine and imperialist pillage.
 
Churchill Hits Low Point
The low point in this Roman holiday, was the speech of Churchill: this astute capitalist statesman, this trumpeter of British imperialism, this butcher of defenseless.
African and Indian natives. Churchill, doubtless after consultation with Roosevelt, reached the greatest heights of hypocrisy, capitalist demagogy and political trickery. Churchill weeps all over the place, he is bowed down with grief for the “Russian people”; they are “defending their native soil ... poor as are the Russian peasants, workmen and soldiers, he (Hitler) must steal from them their daily bread. He must devour their harvests. He must rob them of the oil which drives their plows and thus produces a famine without example in human history.” This sleek and overfat master of words and fine phrases goes on with his disgusting feigning of sympathy for the Russian people. “I see the 10,000 villages of Russia where the means of existence was wrung so hardly from the soil, but where there are still primordial human joys, where maidens laugh and children play. I see advancing upon all this, in hideous onslaught, the Nazi war machine ...” But Churchill sees more with his benign humanitarian soul.
“I see the Russian soldiers standing on the threshold of their native land guarding the fields which their fathers have tilled from time immemorial. I see them guarding their homes, when all pray for the safety of their loved ones, for the return of the breadwinner, of the champion, of their protectors.”
This arch-imperialist is not here engaging only in simple oratory. He is holding before the Anglo-American workers the idea of defense of the fatherland. Just as the Russian peasant defends his fields and guards his home, so you too, British and Americans, must defend the fields which yours fathers have tilled from time immemorial. But just as the Russian worker tilled soil for centuries which he did not own, so too do British and American workers till soil which they do not own. Churchill conceals, as do all the defenders of capitalism, that the workers have no fatherland, they have no country. The governments are the governments of the bosses; the land is owned by landlords, banks and insurance companies; the factories, mines and mills are owned by big stockholders and bondholders.
The workers do not even have homes to defend. The shacks we live in are owned by banks and the property owning aristocracy. Sometimes we hold the deed but the bank holds the mortgage. When the worker fights to defend the “fields,” he fights to defend the property of the imperialist ruling class.
Churchill in this flowery and revolting oratorial flight seeks to hide the imperialist character of the war and the fundamental evils of capitalist society. Therefore he can say “this is no class war. It is a war in which the whole British Empire and Commonwealth of Nations is engaged without distinction of race, creed or party.”
We remind Churchill that we can see some things also. We look back two decades. We see the Russian peasants and workers, after a victorious revolution in which they smashed their Churchills; faced with another invader moving upon them from north, south, east and west. This invader blockaded their ports and even denied them food to keep from starving and medicine to heal the sick. This invasion was organized, financed and led by the same Anglo-American imperialists who pretend to weep today, over the plight of laughing maidens and rollicking children. Churchill stood at the head and front of this counter-revolutionary attack on the Russia of Lenin and Trotsky.
Churchill’s perfidy, is unbounded. Not only does he weep for the plight of Russia, but for China and India as well. Hitler is after them too. This is Churchill, imperialist brigand who personally has led the bloodiest of assaults on helpless Indian natives.. The spokesman for the English exploiters who have taken billions out of the toil of the Indian masses; murdered them, bombed them and denied them even the most elementary political freedom. This murderer, this liar whose class went to war against China to force the Chinese people to continue the cultivation and use of opium for the enrichment of the British ruling class. This is the man who comes before the world, to call Hitler a “monster of wickedness” and Mussolini a “jackal.”
Despite his admitted age-long opposition to communism, or socialism, or for that matter anything that will give security to the working class, Churchill is anxious to come to the aid of Stalin: the butcher in the Kremlin. He can do this because he knows that there is no communism or socialism in Russia. He knows this as well as the New York Times, which remarked that Stalin had “betrayed the international communist movement of which he was the leader.” The whole Anglo-American ruling class knows this. They are well aware that Stalin most treacherously betrayed the working class of the whole world. They don’t fear Stalin, they only seek to use him now in their own foul designs against the workers of their own countries.
Churchill talks of “the worst features of communism. ... No one has been a more consistent opponent of communism than I have for the last twenty-five years ... but all this fades away before the spectacle which is now unfolding ... the past with its crimes flashes away.” What is this past of Stalin’s which flashes away, and which Churchill and his brother American imperialists can forget so easily? First we must remark that Churchill is talking not only about the crimes of Stalin but of the “crimes” of Lenin and Trotsky also. The capitalist brigands make no distinction between Lenin and Stalin, unless it is to prefer Stalin. For Stalin’s crimes were not against England and the United States, but against the world working class. Stalin killed the revolution, wrecked the Bolshevik Party and enslaved the Russian proletariat. Surely the Anglo-American imperialists have no objection to this and of course this “past with its crimes ... flashes away.”
Sumner Welles for the United States echoed the Churchill politics: the “principles and doctrines of Communist dictatorship are as intolerable ... as are the principles and doctrines of Nazi dictatorship.” But, said Sumner Welles, “Hitler’s armies, are today, the chief danger to the Americas ...” The Times adds:
“If a man is unfortunate, enough to find himself in a field with a mad bull and the bull turns suddenly, on a terrier that has been following, at his heels, the man does not need to share the terrier ‘ideology’ in order to hope that the chase will be a long one and that the bull will break his neck.”
 
Time for the Masses to Speak
Thus the “democracies,” the imperialists, expose themselves to the gaze and scrutiny of the workers of the world. They sing hosannahs to Stalin because he has been forced to come to their aid. The thousands of Russian workers and peasants, betrayed by Stalin and who will fall before the advance of the Nazi war machine will die to save Anglo-American imperialism. These workers and peasants, sold out by the stupid and treacherous Stalinist bureaucracy, die today to give the Roosevelt-Churchill governments time to prepare the British and American workers for the same ghastly death tomorrow. “Long live the Russo-German war” sing the Anglo-American imperialists; “until winter, or nine weeks instead of six, or six weeks instead of three ...”
It is now time for the workers of the world and the colonial people to speak. The imperialist, monsters and jackals have had their say. They have spoken well and eloquently for their class and their class interests. All of them – Churchill and Hitler, the doddering Petain, the jackass Mussolini, the strikebreaker in the White House – have spoken. It is now time for the workers of Germany and Russia, England and the United States, Italy and France, to speak with all their tremendous force and might.
The working class in every country engaged in the war has a job to do: kick out its national ruling class; run the mines, mills, factories, railroads and banks. Establish a workers’ government in every country. Give independence to the colonial peoples. Build, the WORLD FEDERATION OF WORKERS’ GOVERNMENTS AND SOCIALIST REPUBLICS.
 



The Stalinists and the Trade Union Bureaucracy
Numerous trade unions in the United States are anxious to let it be known that although they accept the policy of the Roosevelt-Churchill governments to grant all aid possible to the Stalinist government, these unions have not changed their attitude toward the Stalinists. This is the reasons for opposition to the Stalinists by some of these unions.
The AFL for instance: Bill Green & Co. are against the Stalinists. They are also against the CIO, and they are against the CIO for other reasons than the fact that the Stalinists have some influence in the CIO. The AFL would be against the CIO if there were not a single Stalinist around. The AFL is opposed to industrial unionism. They were against the steel workers before the CIO came along and organized them. One high AFL official said that the reason the AFL had not organized the steel workers was that these workers did not want to be organized. Many of the mass production workers were always scum to the AFL leadership. They preferred the “aristocracy” of labor, the skilled craftsmen.
In the last number of Justice, the ILGWU reaffirms its years-old opposition to the Stalinists. Many other unions are taking a similar position. They are ready to follow the government but they want to make it clear that this must not mean any collaboration with the American Stalinists. They just want to give material aid to the Russian government. Their attitude is the same as the position of the ruling class: anybody who is fighting against Hitler is entitled to material support. Hitler is the main enemy because it is he who is the raging enemy of “democracy.”
These trade union leaders say that the Stalinists twist and turn and change their “line” in accordance with the dictates of Stalin. This is true, but these trade union leaders ignore or suppress one important fact: they change their line in accordance with the suggestions and plans of the Roosevelt-Churchill governments. The Stalinists seek to drag the working class in the U.S. along behind Stalin while these trade behind Roosevelt-Churchill and tie the workers to the imperialist war chariot.
The Stalinists jump through the hoop in either direction at Stalin’s command, and Dubinsky, Tobin and others dance to the Roosevelt-Churchill music. Both Roosevelt-Churchill and Stalin are enemies of labor. Both sides ore engaged in the imperialist war, and the workers will catch hell no matter which side they line up with.
There are valid reasons for the workers to refuse to support the Stalinists. We have recited these reasons many times. There are just as valid reasons for labor to refuse to support the Roosevelt-Churchill imperialist war outfit. Dubinsky & Co. charge the Stalinists with being against “democracy. Well, we didn’t know that Dubinsky, Tobin, Murray, Green and most of the trade union big shots were such great democrats. They may be for democracy at large, but they haven’t made very hot records in the unions which they head. It’s a real joke to hear the strike-breaker Tobin shooting off his mouth about democracy.
These fellows are all for the war. They will drag the workers in any direction that Roosevelt tells them. They subordinate the genuine interests of labor to the demands of the bosses who are going to war to save capitalism in the United States. That means the right to keep the system of exploitation, low wages, long hours and union busting. The Stalinists are a filthy, treacherous, union-wrecking crew but they are not the main enemy of labor in this country. the main enemy is the boss class and the Roosevelt boss government.
 
Tobin “Keeps Healthy” at Workers’ Expense
While we have Dan Tobin in mind it will be well to show how great he is and what a great sacrifice it is for him to be president of the Teamsters Union. Tobin had the following inserted in the IBT constitution:
“The general president, for the purpose of promoting the interests and welfare of the International and the making of diplomatic contacts with other organizations and institutions, and FOR THE PURPOSE OF CONSERVING HIS HEALTH, may, IN HIS DISCRETION, travel in this country and abroad and MAY TAKE PERIOD RESTS. The GEB shall PROVIDE FOR ALL EXPENSES of the general president when performing the services mentioned herein or WHEN TAKING PERIOD RESTS; the said expenses shall include travel in this country and abroad, the full and complete maintenance of his wife so that she can accompany the general president, and all secretarial help and services which he deems necessary while engaged as afore referred to. The expenses provided for herein are in addition to all other constitutional compensation and allowances.”
The last sentence means in addition to Tobin’s $30,000 a year salary, $12 a day hotel expenses when away from home and $5 a day incidental expenses. Tobin also has a $20,000 a year “assistant” paid by the union.
Tobin really lives in the style of an East Indian potentate while he makes his “diplomatic contacts,” and while “conserving his health” through “periodic rests.” All that one can say of such an arrangement is that it is a plain racket. No wonder the AFL can’t get rid of racketeers. What argument can they make?
 
Closed Shop Is a Mighty Important Weapon
The National Association of Manufacturers wants the “closed shop” outlawed. If this can not be accomplished, then they are asking employers to refuse to sign “closed shop” agreements. The action of the UAW-CIO in winning a closed shop agreement from Ford was too much for the big boys at the top of industry. The NAM urges employers “not to discriminate against either union or non-union workers.” This lets the cat out of the bag. What employers discriminate against non-union workers and scabs? The NAM further says that “within the last week ... American workers in defense industries” have been coerced by the government “into joining labor organizations not of their own choice ...” We suppose that the NAM is talking about the election at Ford’s, where the CIO won a victory in an open contest with the AFL. The NAM’s hypocritical position means that it is wrong even to hold an election to determine the bargaining agent for workers in a particular industry. The NAM says that the government has no right to compel employees to belong to any “private organizations.” The NAM hides the fact that whether or not there is a closed shop does not really rest with the government but with the workers themselves. There were closed shops and closed shop agreements long before the Wagner Act and the New Deal administration. Whether or not a union gets a closed shop is dependent on the strength and determination of the union membership. To say that a union which has received the majority of the votes in an election should represent all the workers in the industry is no more discriminatory than to say Roosevelt shall be President of all the people when he got more votes than Willkie. Of course Lindbergh does not accept this; he wants a new leadership in Washington; he doesn’t believe in accepting the decision of the majority. Neither does Hitler. The closed shop is a device forced on the bosses by labor. Workers must learn to accept it and not be fooled by boss blarney. The bosses of the NAM believe that every worker should bargain individually with the boss, that the boss should have the right to hire whom he pleases and to fire at will. The bosses would like to have half a dozen unions in every industry, including one or two company unions. That is, if there is to be any unionism. The real preference of the NAM is no unions at all. the closed shop following a majority vote of the workers is a guarantee that the workers have a bona fide union of their own choosing. Nobody is discriminated against. The losing side joins the winners and presents a solid front against the boss. The NAM is always yelling for the workers to close ranks with the bosses. What’s wrong with workers closing ranks with each other for a change?
 



What the Figures Show on Profits and Wages
AFL economists have reported something about corporation profits and wages that Labor Action has been pointing out for several months. That is the fact that the war industries and others could pay far higher wages than at present and still retain tremendous sums for top salaries, dividends and interest. In discussing the Mellon aluminum trust (Alcoa), the AFL reports that out of the 1940 profits of $44,146,000, the Aluminum Co. could have given its 28,000 workers a pay increase of 45 cents an hour and still have paid its stockholders $l6,000,000 or 8 per cent on their investment.
This is something for workers to think about. Just think, each of the Aluminum Corporation workers could get an increase of 45 cents an hour and leave the company stockholders 8 per cent. The company hated like hell to give its workers even a 10 cents an hour boost. Workers should understand too that the stockholders have no business even with the $16,000,000. They did absolutely nothing to create this wealth. All of it was taken from the earth by labor as raw material and then made into a usable product by the labor of the workers in the factories. The stockholders and bondholders should be glad that they are permitted to take anything. They should be highly pleased to get 16 million; but they actually took 44 million.
The AFL report also cites the airplane companies. Ten leading aircraft manufacturers which make nine-tenths of the planes could have increased the wage of each worker $544 in 1940 and have 8 per cent earnings left. Instead of this, these vultures put that &544 in their own pockets. Not only this, they tried to peg wages and give no increase at all.
Roosevelt and the New Deal are doing what they can to keep things rosy for the big bosses: even to sending in the army to stick bayonets into workers who strike to get some of that $544.
It is funny to see the AFL putting out such a report. They say the corporations can pay more, yet they say at the same time, that they will not make a fight to help the workers get it. John Frey called in the Navy to help him break a strike where workers were trying to get some of this money that the AFL says is available for them. You can’t get higher wages from the war industries simply by publishing some figures to show how much money they make. It is correct to publish the figures and establish the facts. After this, however, it is necessary to make demands on the corporations. If the demands are not granted the only sensible thing is to strike and throw the biggest possible picket line around the plant. And the picket line should not be delayed waiting for the “Mediation” Board. The grievance of the workers is against the boss; they don’t work for the Mediation Board. If this board of business men and simple minded labor leaders wants to help, all right: but they should not be permitted to obstruct and retard the fight for higher wages.
 
The Stalinists and the Basis of Union Membership
At the convention of the National Maritime Union in Cleveland, one of the delegates presented a resolution calling for an outside trial board to investigate charges that the union president, Joseph Curran, is a communist. The resolution was rejected with only two dissenting votes.
This resolution should have been rejected. We don’t know what were the reasons that the delegates voted against the resolution, but we can give sound reasons against accepting such a proposal. In the first place, a trade union should not reject and expel members for political belief and affiliation. Trade unions must be open on equal terms to all workers irrespective of the political party to which they belong. Not only this, but the unions must disregard race, color, creed, sex and nationality. Membership in the trade unions must not be denied to aliens. The only aliens that the working class must exclude from its organizations are members of the boss class; never workers for the reason that they are not citizens.
Workers of every country are members of the working class; that is our basic citizenship. If the boss government wants to set up some national basis of citizenship, that is their business. We, however, must not accept this boss standard as a determining factor for admission to our unions.
Labor must accept into its ranks and organizations Republicans, Democrats, Socialists, Communists, Protestants, Jews, Negroes, and all other workers without discrimination. The working class ground for rejection or expulsion is the commission of anti-working class or anti-union acts. This would hold for a Republican or Democrat the same as for a Communist or a Socialist. Anti-union acts are such activity as strike-breaking, scabbing, refusal lo pay dues or to function in the union, being a stool-pigeon for the boss or the government.
The AFL wants to oust communists but it keeps a strike-breaker like Frey in. Amalgamated kicks out communists, but it lets Hillman stay while engaged in stool-pigeon activities for the government and the bosses. The AFL tries to frame the leaders of Teamsters Local 544 but it keeps racketeers like Browne of the Theatrical Union as a vice-president. The machinists and other AFL unions bar Negroes from membership just because they are Negroes. They too will kick out communists if they find any.
The Workers Party has said many times that the workers should not follow the Stalinists nor let them acquire any power at all in the labor movement. We have given reasons.
This does not mean that members of the Communist Party should be barred or expelled from the unions. It only means that they should not be permitted to acquire influence or power in unions. When Stalinists are rejected or expelled from the unions it should be for the same reasons that Republican or Democrat workers are rejected or expelled: for anti-union actions. If this procedure is followed, many of the top leaders, particularly of the AFL, would be expelled.
The top leaders of the unions are not against the Stalinists because the Stalinists are anti-union in the sense that we have defined anti-union. They are not against the Stalinists because this outfit violates all the principles of trade union democracy, because it attempts to drag the unions from pillar to post every time the chief bureaucrat, Stalin, orders a change in line; because they are ready to kill the militancy of labor whenever this step fits in with the interests of the gang of murderers in the Kremlin. These are the reasons the Workers Party is against the Stalinists. That is why we tell the workers not to vote for Stalinists for union officers, nor allow them to have any prestige whatsoever in the labor movement. This does not mean, however, that Stalinist party members should be barred from union membership, nor that they should not have the right to run for office. All we say is that the workers should not vote for them for office. As individual workers in industry, however, they have the some right as every worker to union membership. Expulsions should follow only after a democratic trial of the individual member of members for overt acts against the union and the working class, not for political affiliation.
Another reason that the resolution should have been rejected is the provision for an OUTSIDE TRIAL BOARD. Trial boards for union affairs should be INSIDE trial boards, that is, INSIDE THE LABOR MOVEMENT. This trial board was to be composed of one member each from the Daily Worker, Federated Press, Communist Party, CIO, Civil Liberties Union, Associated Press, United Press, AFL, Department of Justice and American Legion, Quite a board, we say. Some formal validity might be given to having labor organizations, parties and papers, but none whatever for the capitalist press associations, the Department of Justice and the anti-labor, strike-breaking American Legion.
This resolution was an excellent example of how the bosses and the government try to worm their way into labor organizations by inducing some worker to act for them.
 
If Union Bureaucrats Got a Wage Cut ...
The NMU convention also decided not to increase the wages of the three leading union officers. At present Curran gets $100 a week and the secretary and treasurer get $75 each. This was a correct decision. No trade union official, local, national or international, should be paid more than $100 a week. This goes for the big shots at the top: Green, Murray, Tobin, Lewis and the rest of them. Most trade union top salaries are far too high and are a disgrace to the labor movement. If the trade unions have money enough to pay these fabulous salaries, such as Tobin’s $30,000 a year with his “rest periods” and foreign travel racket, they can use this money to reduce initiation fees and dues and for the accumulation of strike funds and benefits. Also, it might not be a bad thing to use more of this money for educational work in the unions.
It would be a real stunt for the unions to reduce the big salaries real drastically. Then we would discover just how loyal some of the labor big shots are to the labor movement and just how self-sacrificing they are. We are of the opinion that if some of them were forced to live on an income somewhere near that of the highest paid workers they would scamper out of the labor movement and go over to business.
Some of them, like the strike-breaker Frey, the racketeer Browne and others might join the boss spy agencies and strike-breaking outfits. That’s really where they belong.
 



The New Jingo Line of the Stalinists
The Stalinists in the United States have made a new political discovery. They have discovered that when the Stalinist bureaucracy jumps from one imperialist camp in the present war into the other, the war loses its imperialist character. They ignore the Stalin-Hitler pact and seem to think that everyone else has forgotten how that perfidious covenant with hell was the signal for Hitler to invade Poland and initiate the Second World Imperialist War. The Stalinists, to be sure, announced that the pact would prove the greatest “bulwark of peace” in the world.
We don’t label this pact perfidious and reactionary because Hitler, the fascist, was one of the signatories. Fascism is nothing more than degenerate capitalism stripped of all its democratic pretensions and functioning with the knout and the club in the interests of finance-capitalism. If in similar circumstances, Stalin had signed a similar pact with Great Britain or the United States, it would have been just as perfidious and just as reactionary. That is, the Stalin-Hitler pact was not reactionary because it was signed with a fascist nation. Fascist Germany is at the same time a capitalist and imperialist nation, just as are England and the United States.
This pact was reactionary because in relation to the interests of the world working class, it was “conceived in sin and born in iniquity.” From a working class viewpoint this pact would have been no less iniquitous had it been a covenant between Stalin and Churchill or Roosevelt.
After this pact, these political acrobats and contortionists were against England and against the United States entering the war. They were for peace. Not in Estonia, Finland and Germany, of course, but in England and the United States.
They bellowed and organized all over the place with their American Peace Mobilization and other phony outfits. Labor Action pointed out long ago and warned that the Stalinists might soon be waving the flag and yelling for the defense of England and the United States. We said that just as they were rushing into the trade unions with their bogus peace line today, tomorrow workers should not be surprised to see them calling for all-out aid to “imperialist Britain.”
Well, it’s happened, as every worker knows who is not deaf or blind. The war isn’t completely non-imperialist of course, because Germany is involved and the Stalinists are certain now that Germany is an imperialist nation bent on the domination of the world and the total destruction of “democracy.” England and the United States are “democracies” again fighting against fascism. Therefore all out aid to England and the United States. Yesterday England was imperialist; today it’s a “democracy.” Yesterday, Roosevelt was preparing to plow our youth under; today he and Churchill are leading a holy crusade to give every boy a chance to become President or Prime Minister.
This all happened, say the Stalinist magicians, because Germany attacked the Soviet Union. To be sure, the Stalin gangsters have destroyed all the Soviets, the trade unions and the revolutionary workers’ party; but this makes no difference: it’s a “socialist” state anyhow, these gangsters of the Kremlin maintain. Furthermore, it makes no difference, they say, that the Stalin clique embarked on a grabbing expedition in Poland and the Baltic countries. Workers are not supposed to be interested in the fact that the Stalin gang participates in the imperialist war; first on one side and then on the other. The workers are expected to believe that when the Stalinists change camps the nature of the war changes. If Stalin makes a pact with Hitler, that is a move for peace. If Stalin makes a pact with Churchill, that makes England’s war a struggle for democracy and against fascism.
 
How They Carry It Into the UAW
Just as they carried the old People’s Front line into the trade unions, the Stalinists are preparing now to flood the labor movement with the new line. Workers who were told yesterday that the Lend-Lease Bill was an evil accompaniment of Roosevelt imperialism, are told today that it is OK and one of the strongest bulwarks of democracy and civilization. Workers who were told that they should oppose the war are now advised to support it.
The first concrete application of the new line in a trade union will come at the time of the convention of the United Automobile Workers, the first week of August. the Stalinists had been preparing a fight against President Thomas of the UAW. They wanted to oust him at the coming convention. They intended to advance their fake anti-war line. they would have made long and fervid speeches on British imperialism and colonial oppression.
But now none of this will happen. According to an article in the Daily Worker of Monday, July 14, written by Roy Hudson: “We (that is, the CP) do not hesitate to state that in our opinion the best interests of the UAWA, the unity of the UAWA, can best be served through the rallying of the membership around its present leaders, President Thomas and Secretary-Treasurer Addes.”
That is, since the war is now a war for democracy, and since Thomas has all along been a supporter of the war, the Stalinists will now support him for re-election. The planned struggle to displace Thomas has gone with the Stalin-Hitler pact.
Furthermore, Hudson says that the Communist Party as an organization “never did, does not now, and never will attempt to dominate a union.”
This is an astounding claim. Many militant unionists will be able to refute this out of their own experience. Wherever the Stalinists have had any appreciable influence in a union their procedure has been of the most bureaucratic and undemocratic nature. They have framed good union militants who disagreed with the Stalinist political line. They have carried on campaigns of slander and lies against all unionists, even the most loyal and militant, who opposed the Stalinist bureaucrats.
In numerous instances they have not hesitated at intimidation and terror. They have dumped workers from jobs where they had job control in cases where these workers were opponents of the Stalinist political line. They have refused to defend militant unionists who were being persecuted in the capitalist courts if these unions were in opposition to any of the twistings of Kremlin politics. The Stalinists always seek to dominate a trade union in the most vicious and non-working class manner.
 
Do Not Vote Stalinists Into Office!
These are some of the reasons why the Workers Party advises workers not to permit Stalinists to attain leadership and control in the unions. These are some of the reasons why Stalinists should not be voted for when they run for office in the unions.
The fact that the Stalinists announce their support of Thomas for re-election should be taken with a grain of salt. Thomas may or may not deserve re-election, but such questions should be decided on their merits in relation to his past as a leader of the international. The Stalinists don’t decide questions in this manner. They were prepared to wage a fight against Thomas not because he may not have been a good international president of the UAW, but because he was in disagreement with the political line of the Stalinists. Thomas could have been the worst possible trade union bureaucrat and still get the unstinted support of the Stalinists if he had been one of their stooges.
They will support Thomas, even with all his opposition to them, because they are afraid not to. They are ready now to crawl into their holes and be nice boys, at least in the open. This leads us to repeat that their announcements on the UAW convention should be taken with a grain of salt. They are a filthy and slimy outfit and very adept at the stab in the back tactic. They will come into the UAW convention with the best sounding resolutions. Out in the open, on the floor of the convention, they will be as meek as lambs. They will support even the most reactionary proposals of the leadership, even those that should be voted down. But under cover, in the dark, so to speak, they will scheme against those militants who disagree with their line and attempt to smear them.
They planned to achieve domination of the UAW at the coming convention. They really haven’t given up this idea; they only plan now to changed banners. They will attempt to secure places on the general executive board of the international. They will be willing to bargain and make the most reactionary concession’s in order to squeeze a few of their stooges onto the GEB.
 



The New CP Line and the Trade Unions
When the war broke out between Stalin and Hitler, the Communist Party began to retrace its steps and return to its Peoples Front days. This will be its line now in the trade unions. All of the old signs, placards, streamers can be pulled out and dusted off. The old Peoples Front slogans have already appeared in the Daily Worker. As before, the Stalinists will, of course, pay some attention to the unions. They will want the workers to fall into step behind the “new” line. But the workers will have to watch their step. They will have to say to the Stalinists, “Not so fast, we want to ask you a few questions.” Then the workers can go back to the other Peoples Front days before the Stalin-Hitler pact. Then the Stalinists were yelling for Roosevelt and calling him the leader of the Peoples Front and the democratic front. They were demanding that France, England and the United States, the “democracies,” as the Stalinists called them, should go to war against Hitler.
Then one day, without saying a word to the Stalinist parties, Stalin signed a pact with Hitler. The Stalinist papers came out with the old line and didn’t even know that Stalin had signed this pact behind their backs. They were still yelling for war on Hitler after Stalin had made friends with Hitler. This pact gave Hitler the necessary backing to begin the war with the invasion of Poland. He knew that he had nothing to fear from Stalin.
As soon as the Stalinists recovered their breath they began to preach the pact would make for peace. While they were busy with this explanation Hitler invaded Poland and the Second World Imperialist War was on. The Stalinists turned the fire on England and France, especially England. They said the same things about England that Hitler was saying. The workers didn’t hear anything more about Hitler being the main enemy of the working class. The main enemy was now England.
When the United States began to prepare for the war, the Stalinists told the workers that it was an imperialist war and that we should be against it. The Workers Party and Labor Action said it was an imperialist war, too. The Workers Party explained to the workers that the Stalinists were not really against the war; they were only against England and the United States entering the war against Germany. This was because their leader, Stalin, had a pact with Hitler and was in the imperialist war on Hitler’s side. Of course, they didn’t want anybody to fight against their fascist ally and buddy, Hitler. The Workers Party and Labor Action also told the workers that if Stalin and Hitler fell out, the Stalinists would be running around again waving the flag and calling for the “democracies” to go to war against Germany.
 
From Turn to Turn They Remain Wreckers
But before we get to this we want to go on with the things that the Stalinists told the workers when Stalin and Hitler were friends. They said they were for peace and that the United States should stay out of the war. They organized the American Peace Mobilization and held a peace congress. They asked the unions to send representatives, and many workers came. They kept up their opposition to Roosevelt because they said they were against the war and Roosevelt was a warmonger.
The Workers Party through Labor Action kept saying to the workers “don’t trust the Stalinists. they will betray you as they have done before.” We said that they were only carrying out the policies of Stalin who had betrayed the workers in the Soviet Union and the rest of the world. We said, “Yes, this is an imperialist war – but under the domination of Stalin, Russia is in one of the imperialist camps, the camp of Hitler and Mussolini.” There was the Roosevelt-Churchill imperialist camp on one side and the Hitler-Stalin imperialist camp on the other side. the Stalinists, we said, are not for, peace and they are not against the war.
Neither were the Stalinists interested in the trade unions as labor organizations trying to carry on the fight to improve the conditions of the workers. They would tell the workers different things, depending on which side of the fence Stalin happened to be on. When they had the first Peoples Front they were against strikes. They wanted all the workers to be good patriots and not worry too much about wages and working conditions. In unions where they had influence or control they would expel a worker who did not agree with their party line and opinions. They even refused to defend workers who had been grabbed by the capitalist courts unless they agreed with the Stalinists. We said that they were “wreckers” and “poison” in the labor movement. Thousands of workers who have had experience with the Stalinists know that this is the truth.
 
They Are Betraying the Workers Again
But when Hitler and Stalin went to war the Stalinists changed again. Hitler is the devil once more. Churchill is not so bad now and pretty soon Roosevelt will be their hero again. Now they want the workers to support the war. They will be against strikes and will close their eyes to just grievances of the workers against the bosses. They are preparing to betray the workers again. In their new Peoples Program they say: “What is needed is speedy and effective aid to the Soviet and British peoples.” What does this mean? They use this language to fool the workers and make us believe that they are not for aid to the British government. This is nonsense. It is the British ruling class that is fighting the war under the leadership of the Churchill government. They are for the imperialist war now, just as they have been ever since Stalin signed the pact with Hitler. They have just changed sides, that’s all.
They want the “united front of the working class ...” Does this mean that they want unity between the CIO and the AFL? They were also against this. But the line’s been changed and soon we may see them ready for merging the CIO and AFL even on terms set by the AFL. The CIO workers voted against such a merger at the last CIO convention, and it was the Stalinists who made the loudest noise.
They say that they have changed because the Soviet Union has been attacked. Sure, the Soviet Union has been invaded, but the war is just as before Hitler invaded Russia. And Russia was already involved in the war in the Hitler-Mussolini imperialist camp. Furthermore, before Stalin had signed the pact with Hitler he had already enslaved the workers in the Soviet Union. He had destroyed their unions and murdered all the leaders of the October Revolution who wanted to lead Russia to socialism. Yet the Stalinists today are asking the workers to defend the Stalinist rule. Defend the Soviet Union, they say. Fight against Hitler. Support the United States ruling class and the British ruling class. Yesterday we told you to be for peace and against the war; then it was an imperialist war. Already, in England, the Stalinist leaders have called for support of the government, that government which yesterday they told the workers not to support. they say: Into the factories! Increase production!
The workers in the United States should not be fooled. The war is still an imperialist war. Our main fight is still against the war; against the bosses right here, for higher wages and shorter hours. Stalin has been forced to go over to Roosevelt and Churchill, but the war is the same: it is an imperialist war. Both camps are fighting for the right to exploit and enslave the workers of the world. Nothing has changed; Stalin has merely been forced out of his friendship with Hitler into the arms of Churchill and Roosevelt. They will use him to pull their chestnuts out of the fire. Workers in the United States should keep up the fight. Don’t let the Stalinists betray you! Don’t trust them!
 



THE SECOND WORLD IMPERIALIST WAR poses in a most practical and concrete manner the question of the future character of world society. What kind of society will exist after the war is over. Will we have world fascism, bourgeois democracy or proletarian socialism? Should the United States triumph it is reasonable to assume that some sort of “New Deal” on a world scale would be attempted. If this is a probability then it is our business to try to envisage and predict what the world would be like under the domination of the “New Deal” imperialist bourgeoisie. This is not all; a further question intrudes: assuming the victory of the New Deal bourgeoisie, has the world proletariat any compelling reasons now for believing that its condition would be enhanced, improved, or even equal to what it was before the war? That is, what is the probability of the status quo ante bellum; of the perpetuation of bourgeois democracy as we have known it? If not bourgeois democracy as we have known it, then what?
There are numerous persons, high in public life and by no means of radical proclivities, who admit and urge that there must be a change, that the world can not go on in the old way. A Mr. Batt, a business man and deputy director of the Office of Production Management (OPM) returned from England with the startling announcement that a “revolution” was taking place there and that the old capitalism is dead. Mr. Luce of Time and Fortune has spoken of the “American Century” after the war. Miss Dorothy Thompson wants a “Ring of Democracies.” Mr. Streit demands “Union Now.”
Norman Thomas, the social democrats and the beleaguered liberals are very modest in their desires. They want only that “democracy” be maintained and extended. Mr. Thomas, in his ardent and burning desire to keep us out of the war, almost forgot his fervid call for “socialism in our time.”
 
The Bourgeois Groups
There are two groups, both within the ruling class, whose desires and plans for the future are not completely clear. On the one hand there is a section, the Old Guard bourgeoisie whose mouthpiece today is Lindbergh. They are against the war, they say, but for what reason we can not at this time be certain. They work in the dark and behind the facade of anonymity. When they appear in the open it is to make a flank attack. Their positive pronouncements are always in defense of good old-fashioned American democracy, the “American Way of Life” and “Our System of Free Enterprise.” They have never been outshouted in their appeal to the Founding Fathers, to religion and the Declaration of Independence; not even by the Stalinists in the days of Collective Security. But their real program for the future is not known and their aims are obscure.
Next there is the “New Deal” bourgeoisie, led by Roosevelt. These crusaders sallied forth in 1933 with a fanfare of trumpets and a program. Wilson had his “New Freedom” and Roosevelt promulgated his “New Deal.” As the years went on the New Deal began to sag and crack. It was transformed into the War Deal and that is where we find ourselves today. Beyond the bare fact that Roosevelt and the New Dealers move into war with a singleness of vision and purpose, we are as much in the dark as in the case of their blood brothers, the “economic royalists.” For as far as we know their program for the future is amorphous, their ideas vague and their plans and intentions imperfectly illuminated.
The purpose of this article is specifically to examine the New Dealers, to examine this section of the bourgeoisie in relation to the proletariat and the class struggle. This is important mainly for the reason that Roosevelt represents primarily that part of the ruling class which has to a considerable extent succeeded in convincing the working class that capitalist society, while far from perfect, is steadily being improved under the ministration of the New Deal. Furthermore, the Roosevelt bourgeoisie believes that it will not be difficult to hold the proletariat under its banner because of the devastating regime of Hitler and the irreconcilable anti-labor attitude of the capitalist Old Guard. We shall primarily concern ourselves, therefore, with the Roosevelt New Dealers and their backers in the ranks of the bourgeoisie.
 
The Labor Upsurge
As United States imperialism prepares for a showdown with German imperialism, the dominant local phenomenon is the revolt of the working class against the set tendency of the bourgeoisie to conspire against the trade unions and to freeze wages. This is attempted by the ruling class in the face of gigantic profits, a rapid increase in profits over last year. This fact has thoroughly penetrated the consciousness of the proletariat. It overshadows their somewhat muffled patriotism. The intensity and persistence of the strike wave is a source of constant annoyance to the bourgeoisie and creates uncertainty in their ranks.
The spearhead of the upsurge of the trade union proletariat is the CIO. In order clearly to comprehend this movement of the working class it is necessary to understand the historic roots and development of the CIO. What is happening today is an integral part of the origin of the CIO. The movement for the CIO arose inside the American Federation of Labor some years after the objective conditions for industrial unionism had already matured. The transformation of industry from the craft, hand production base, to complete machine production on a mass scale was already full-grown years before organized agitation for industrial unions got under way in the AFL. Not only had modern technology triumphed but it was increasingly accelerated in the decades following the First World Imperialist War.
 
Trade Unions and Industrial Changes
Not only this, but capitalist centralization and concentration created huge monopoly industries. These corporations built vast industrial units and gathered in millions of workers to man their ever-expanding plants. These millions of proletarians were gathered from all over the earth and assembled and disciplined in the organized processes of capitalist production. Furthermore the leaders of industry and finance rendered a service to the working class when they adopted the practice of giving preference in hiring to younger men. The older men, schooled in the earlier methods of production, were unfitted both psychologically and physically for the more rapid pace of modern machine technology. Also in the beginning – before they learned the dangers involved – industrial leaders preferred younger men and women because they did not have family responsibilities in the same proportion as the older people. Therefore lower wages could be paid to the young unmarried men than to the older ones with families to support. But aside from desires of the employers it is a fact chat modern mass production industry must give the preference to the younger men and women who have the required physical stamina and endurance.
We say then that the whole of mass production industry in the United States was ready for the vertical union long before it became a reality. The old craft form was outmoded and the working class was ready for the new unionism. That the CIO seemed to appear suddenly, to burst from the AFL overnight and take its place in the mass production factories is only strange when one fails to take into account the long years of preparation and the foundations laid by the process of capitalist production.
What is happening today is in a direct line of descent from the beginnings of the industrial union movement as represented by the CIO. The movement arose out of certain objective conditions. It functions today in similar objective conditions, only in a more intense and faster moving situation. The events and the situation which called forth industrial unionism are with us yet. The only difference that can be discerned is in magnitude, intensity and the wider understanding of the proletariat of the meaning of the struggle in which it is engaged.
 
The Triumph of Industrial Unionism
The industrial union movement expresses itself today as the CIO. But it is wider and deeper than any label or any given name. At a later stage the movement may go by another name. It is not to be excluded that its economic and political activity may move to a higher plane. Theoretically it is correct to say that genuine industrial unionism should be consciously based on principles of class struggle and not class collaboration as is the case with the CIO today. What must be emphasized now, however, is the continuous dynamic character of the industrial union movement. This flows from its origin and coincides with the objective conditions faced by the working class. The movement expresses – very primitively it is true – the beginnings of a new body of concepts, concepts that impel a whole class forward, that is, political concepts. To be unclear on these points is to place oneself in a position of confusion and the danger of falling prey to the clever and deliberate nonsense promulgated by the bourgeoisie to that effect that “communists” are responsible for the strikes in the “defense” industries.
The dynamics of the industrial union movement has been completely misunderstood in some quarters. It has never been understood and appreciated by the leadership of the AFL. From the position that the mass production workers did not want to be organized, this leadership moved over to open hostility to industrial unionism and the most adamant and ingrown craft unionism. Even the leadership of the CIO itself does not fully comprehend the nature of the movement which it is attempting to lead. There were some who predicted, after the first flush of organization, that the CIO had reached its peak; the AFL was getting stronger, its unions were more solid and better organized than those of the CIO. Some of the New Unionists, however blind, began to see when the AFL started to flirt a little with a sort of semi-industrial unionism. [1] The Marxists, who were clear on the issues, took the position that the success of the CIO was to be welcomed.
The bourgeoisie and its theoreticians had a clearer understanding of the industrial union movement. They preferred the success of the AFL whenever they were forced to choose between the two organizations. The AFL to them represented “responsible” unionism, that is, docile unionism. They saw, correctly, that if any type of trade unionism had revolutionary implications it was the industrial union. They perceived that here was something new of great potential power and strength. Down the road somewhere and under the proper objective conditions they were not sure what might happen. The bourgeoisie was correct, as they are at times in relation to their own class interests. The industrial union movement is not hard set. It is fluid, vibrant and virile. It is militant and understands something of what is necessary to be done and how to do it. It is made up of comparatively young workers who flock into the movement. They are serious and eager to learn. They believe in industrial unionism and in its possibilities. They are crusaders, often impatient at delays and usually ready for a picket-line struggle with the employer.
These young proletarians have not absorbed what the capitalist press calls “responsible unionism.” At times they resort to “wildcat” strikes. They do not always submit to the commands of their leadership. They are not thoroughly regimented. No one should be alarmed at this. Even the so-called wildcat strike is a manifestation of initiative, of power and courage. It is proof that the industrial union movement throbs with life. This drive and skepticism in the ranks are a necessary corrective to the class collaborationist attitude of the leadership. Even the bourgeoisie today in the period of its decline finds it necessary to tolerate a little wildcatting, inside its own ranks, in order to hold back its demise.
This is the kind of labor movement that the bourgeoisie was face to face with at the outbreak of the war. It is a movement with this background, this history and this composition that manned the “defense” industries. It was not the AFL craft unions. They had only nibbled occasionally at organizing the great army of proletarians in the mass production industries.
It was clearly discernible at the CIO convention in November 1940, which was held after the Selective Service Act had become law, that these workers were not primarily concerned with such an abstraction as “national defense.” Their primary interests were building the CIO, that is, industrial unions; union recognition with signed contracts and wage increases. Thousands of these workers understand thoroughly that the basic task is the building of industrial unions. That is not just a theory, for they know almost nothing of the theory involved. They know the concrete situation and the practical questions involved. Some of the strikes, for instance, have not involved wages at all, but union recognition. The capitalist press along with the social-democrat New Leader have noted this as a black mark against the CIO. The bourgeois press wanted to give the impression that trade union activity should center on wages only, A demand for the recognition of the union and the closed shop, they consider outside the realm of legitimate unionism. It is a bid for power which, of course, the ruling class considers a threat to its safety.
 
The Growth of Class Consciousness
With the upturn in war preparations and the publication of profit figures, showing tremendous increases over 1939 the mass production workers became extremely wage conscious. They wanted more of the profits returned to them. Not only because the cost of living was rising but also for the reason that within these workers was born the germ of a new and seminal idea: profits were created by the working people and they should share more equitably in their distribution. And too this was the way they understood the New Deal. It was a plan for a larger life for all the people. To be real this plan must give the workers an ever increasing share of the national income.
The bourgeoisie had been thinking also. They had ideas and plans. They had a war to fight. One can not fight wars with bond salesmen, college professors and social workers. The main body of the working class in the factories and on the farms is necessary for the military adventure. This working class must be regimented and tamed. This must be accomplished not only to prosecute the war in a military way but in order to clear the tracks for unhampered boosting of profits. The proletariat, however, evinced no real inclination to close ranks and suspend the struggle for social and economic gains. This led to a conspiracy on the part of the bourgeoisie to scuttle the labor legislation, peg wages, increase hours and break the unions, particularly the CIO. In practice this was what was attempted in all the big strikes: Bethlehem, Ford, Allis-Chalmers, International Harvester, North American and others. The tactic was so plain and open that even the most stupid should understand.
The bourgeoisie, as is its wont, called in the most docile and gullible of the union leadership. They appealed to their patriotism.
Not only were some of the labor leaders captured by the bourgeoisie, docile and patriotic, but also corrupt and stupid. The sharpest and cleverest trap was set for Philip Murray, for obvious reasons. For not only is Murray the head of the CIO but he is an honest labor leader with ability and a genuine interest in the advancement of the working class. Roosevelt forced Murray onto the “Mediation” Board. Then things began to happen. The bourgeois captains knew what they were about but the labor captains understood neither the aims of the ruling class, the temper of the proletariat, nor the stage of the class struggle through which the workers were groping their way.
 
The Communist Bugaboo
This whole panorama of events, ideas and situations is the real background of the recent strike wave. It is the concrete analysis of these events, ideas and practical situations that one must seek an understanding of that segment of the world drama being enacted in the United States today.
When the proletariat refused to submit and resisted “pacification” by the bourgeoisie and the government, a dilemma was posed before Roosevelt and the ruling class. An explanation and a cure had to be found. Industry and finance blamed the situation on Roosevelt and the New Deal. The President and his cohorts had steadfastly refused to consider “cooling off” legislation, revamping of the Wagner Act and the grant o£ judicial powers to the Mediation Board. The workers had been coddled by the New Deal and given visions of power that if attained or even approached, would disrupt capitalist economy. Not only this but the press and others made still another accusation against the New Deal and the CIO. Both the government and the CIO had been nurturing the “viper of communism.” This accusation and the accompanying attack reached their peak when the workers at the North American Aircraft Corporation refused to wait for the “Mediation” Board to render its advisory decision. The capitalist press screamed its imprecations against “communist” activity. The government and the heads of the CIO joined the chorus. There was no doubt in the minds of any of these gentlemen that the road to peace, harmony and full speed ahead for the “defense” program lay through purging the unions of “communists.”
When such talk comes from Murray and the CIO leadership we can only say that it is the most puerile infantilism. When it comes from the Old Guard of the bourgeoisie, they lie and they know it. When uttered by Roosevelt and the New Deal in connection with the use of the army in a strike, we are face to face with a new and dangerous phase of the New Deal which we will say more about later on.
To say that the recent strikes are due to the activity of “communists” or “the communists” is to ignore both the background of the strikes and the nature of industrial unionism. Also the oft repeated charge about “communist” responsibility is only to say that one rejects the doctrine of spontaneity as an explanation for the strikes. To say with the bourgeoisie that the Stalinists “foment” strikes, meaning that there would be none, or only inconsequential ones in the “defense” industries, is identical with accepting the bourgeois notion that “radicals” and “outsiders” foment the class struggle. The strikes are an integral part of the class struggle which reached the heights it did because of well-defined objective conditions.
 
Roosevelt Strikes Too
It should also be said that no questions of tactics are at issue here. What we are discussing is the reason for the strikes per se and not questions of timing, organization of procedure. Philistines, quacks and chauvinists of all stripes talk about tactics, tempo and the rest of it when they really mean class collaboration as a principled position. In a very elementary and halting manner the proletariat is in process of rejecting this concept of class peace in favor of class struggle.
This may have been a revelation to Roosevelt and the New Dealers. This may account for his sudden decision to strike with the army. He perhaps discovered that he did not have the total allegiance of the working class. It did not trust him completely. The material conditions of life were a stronger factor in their decisions than the “defense” program or the fading promises of the New Deal. The fact is that the New Deal had failed even before the outbreak of the war. Although the working class supported Roosevelt for the third time, they were only choosing what they considered the lesser of two evils. Even at that the large popular vote given Willkie demonstrated that the ranks of labor were not solid behind Roosevelt.
It is not easy to fathom the mind of the New Dealers and their plans for the future, but it is imperative that we make the effort. What are they thinking about and what are their plans not only for carrying through the war but what type of society do they envisage after the war? A capitalist society to be sure, but what kind of capitalist society? The traditional bourgeois democracy? Hardly. The pleas and protestations of the liberals are not availing.
There are cogent reasons for believing that Roosevelt has a “plan.” The New Deal was a part of that plan. At least one thing seems clear and that is the New Deal intent to stifle the Old Guard bourgeoisie and at the same time win the allegiance and support of the proletariat. This consummation would put the New Deal firmly in the saddle and whip the “enlightened” bourgeois into line. So long as the Old Guard kept to its “evil” ways, Roosevelt could chastise them with his proletarian support. But the war broke out and with it came American preparation for entry. The “economic royalists” got their chance for the reason that it is they who control the decisive sectors of industry. Furthermore, the proletariat in the war industry factories failed to act out the r&le that had been assigned them; that of more or less docile supporters of the war preparations. It is one thing to revolt against Ford, whom the New Deal wanted to teach a lesson. It is something quite different, however, at another stage in the war preparations, to stop production at North American, whose president is cooperating fully with the Administration.
Roosevelt’s use of the army in breaking the North American strike was extremely revealing. Not mainly for the reason that here was a capitalist army moving against workers – that has been done before; but because this specific action seems to be part and parcel of wider aims and intentions. Even the big capitalist press was mildly stunned and uncertain whether or not to applaud. This was strange indeed when one remembers the fact that forcible suppression of strikes is a chief constituent of their arsenal of anti-labor activity. But they had their reasons which were expressed in a somewhat cautious manner by the big bourgeois press. The New York Herald Tribune displayed its perturbation in an editorial entitled The Pity of It. Big business was disturbed not only by the audacity and courage of the young proletarians at North American but, in this instance, more by the action of the Roosevelt government in “seizing” the plant.
 
Plant Seizure Alarms Capitalist Press
Despite the fact that the government did not really seize the plant but only placed it temporarily under the supervision of army officers, the bourgeoisie was alarmed. The capitalist press was convinced that military occupation had become necessary only because Roosevelt had refused to support “cooling off” legislation and had assumed that the “Mediation” Board could rely on “labor’s voluntary cooperation.” This assumption was rudely shattered, said the Herald Tribune, making necessary “the military occupation of the North American Aviation plant, in the order to selective service boards that they reclassify defense strikers and In the imminent threat of anti-strike legislation far more coercive than a ‘cooling off’ mandate ... all this is a great pity. It is a pity that strikes must be broken with bayonets for want of a proper initial labor policy ... it is a pity that into the call for selective service there should have to be introduced a punitive feature.” The Herald Tribune is also against “compulsory arbitration” and is doubtful that “the situation demands any such drastic shift of policy.” The New York Times, while not as tearful as the Herald Tribune, took a similar position on the matter of “compulsory arbitration” and in its criticism of the President for not accepting proposals made on revision of the Wagner Act and providing “cooling off” procedure.
The Times and other big capitalist papers were against plant seizures, even in the North American instance, where there was no real seizure. They were against even the slightest gesture at the taking of private property by the government. This was the real “pity of it.” The Times pointed out that it was not necessary for the army to take over the plant in order to break the strike. Also the big capitalist press made the “discovery,” after the North American affair, that Roosevelt’s basic interest was the “defense” program. Right here the big bourgeoisie stumbled on what was, for them, confirmation of fears they had had all along; namely that Roosevelt and the New Dealers have ideas of making some sort of change in capitalist society. Furthermore, the Old Guard of the bourgeoisie ran into a contradiction. All along they too have been ardent defenders of the “defense” preparations. This basic interests also were alleged to revolve around the “defense” program. Their press emphasized daily, whenever and wherever there was a strike or a threat of a strike, that the workers were holding up “defense,” the workers on strike were holding up so many millions in “defense” orders. Some of them finally got around to the place where even the anticipated subway strike in New York City would vitally retard the whole “defense” program.
Notwithstanding this seeming unanimity of purpose, the Old Guard of the bourgeoisie claimed to discover that the New Dealers’ motivations were not the same as theirs. In their opinion, Roosevelt had made no distinction between the seizure of the plant by the army and the breaking of the strike with the army. New Deal strikebreaking is a buttress to capitalism, but New Deal plant seizing is an assault on capitalism. Despite the “national emergency,” nothing must be done that tends to destroy the “system of free enterprise”; there must be an abiding respect for private property.
The Old Guard of the bourgeoisie is skeptical of the New Dealers and the support given them by the “enlightened” bourgeois. The Old Guard is scared. Scared both of the proletariat and of those recalcitrants within the ruling class who support the New dealers. The whole ruling class must make war against German imperialism but they fear what may happen during the war or after. They do not trust the New Dealers, while at the same time they dread the boldness of the proletariat, particularly through the industrial unions.
The most irreconcilable of the Old Guard bourgeoisie are the cast-off elements from which Lindbergh probably draws support and finances for the America First Committee. This group may include Ford and some of the Standard Oil families. Out of the mouth of Lindbergh, a fascist, white-supremacy zany, they have called for “a new leadership in Washington” before the time arrives for the next presidential election. This group claims to be against the war, but this is incredible unless they are appeasers of Hitler or are testing out the possibilities of fascism in the United States.
The public and active leaders of the Old Guard of the bourgeoisie, who are “enemies” of the New Dealers, are possibly correct when they hint that Roosevelt may have “totalitarian” aims and aspirations. Not primarily as a war measure in the struggle against German imperialism but as one of the emerging facets of the New Deal itself.
 
Danger from New Dealism
This question must be examined not primarily from the class viewpoint of the bourgeoisie but in relation to the proletariat as a class and in light of its class aims and historical interests. It is imperative, in the opinion of this writer, that the working class in the United States turn its attention now to the perspectives, plans and ideas of the New Dealers and their bourgeois supporters. It is not necessary to tell the proletariat to watch the “economic royalists”; they will do that without undue agitation. But a warning must be sounded in connection with the New Dealers.
The New Deal is still faced with capitalist collapse and the degeneration of bourgeois society as we have known it. The New Deal did not pull the country out of the depression; the war economy is only a grewsome substitute for adequate peace-time production and there still remain 9,000,000 unemployed. There are pressing consumer problems now and these will be increased a thousand-fold after the war. Sloan, of General Motors, has spoken repeatedly on this question. Officials of General Electric have manifested interest in their fate as producers not only of capital goods, but of consumer goods on a mass scale. The same is true of Litchfield, of Goodyear Rubber, who voiced doubts as to the future in his New Year’s message printed in Akron papers.
After the present uncontrolled expansion of capital goods plant and equipment, this market will decline and go flat. This is happening not only in the United States but in every capitalist country. The staggering sums being poured out today for powder plants and aircraft factories that will not be needed after the war is only a sample of what is taking place in every field of industry. The plant that was abandoned after the last war, such as Hog Island, the explosives plant at Nitro, West Virginia, and various government arsenals, assume Liliputian proportions in relation to what we will observe after the present war. Combined with the post-war fate of the capital goods market, the prostration of the consumer goods industries through vast and unprecedented unemployment, is the national debt. This will expand to astronomical size.
The problems we pose cannot be examined either in isolation or as a cross-section of the general movement of capitalist society. All of the social, economic and political problems of today are subsumed under the root problem of the entire epoch. That problem is the attempt of declining, embattled and frustrated world capitalism to perpetuate itself. It is the attempt of bourgeois society to gain a new birth of freedom. The whole 20th century has been an era devoted to planning for capitalist resuscitation. The fact that contradictions arise which force the various nations into periodic armed conflict means only that there are differences of opinion in the ranks of the world bourgeoisie as to the manner of achieving the stabilization of capitalism. That was the meaning of the First World War. It is more clearly the real meaning of the present World War.
 
World War II Seeks Another Solution
The rise of what is known as fascism is not some incidental and detached political development. It is not a mutation but the result of continuous variations in the rapid decline of world capitalism in the twentieth century. Fascism is an increasingly prominent part of the political and economic configuration of world bourgeois society in a period of capitalist convulsion. Those liberals and others who see in fascism something even resembling a new social order are only playing with words and do not perceive that the present stage of capitalist decline, which produced fascism, is in some real sense inevitable, unless liquidated by a basic social transformation. These liberals (and proletarians, too) are not only playing with words but with the concentration camp, in every capitalist country, the United States included.
Despite the fact that the present war is an imperialist war, as was the First World War, the present conflict is not a mere repetition of the first. It is something more than an imperialist war. The inner development of the present struggle will propel the imperialist nations and world bourgeois society outside the present bourgeois democratic orbit. The old “balance of power” politics has passed away never to return. To speak of the war as a struggle for the “redivision of the world” is inadequate and dangerous. It is nearer correct and significant to say that it is a war for the domination of the whole world, either by Germany or the United States.
The post-war problems to be faced by each group of warring nations will be identical. That will be the problem of making world capitalism function. To say that there must be no new Versailles provides no solution to this problem. Any attempt at reallocation of colonies and raw materials also will not answer the question. Those who think that the many problems posed by the decline of world capitalism and the war will necessarily find their solution in an Anglo-American victory, fail to grasp the meaning of the ordeal and the travail which bourgeois democracy is now going through, and the worse ordeal that it will face later, even though Hitler is defeated.
 
New Dealism Has a New Program
The main forces involved today are German and American imperialism. Hitler has accepted it as a fact that capitalism has entered a new stage and that this new period is one in which capitalism can not survive if dependence is placed on bourgeois democratic guarantees. The American bourgeoisie does not accept this dictum in its public pronouncements, but pretends that it is engaged in a struggle, not for a “New Order,” as is Hitler’s contention, but for a sort of reincarnation of bourgeois democracy on a higher plane. The leadership in this evolution has fallen to the New Deal, whose major prophet is Roosevelt. The attention of the proletariat in the United States should be centered on Roosevelt. There is reason to hold that Roosevelt also believes bourgeois democracy must be transformed, or converted. He and the New Deal bourgeoisie will unquestionably come forward in due time with a “plan.” He will not be able to hold to the old shibboleths. The proletariat will not respond as in the past to the traditional capitalist slogans. The New Dealers will, and in fact have already discovered that this is a fact. That the proletariat has not yet directly rejected these slogans either intellectually or in action is not today real solace to any section of the bourgeoisie. Roosevelt and the New Deal are particularly concerned because it was they who virtually assumed leadership of the working class in the United States with the promulgation of the NIRA. The ascendancy of the New Deal was based on the allegiance of the proletariat. This allegiance was used to chastize the Old Guard of the bourgeoisie and bring in the “New Order” with the New Deal at its head.
The working class submitted, at times very noisily, to this regime even after the failure of the NRA and after it was clear that the New Deal was no cure for the evils of a decaying capitalism. The war came and brought with it the drive to put through the “defense” program. The bourgeois Old Guard with their ownership and control of the “defense” industries, insisted on “business as usual”: maintenance of the old monopolistic practices, boosting of profits, continuation of international connections, including respect for patent rights and agreements with Germany, and was, above all, firm on restrictions on the proletariat and the rise in wages.
 
Its Relations to the Proletariat
We have already analyzed the response of the working class to this situation in relation to the employer. But the New Deal concluded that the proletariat in the industrial unions were not only breaking through the net of the “economic royalists” but were also bursting the bonds forged around them by the New Deal. With only the most primitive and vague understanding of the problems that we have been discussing in this article, the workers, led by the industrial unions, marched into class struggle with heightened consciousness, irrespective of the demands of the “national emergency.” We want to emphasize again that this should have been expected, especially by Marxists, given the situation and the existence of the new industrial unions.
In many respects this development reached its peak in the North American strike. Here one had an opportunity to look into the New Deal mind and envisage what the future may hold in the way of a “plan.” Roosevelt used the army for the same reasons that Hitler would use his army. Not for the simple reason that the “defense” program was being hindered but because to the New Deal the strike portrayed an advance stage of the class struggle. The workers were becoming increasingly disillusioned, not only with the “economic royalists” but with the New Deal bourgeoisie also. The proletariat was losing its respect for the processes of bourgeois “democracy.”
Not only did the New Deal Roosevelt act for the same reasons that would have motivated a Hitler but he used the same violent methods, and without respect for bourgeois democratic legality. Under-Secretary of War Patterson stated that the action was “of dubious legality.” After the act Congress passed a law “legalizing” such procedure.
As we have stated, even the Old Guard of the bourgeoisie was a little stunned. Here was the New Deal which had steadfastly refused to permit any changes in the Wagner Act, which was against “cooling off” periods or “legal” compulsory arbitration, virtually “taking the law into its own hands.”
 
Roosevelt Seeks a Way Out
This writer is convinced that Roosevelt and the New Deal thoroughly understand that bourgeois democracy has run its course and that such a political system can not longer stand against an awakening proletariat. Roosevelt faces what every bourgeois ruler and leader faces: the problem of the class struggle in these days of bourgeois democratic impotence and unfolding proletarian intervention. The outposts of the class struggle in the United States are an uncharted territory. This is the result of the activity of the workers in the mass production industries. The New Deal is caught between these workers and the Old Guard of the bourgeoisie. The New Deal seeks to play the rôle of arbiter and mediator. For the reasons that we have given, both from the angle of the proletariat and the bourgeoisie as a whole, this mediation can not be essentially different from the mediation of Hitler and the National Socialists. All the talk in the United States about the necessity of “total defense” against “totalitarianism,” when stripped of mysticism, cant and chauvinist idealism, means the adoption of a native brand of “totalitarianism.” This development is inevitable, given capitalism today, unless checked by decisive action of the proletarians. Liberals and workers who think otherwise are due for a rude jolt and a taste of a new type of Americanism.
Roosevelt and the New Deal bourgeoisie will attempt to pull world capitalism out of the doldrums under their leadership. The milder processes of bourgeois democracy have lost their potency and charm. In this particular imperialist epoch an individual rises to power supported by a party which is the bearer of an idea. That idea flowers into a political system whose only aim is the preservation and stabilization of world capitalism. Roosevelt and Hitler stand face to face, engaged in a struggle to determine which shall become the world’s No. 1 imperialist chieftain.
 
The Proletariat Is the Only Hope
If the foregoing analysis is even moderately reasonable, then the outcome of the present war, without the revolutionary intervention of the world proletariat, will be dark indeed for the working class and the peoples of all countries. The collapse of bourgeois democracy, the attempt to save international capitalism through a devastating world war, the demonstrated incompetence of bourgeois democratic leadership, its confusion and its fright, all these together combined with the determination to hold fast to capitalism, present the specter of world fascism.
On the other side stands the international proletariat. The freest and largest section is in the United States. It is also the most active and militant section and in this sense the most advanced. In this same sense it is the vanguard of the world working class. We have already portrayed its organization, its roots and its temper. The situation in the United States is extremely consequential. This country may and can become the pivot around which the world movement of the working class turns. Roosevelt sees this and will undoubtedly attempt to crush the movement ruthlessly and decisively. The American proletariat threatens to harass him and the New Deal on the road to world power.
This is not all. The European working class, including the Russian, is not dead. One possible outcome of the entanglements and shifts of the present war can be and may be revolutionary actions in one or more European countries. The world stage is set for a thrust by the international proletariat. This is demonstrated not only by the objective scene in connection with the collapse of capitalism, but primarily by the resistance of the proletariat to imperialist pacification. This refusal of the working class, especially in the United States, to be passive reveals a primordial inclination to go forward. This more than instinctive attitude of the working class is stultified and shunted into patriotic channels because no adequate political leadership has emerged. Trotsky wrote three years ago that the crisis of the proletariat is the crisis of leadership. This is far more evident today than when Trotsky wrote. The proletariat in the United States has met a test and needs a revolutionary leadership to organize it and lead the march to victory.

Note by ETOL
1. There is a typesetting error in the printed version. We have tried to reconstruct this sentence so that it fits the context.
 



Keep Your Eyes on the Profiteers
One aspect of the war that workers need to pay more attention to is the millions of dollars going to the “profiteers” and war contract “brokers.” First we want to talk about the “profiteers” because Leon Henderson, price administrator, has been having some rather harsh things to say on this subject and he ought to know what the facts are. Henderson says that “profiteering has cost the government $50,000,000 extra since the war preparations began.” That is, preparations up to now for participating in the Second World Imperialist War have cost the government $50,000,000 in what virtually amounts to graft. The speculators got busy and have made a killing. Congress dawdled around for four months but finally got busy with plans to have labor make more and more sacrifices. While Congress was preparing to manacle labor, the “profiteers” raised food stocks in cold storage far above the average for the past five yearn Butter stocks were increased 40 per cent, cheese 47 per cent; poultry 34 per cent, beef 38 per cent, eggs 13 per cent, frozen fruits, 58 per cent, lard 86 per cent, pork 18 per cent and mutton 47 per cent. What this means is that the “profiteers” packed huge amounts of foodstuffs away in cold storage in order to create a “shortage” and jack up the price. Therefore, the higher prices that labor is forced to pay for food is the result of hoarding, speculating, gambling and graft. The government has done nothing about this racket. No more has been done up to now than was done during the last war.
A question to be asked is: who are these “profiteers” and speculators? Virtually all of the items in the list named are products that are controlled by the big packing companies: Armour, Swift, Wilson, Cudahy and a few others. Armour and Swift are by far the biggest. This hoarding job isn’t being done by little fellows. They don’t have the capital necessary to buy up, huge supplies and neither can they pay for the extremely high price of cold storage. It’s the big fellows that are doing this robbing and stealing and grafting on the government and the public. They control the packing houses and the cold storage plants.
This organization for the wholesale robbery of the working class has been going on right under the nose of Congress while the windjammers on Capitol Hill were busy thinking up new ways to strangle labor and break up the unions.
The capitalist press has been blaming rising prices on the farmers, while the manufacturers of food products say that the high wages paid to city workers are responsible. And so, business goes on as usual: the tax burden on labor is increased by the government, while the “profiteers” hoard food to create a shortage so that the “law” of supply and demand can operate to raise prices.
 
Some Sterling Patriots: Defense Brokers
The “defense brokers,” sterling patriots, are getting theirs also. By “defense brokers” we are not referring; to the “dollar a year men” in the various government bureaus such as OPM. They are a “higher order” than the fellows we are talking about right now. We are talking about the fellows who prowl around the government departments in Washington who let the billions in contracts to private firms for war material and supplies. Their job is to use the prestige that comes from former connection with the government for the purpose of getting fat contracts for the private firm employing them; usually on a commission basis; If the “contact man” himself isn’t a former government official or employee, he knows someone who was.
Not only are these “brokers” operating with companies which get contracts directly from the government, but also with companies which are sub-contractors and do work for the companies that deal directly with the government. One machine company received $65,000 from the Remington Arms Co. for shell dies. This company deducted 5 per cent of the $65,000 for its “services” and sent the balance to a company that actually had dies to sell. The second company (the one which made the dies) took out payment for the dies and then gave up to 30 per cent of the $65,000 paid out by Remington to a “contract broker.”
Now let’s see what this means in hard cash. Remington Arms Co. put out $65,000 for shell dies for “national defense.” An alleged machine company which made no dies and was therefore only a “broker,” took $3,250 of this money. This company then sent the balance; $61,750 to a company which actually made dies. But the company which actually had a plant to make dies evidently couldn’t get the contract from the “machine company” without assistance. There was a man named Leon K. Shanack standing in the way whose mitt had to be greased. Shanack got around $18,000 for getting the contract for the company that made the dies. Now let’s see where we are. The dies necessary to make shells “for the fight against Hitler and to save democracy,” cost the Remington Arms Co. $65,000, but the cost of the dies themselves was only around $43,000. The other $21,000 was brokers’ fees; $3,250 to one brokerage-firm and $18,525 to an individual “broker.”
We assure any worker who reads this that none of this came out of; our head. It was all bared in the “investigation” begun by the House Military Committee on December 2 and reported on the front page of the New York Times of December 3.
 
Here’s a Story That’s Even Better
The above however is small potatoes in the “brokerage” fees for getting “defense” contracts. The best story concerns one Charles West, who at one time was a big shot in the New Deal. In fact, in 1935 West was a “contact man” for President Roosevelt. He has also been a member of Congress, under Secretary of the Interior and a member of the Treasury Department’s processing tax board of review. In all these jobs West receivedi a salary of from $7,500 to $10,000 a year.
Evidently, West saw a chance to get fat off the spending the government was doing in preparation for war entry. He got himself a job as the “representative” of the Empire Ordnance Corp. This firm, according to West, has received $70,000,000 in war orders from the government since November 1940. Now West has brought suit against the company for $700,000 which he claims is due him as a fee for helping get the $70,000,000 contract through. (West began “working” for the company in November 1940.) He claims in his suit in a New York federal court that he agreed to serve as a “business consultant and adviser” for a fee of 1 per cent of any orders that the company would “accept” during the year. The question arises just why this big ordnance company needed the services of West in dealing with the government. Why couldn’t the officers of the company negotiate contracts with the government? What influence could West wield that was denied to the officers of the Empire Ordnance Corp.? Who were West’s “contacts” in Washington?
There is one other question that must be asked. West began his connection as “business consultant and adviser” to the Empire Ordnance Corp., a private business, in November 1940 but in March 1941 according, to the New York Times, “he received his latest appointment, being named to a three man board to study and report on the nation’s existing rail, water and truck facilities. His salary again was reported at $10,000 a year.” The Times doesn’t reveal from whom he received the appointment nor who or what was paying the salary. If it was a government board, and this is probably the case, then West was drawing a salary from the government at the same time he was representing a private firm as a “contract broker.”
These revelations made in Congress and in the capitalist press don’t show much “sacrifice” on the part of the bosses and their stooges. It’s only labor that gets a demand from the bosses and Congress to bend its back and pay for the war. They want a “ceiling” on wages, but not on profits. They are ready to outlaw the closed shop for labor but the closed shop for the war profiteers and “defense brokers” is passed by with a wink.
 



After a week of deliberations, during which all the main controversial questions were either muffled or smoothed over, the fourth national convention of the CIO came to an end with the tumultuous and “unanimous” re-election of Phillip Murray to the presidency.
It had been a week in which some delegates, spectators and the capitalist press were waiting for something to-happen. But whatever it was they were waiting for, it never came to pass, that is on the convention floor. There were tilts in committees, disagreements and hot words – but not a single minority, resolution or report came before the convention. All dissenters were either persuaded to go along or at least to abstain in the convention sessions. The best that they could do was to take a few wild and harmless punches at each other in the Statler Hotel.
 
The Task Murray Set Himself
THE CIO leadership headed by Murray seemed to have had one big idea in mind, one paramount task to perform. That task was to prove to Roosevelt first, then to Congress, business and the “public” that the CIO is in full support of what; is known as “the President’s foreign policy” and the “defense” program. The big idea in the mind of the delegates was the reflection of Murray. This is not to say that these actions were the sole contributions of the convention; the gathering did other things – things that were extremely important – but all other questions, no matter what their importance, took second place to the resolution on the war and the re-election of Murray.
These two actions called forth most of the “debate” at the convention. The speeches as a whole were of the routine and hollow kind that didn’t carry much conviction. This doesn’t apply of course to the case of Murray’s re-election, because Murray should have been re-elected. There was no contest and there could have been none.
 
Murray’s Strength in the Organization
All the talk in the capitalist press about Murray now being the strong man of the CIO and that he will now lead the organization in his own name and not merely as the deputy of John L. Lewis, is just so much tripe and nonsense. Ever since his election at Atlantic City last year; Murray has been in command of the CIO and has not been a deputy of Lewis. He was the only candidate for the office and in the nature of things could have been the only candidate. His re-election by unanimous vote of the convention was in the bag and all the parading, shouting and seconding speeches by all the CIO vice-presidents was just so much ballyhoo and a sheer waste of time.
What was the convention trying to prove by the 35 minute ovation after Murray’s nomination by Kennedy? These were the same people that had given Lewis a 45 minute ovation the year before at Atlantic City. Should anything happen that would make it impossible for Murray to be a candidate next year and Lewis came forward, these CIO leaders would be just as vociferous and voluble for Lewis as they were this year for Murray. I hope that Phil Murray understands this sort of thing. I think that Lewis does. There were the Stalinists, who last year inflated the ovation for Lewis (and against Murray) to 45 minutes; this year, they, were bellowing, all over the place about Murray’s great leadership and what a calamity the CIO would face without the leadership of Murray. The performances of these scoundrels in the convention must have turned Murray’s stomach.
Of course, for many delegates, that is those under the influence of Hillman, the demonstration for Murray, was a demonstration against Lewis. Hillman had slipped into Detroit a few days before the opening of the convention to organize his faction and to prepare for the convention sessions. This is the, only method that Hillman; can use in fighting Lewis since he and of course none of his lieutenants is any match for Lewis in the open, There must have been a lot of scared Hillmanites present who were fearful that Lewis would show up some day.
I say that the unanimous re-election of Murray was indicated not only for the reason that there was no one else but also because, within the framework of his outlook and understanding, Murray had made an excellent CIO president. This despite his bungling of the North American situation, his “for and against” attitude in connection with “mediation” boards, his support of the war while he at the same time protests that he is no war-monger, his naive belief in the “Murray Plan,” his all-out support of the “defense”’ program and his simultaneous claim that the CIO will never surrender its gains but will, continue to fight for greater gains while the war is on.
The most important reason for which the delegates: gave Murray full support was that they had earlier adopted significant resolutions giving; the stand of the CIO on the questions of war and national “defense.” The positions taken in these resolutions were Murray’s. To adopt Murray’s program and then repudiate Murray, or even to waver on the re-election of Murray just would not make sense. This also goes for all those like A.D. Lewis and the delegates from the miners, who, although they did not vote for the war resolution, did not oppose it or offer any substitute. There was no leadership in the convention except the Murray leadership. Not a single delegate took the floor to oppose the resolution on giving full support to Roosevelt’s “foreign policy” and the “defense” program.
 
Opposition to War Resolution Silent
Despite the fact that national CIO conventions are pretty well oiled and with the top leaders at the controls, they did not perhaps expect such easy sailing with the resolution in support of the war. Even with opposition the resolution would have passed. What opposition there was had no leadership present. Furthermore, no program had been or was put forth by any opposition, actual or potential.
The tactical procedure followed by the convention leaders must have caused them some sleepless nights. They had the job of supporting Lewis and his miners in an actual strike, justifying their withdrawal from the National Defense Mediation Board and at the same time proving their loyalty to Roosevelt and “our country.” This was a big order and I got the impression that Murray wasn’t very happy in the role of captain attempting to steer the CIO ship away from the rocks. And then too there were the millions of workers organized in the CIO, including some of the lowest paid and most exploited workers in the United States. There are the Negro workers who are not benefiting much from the President’s “foreign policy” and the “defense” program. The rank and file membership had to be kept in mind.
The capitalist press wasn’t much impressed with the “for and against” attitude of the convention. The bosses wanted complete capitulation, open repudiation of the mine strike and, a harmonious rejection of any and all militant actions by the CIO unions. The Hillmanites were in complete agreement with the bosses on these matters. Krzyski, Potofsky and Rosenbloom were there as delegates and Irwin and Hardman were on the sidelines. To these can be added the smaller Hillman fry like Reuther and others.
 
Initiate Organizing Drive in the South
The outstanding decision of the convention, so far as benefits to labor are concerned, was the decision to initiate an organizing campaign in the South. This is to be the next great organizing effort of the national CIO. At another kind of convention this decision would have called forth the kind of discussion such an important project deserves. Everybody was for it, of course, but nothing much was said about it in the convention. Such a proposal could have and should have been made a big thing. Carrying the CIO into the South means penetrating the most reactionary section of the country with the most militant trade union in the country today. It means bringing industrial unionism to the most oppressed workers in the country.
The convention reaffirmed its former position on the question of the poll tax and passed a strong resolution against lynching and in support of federal anti-lynching legislation, Ferdinand Smith, Negro secretary of the National Maritime Union, took the floor on the anti-lynching resolution. It was significant, however, that Smith did not speak on the resolution supporting Roosevelt’s “foreign policy.” He could have tied up the war resolution with the status and plight of the Negro in the United States and opposed the passage of the resolution as the representative of the most oppressed of the workers who had nothing to gain by support of the imperialist war. But being a Stalinist, it was not in the cards for Smith to oppose the resolution supporting the war.
There was a resolution calling for raising the minimum pay of soldiers in the army to $60 a month. The convention also went on record opposing the practice of the War Department in training draftees for strikebreaking.
 
Prove They Want to “Get into Line”
The leadership not only demonstrated in the resolution on foreign policy that it was anxious to get into line but it wanted to make it clear that the CIO is not opposed to “mediation.” This despite the recent experiences with the “Mediation” Board. A resolution passed, with the usual uncritical attitude, putting the organization on record as favoring the exhausting of all “mediation” and “conciliation” services before resortting to a strike. The intention of the leadership in this resolution was clearly to say that although the CIO had had difficulties with a certain “mediation” board that this did not mean that the CIO will take any future boards of the same stripe lightly.
The Currier case was the event that was expected to let off the fireworks against Hillman. But there were to be no fireworks. Murray saw to that. A resolution was presented and adopted condemning the OPM for its handling of the Currier matter, but Hillman was not mentioned by name. In attempting to go further, the convention on the last day adopted a resolution calling on the OPM and other government department and agencies to “take immediate positive action to set aside the AFL’s collusive contracts” in certain plants on the Pacific Coast. The leadership of the convention stood firm against the naming of Hillman, despite the fact that Hillman is known to all of them as the one person responsible for the establishment of these “collusive contracts” and for refusing the contract to the Currier Company in favor of a collusive contract with the AFL.*
This failure to let a resolution condemning Hillman come before the convention for discussion and vote made it impossible to determine the relative strength of Lewis and Hillman in the convention. It is my opinion that a resolution condemning Hillman would not have been carried in the convention. Not because Hillman had anything that could be called a Hillman majority, but for the reason that the majority of the convention delegates were against the attitude of Lewis in connection with the “national emergency” and support of the President.
Not only this, but it is important to note that it really would not have made sense to pass a resolution condemning Hillman in the Currier case after voting for the resolution to support the Roosevelt “foreign policy” and full support to the “defense” program. On the all-important question of the war, the convention, including Murray, was in full agreement with Hillman. Furthermore, Hillman’s idea of applying the resolutions passed by the convention is to do precisely just such things as he did in the Currier case and what he did in connection with the AFL “collusive contracts” on the Pacific Coast. The CIO voted full support to the “defense” program. Hillman’s idea of carrying this out is to keep down “jurisdictional” quarrels between the AFL and the CIO.
It remains to be seen how Murray will face the many serious problems that will confront the CIO in the coming year. He didn’t make a very good start in the convention. He will learn as he goes along with the campaign to organize the South, to fight the poll tax, to oppose lynching, to collaborate with “mediation” boards and the other things that he has in mind, that the ruling class has not been fooled by any of the conciliatory resolutions and speeches made in the convention. They will still demand the complete capitulation of Murray and the whole CIO.
 



The Stalinists Knife the Labor Movement
We walked out into the street last Saturday and came across a man passing out a leaflet and asking people to sign a petition to the Senate against the passage of the Smith Bill. The leaflet was headed America Is in Danger and said that “a serious blow has been struck at National Unity and the Defense of the Country through passage of the Smith Bill in the House. The Smith Bill would rob labor overnight of almost every gain which it has fought for and won through decades of bitter struggle ... This bill would “give a free, hand to every open-shopper in the country and thus promote industrial strife, hinder the Defense Program and help Hitler.”
This leaflet was put out by the Communist Party, that is, by the Stalinist traitors. They are concerned with “national unity,” the “defense of the country” and the “defense program.” The real meaning of these phrases in the mouth of the Stalinists is: unity with Stalin and his murderous bunch of bureaucrats, and defense of the Stalinist gang in Moscow. That’s what the Stalinists in the United States want “national unity” for, that’s why they have switched over to the “defense” program.
How can the Stalinists get so heated up over the Smith Bill? They have the same aims for labor now as the proponents of such anti-labor devices as the Smith Bill. In the Daily Worker for November 14 one can read the following in an editorial:
“The sober and responsible leadership of labor, it seems to us, requires avoidance of hasty actions and a determined effort to remedy the workers’ just grievances by finding ways and means of adjusting them without tying up the production of defense industries.”
These traitors even find something very praiseworthy in their fellow-traitor, Sidney Hillman. In another editorial, headed Worthy of Applause, they had this to say about a speech made by Hillman:
“When Hillman said ‘You can’t fight Hitler and at the same time fight defense,’ he was stating an obvious truth.”
In the same Daily Worker, Foster, in the Question and Answer column, had the following to say:
“The workers should be acutely aware in this critical. world situation, that their greatest class interest, identical with the national interest of the whole American people, lies in the defeat of Hitler. If Hitler wins, American national independence will be wiped out. Strikes must be avoided ... the strike should be used only in defense of the workers’ most basic economic interests or to protect the life of the trade unions and then only as a last resort after all other means of settlement have failed ... the workers should taboo strikes ... for the collection of dues and for general organizing purposes.”
 
Why Do They Complain Against the Smith Bill?
Why do these treacherous scoundrels and bureaucrats complain about the Smith Bill and other anti-labor legislation? Because the bill is too harsh? They say that the workers should not strike except to protect their “basic economic interests.” What in hell have all the strikes been for, except to protect the basic economic interests of the workers? What was the North American strike for? The Stalinists who helped to lead that strike said that it was to protect the workers’ basic economic interests. And how about the Allis-Chalmers strike, which they also helped to lead? What was that for? Are they against these strikes today and do they think that the workers made a mistake? And how about the Ford strike and the mine strike, and the recent strike of the “captive” miners? Why didn’t the Stalinists vote against the resolution in support of the “captive” mine strike at the recent CIO convention?
Suppose the decision goes against the miners in the present negotiations and Lewis calls them out again. Will the Stalinist unity hounds and fake patriots oppose this action and tell the miners to remain at work? Is the CIO demand for a “union shop” a demand to protect the “basic economic interests” of the workers or to the Stalinists is it only a trivial demand that should give way before the demand of the bosses for “national unity?”
Which side will the Stalinists be on next spring when the steel workers demand the “union shop”? Should a strike result from the rejection of this demand will the Stalinists support the steel workers or the government, the bosses and the New York Times?
We know which side they will be on; they will be found on the side of the bosses, the government and the capitalist press. They will be found right where they are now. From now on (unless Stalin changes his, line and flops back to Hitler) they will, be the stoolpigeons, the snitchers, the traitors, the unity shouters, the flag wavers. In the factories and the unions the Stalinists will be the chief lieutenants of the bosses and employers. They will make a bloc with Hillman and help with his dirty work. They will lick Roosevelt’s boots and put their GPU men at the services of the FBI. They will oppose every strike, no matter what the cause or justification. They will yell louder than any boss or congressman for “mediation.”
Their opposition to the Smith Bill is a fake. They only want to hold their followers and members in order to have a force to rally around the butcher in the Kremlin. They can have no real quarrel with the anti-labor bills. They are as anti-labor as any labor-hating bill in Congress. They are more dangerous. They are a poison that permeates the labor movement by stealth. They appear as a part of the working class at the same time they are doing the dirty work of the boss class.
 
They Are Traitors to Our Class
They support the Second World Imperialist War now, not for the same reasons as the deluded and muddleheaded liberals but solely as protection to the Stalinist bureaucracy in Moscow. They are not “patriots” in the sense that misguided workers are patriots. These workers do not yet thoroughly understand the nature of capitalist society and the class struggle, but these Stalinist scoundrels do. They are traitors to the working class.
The anti-labor bills are introduced by congressmen who represent the boss class. Congress represents the ruling class. We can understand them. We expect these bills. When these boss class congressmen call for cooling off periods, mediation, responsible labor leaders, keeping production going, no interference with production, we know exactly what they are talking about. They are attempting to manacle labor in the interest of capitalism, American imperialism and the protection of the profits of the ruling class.
Of course they want to keep production going, of course they don’t want strikes. They are fighting an imperialist war against another imperialist bandit. The Stalinists want to keep production going also; they don’t want strikes. They are supporting the Anglo-American gang of imperialists, against the interests of the workers of the world, because they are the protectors of Stalin and his Kremlin bureaucrats.
 



The conference in Washington between labor and big business reveals once again how determined big business is to strangle labor at least for the duration of the war and the honeymoon period of big war profits.
One of the two main goals of industry and finance for the, past two years of war preparation has been to manacle labor and the unions. The other goal is to increase profits. The two goals of course are intimately related; the strangling of the unions, in the opinion of the bosses, will contribute mightily to the boosting of profits. Because if the unions are weakened so that they can be kicked around at the demand of the bosses, then these unions will not be in position to demand higher wages, or even to hold the wage scales they have today.
This doesn’t mean, of course, that the bosses and bankers don’t want to defeat Germany. Of course they do. That’s why they have drafted millions of youth into the Army. But the defeat of Germany also has some connection with profits, world trade, markets and the maintenance of “our system of free enterprise.” The Germans also want profits, world trade, markets and their particular “system of free enterprise.”
American labor doesn’t like the Hitler system, and rightly so. That’s the reason that labor in the United States has already demonstrated its willingness to make certain sacrifices. The two big trade union organizations have voted by overwhelming majorities to support the “President’s foreign policy.” This means that they have voted to support the war. The labor movement supports conscription and has entered the draft army by the hundreds of thousands. Labor has hit the ball in the war factories arid pledged itself to produce and produce and produce. Labor leaders have pledged not to stop production through strikes, if any possible way out can be found through mediation and conciliation. Unions and union members have bought war bonds running into millions of dollars. The unions have passed resolutions and revised their constitutions to provide for the exclusion from office or from membership in the union of all “communists, nazis and fascists; fifth columnists and subversive elements.” Labor has made all sorts of goodwill moves and gestures. It has agreed to virtually all the demands the bosses have made expect one. It has not agreed to liquidate the trade union movement. Labor has not agreed to place itself completely at the mercy of the manufacturers and the bankers. And this explains, the stalemate that exists between the bosses and labor at the Washington conference.
 
Not Enough for Bosses
The unions have made tremendous sacrifices so far, but this is not enough for the National Association of Manufacturers and the Wall Street bankers. They demand complete capitulation. The bosses demand the same thing of labor that they will demand of Germany; complete and unconditional surrender.
We said that the bosses want to defeat Germany. This is true. But they also want to defeat the unions. In the opinion of the boss, he has two enemies: internal, that is organized labor, and external, the German-Japanese-Italian imperialist rivals, There are many times when the bosses in the United States act as though their main enemy was in their own country. That is, the National Association of Manufacturers and the Wall Street bankers act as though they believed that organized labor is their main enemy.
This is all that one can say about the conference that is taking place in Washington. Labor leaders came into this conference in a most conciliatory mood. The organized workers had made all the concessions we have related and more. Murray proposed his Industrial Council Plan. the bosses objected and in continuation of labor’s conciliatory mood, Murray withdrew his proposal for the adoption of the plan. The AFL and CIO representatives unitedly proposed that the conference agree to the “union shop” set-up for the duration of the war. This proposal only means that labor wants guarantees from the bosses that the working class will be assured that its organizations and the right of collective bargaining will be maintained intact through the war.
The AFL and the CIO together are ready to abandon strikes during the war and have all disputes settled by a mediation board. The labor leaders were even ready to agreed to submit the union shop issue to mediation, in concrete instances, as was done in the captive mine dispute. All these proposals were rejected by Hook and the other industrialists at the conference. They demand complete surrender and capitulation. These bosses say that the union shop and closed shop questions cannot become matters for mediation or arbitration. Labor must agree in advance, right now at this conference, not to bring up the question of the union shop or closed shop until after the war is over.
This means only one very simple thing, as we have said again and again: the bosses want to break the unions, they want the opportunity to conspire with their company “union” outfits against the CIO mainly and to use these company unions to harass and weaken the genuine un[ion] unity but their national unity ideas can only result in the total wreck of the labor movement.
 
Labor Can Save Shirt
Labor may save its old shirt at the Washington conference but this will depend on its ability to understand what the present war is about, what the bosses are after and the point beyond which labor cannot go in making concessions if it is to continue to exist. The bosses know what they want. They are there to defend the interests, profits and the dividends of the boss class. As in the case of their religion, the bosses never permit patriotism to interfere with “business as usual.” This is especially their procedure when dealing with labor. This is the program of the bosses at the Washington conference. That’s why they are there. The question left over to ask: is: WHAT IS LABOR THERE FOR?
 



One of the outstanding features of the tour, that I am taking is what seems to be unmistakable evidence of the development of a class line between the Negro worker and the upper class Negro. I am talking about What is known among Negroes as the “big Negro,” These are the Negroes who are in the bigger Negro businesses, the politicians, government officeholders, professional people and the like. Of course Negro workers have not escaped entirely the clutches of these parasites but the beginning of the breakaway is certainly underway.
Increasing trade union consciousness on the part of the Negro is partially responsible for this. The progress of the CIO among Negroes has aided in the process. Furthermore the teaching of revolutionaries has undoubtedly left its mark. Negroes, however slowly, are beginning to understand that most of the so-called Negro leaders use them just about in the same way that they are used by the white leaders. That is, the Negro politicians are after votes and jobs; the Negro professional people are after fees; the Negro businessmen are after profits. They use Jim-Crow and segregation as a base for exploitation and profit taking the same as the whites.
 
These Are the Rich
In a western city, I talked to an old friend, a Negro who is president of a rather substantial Negro insurance company. He, was a Willkieite and talked about the national situation and Roosevelt just as the white businessmen I listened to on the train. “Roosevelt is strangling business. He is ruining the country with the relief and WPA program.” I pointed out that the business people seemed to being doing very nicely under Mr. Roosevelt and that he was really put into office by that section of the ruling class who knew the time had come to make a few concessions to the workers. This didn’t impress my friend who wanted to know where I got the information from that business was making big profits. He being a big business man, I modestly and diffidently replied that one could get such information from the daily papers or certain business journals.
I talked to a Negro woman in another city, who is a social worker, but who on the side has amassed about $250,000 dollars from gasoline stations which she operates. She too was a Willkieite who is certain that the country is going to the devil during the present third term.
I also talked to a Negro who is a social worker in another city. He is for the same end as the socialists (meaning the Workers Party), but he is against our methods. “You want to overthrow the government,” he said to me. To be sure this man wants neither the government nor capitalism overthrown. He is doing very well thank you. I ate a meal at his house. I also ate a meal in a Negro sharecropper’s house. My friend the social worker had a cook who served the meal. It was a gorgeous dinner with good table linen and silverware. The food was excellent and the best. There was wine and liquor.
 
And Then the Poor
The meal I ate in the humble cabin of the sharecropper was sow belly, black eye peas, cornbread and very poor creamless coffee. The food of my friend, the social worker, was supplied by white businessmen who support this particular institution organized to give “not alms but opportunity” to Negroes. The sow belly of the sharecropper came from his own hard toil in the cotton fields owned by the same kind of men who gave my social work friend his fine table linen, liquors and ham. The cotton that these white businessmen give him to clothe his body with is produced by these same sharecroppers who spend their entire lives in nakedness and hunger.
It has been the same everywhere; a few Negroes living in splendor, plenty and elegance (just like the masses of Negroes grubbing for the whites of the same class) and the barest necessities of life just like the poor whites.
 
Learn What It Means
I had an interesting experience in one city. I met a Negro CIO voluntary organizer in a certain Negro social work institution. I talked to him in a rather guarded manner and left. Later he called me and said that he had a feeling that I wanted to say something to him that could not be said in front of the social worker. He was correct. We made an appointment for the next day and and had a two hour conversation about his work and the way out for Negroes. Here was a Negro who works as a volunteer organizer for the CIO and has spent some of his own money to get Negroes into the organization. He isn’t making any money from white businessmen saving Negroes.
There are many more of these incidents that could be told but this is enough. Negroes are learning what all this means: They are learning, slowly it is true, that a Negro is not just a Negro no more than a white man is just a white man. They are learning that there are really two groups of Negroes just as there are two groups of whites. They are beginning to understand that a Negro insurance company president is no more interested in them being cared for when sick or buried when they die, than is the president of the white insurance company. Both of these presidents, the black and the while are interested in the amount of money that is paid into the company; that is in the profits that come from selling insurance. This process will continue until the Negro worker becomes class conscious and not race conscious.
 
Workers Understand
It has been very plain also that it is the so-called leading Negroes who are the patriots among the colored people. I have spoken to Negro audience s and to Negroes in mixed audiences. I have held smaller conferences with Negroes. These meetings have not been large of course; that is not in the thousands, but I have yet to have a Negro worker express any patriotic sentiment whatsoever. They have listened intently through long speeches and long replies to questions asked. In one meeting of about 90 Negroes I spoke a total of nearly three hours and no one left the meeting.
I have reported on the meeting with the sharecroppers. There they insisted on keeping the meeting going after we had suggested that they should get to bed because of the next day’s work. On all of these occasions the speeches were openly and frankly revolutionary calling for the overthrow of capitalism as the only solution to the evils that beset Negro as well as white workers. No one should think that they did not understand. They did understand We saw to that. The sharecroppers understood, the steel workers, the packinghouse workers, the porters, the janitors and the Negro women. The Negro young people understood and many of them will join our party.
On the whole question of the war it has not been difficult to make these Negro workers understand what a piece of fakery it is; what a bloody fraud is about to be unleashed upon them in the name of a democracy they have never known or experienced.
 



CIO Should Investigate Siboney Affair
The strange dispute between the National Maritime Union and the Marine Engineers Beneficial Association, which resulted in the NMU “breaking the MEBA strike” on the American Export liner Siboney, is an unfortunate affair. It is not possible to comment on the incident in detail for the reason that all of the facts are not available.
The MEBA called the strike on the Siboney which was supported by the NMU by refusal to pass through, toe MEBA picket line. The company presumably replaced the engineers with non-union men but the liner could not sail because the NMU refused to supply seamen. Later, the NMU withdrew its support of the strike, claiming, according to press reports, that the MEBA was unreasonable in its demands and that the strike was a one-man show. The NMU issued a statement claiming that E.P. Trainer, business manager of the MEBA local, had deceived the NMU on his demands and on other issues of the strike. The NMU also claimed that they were aiding a strike in which the engineers supposedly concerned were neither involved nor interested.
Joe Curran, president of the NMU and a vice-president of the CIO, then ordered the NMU men to sign up for the ship and collaborated with the ship’s owners in getting the Siboney ready to sail despite the MEBA picket line. The MEBA, which along with the NMU is a CIO affiliate, has demanded an investigation by the CIO and charges Curran with bringing about “the replacement of eight striking CIO engineers with company union strike-breakers.”
The CIO should investigate this affair and take a firm and clear position. There is something wrong somewhere. Both of these unions belong to the CIO. If the difference were of such a nature that Curran felt that it was not longer correct for the NMU to support the strike of the MEBA, he should have submitted the matter to Philip Murray before acting in the way he did. Then the top officers of the CIO could have rendered a decision and given instructions to the MEBA if it was found to be at fault.
Furthermore, we would be interested to know why Curran did not discover that the strike was a “one man show” before the NMU gave its support to these eight MEBA engineers. It seems to us that it would not be difficult for the president of the NMU, who is at the same time a vice-president of the CIO, to discover the issues involved in an eight-man strike on one ship.
If the MEBA is not a bona-fide union, then it has no place in the CIO. Curran, as an officer of the CIO, should have known something about this. Whatever the merits of the case, this incident doesn’t smell good. The CIO should investigate and establish the facts publicly. This is especially necessary since the MEBA announces a continuation of the strike against other Export Line ships.
 
Good and Bad in Bethlehem Contract
With much waving of “good will” banners by Mrs. Herrick of the New York NLRB, by John Green, president of the Industrial Union of Marine and Shipbuilding Workers and, of course, by Sidney Hillman, Bethlehem Steel Co. has signed its first contract with the CIO.
The contract covers 1,700 workers in the Hoboken shipyards of Bethlehem. While this contract is nothing to be especially jubilant over, it does mean a breaking down of Bethlehem’s union-busting policy. The company at least has signed a contract.
The present contract grants nothing much of a material sort. There is to be no closed shop. The company reserves the right to bargain with individual employees or groups of employees outside the union. Wage adjustments are left to the decisions of the Atlantic Coast Shipbuilding Stabilization Conference. The contract must not be construed as abridging “the exercise of the regular and customary functions of management.”
The union pledges that it will not “in any way threaten, intimidate or coerce or attempt to coerce any employee of the company for any purpose whatsoever.” The contract bans all strikes, sit-downs, slow-downs, boycotting, picketing, stoppage or curtailment of work or any other interference with or demonstration against the Hoboken yard on or off the premises. The contract calls for an “impartial” umpire in cases where differences can not be settled by the grievance committees.
J. Ullmer, company representative, thanked Mrs. Herrick for her part in bringing about the settlement and said that “we hope that we have been able to convince you that it is and has been the company’s policy to deal in good faith with the properly chosen and duly certified representatives of its employees, as was done in this case.” It may be necessary to remind readers that this man Ullmer is talking about the Bethlehem Steel Co.
One of the finest things about this contract is the provision for its termination on 20 days’ notice.
There is nothing incorrect about a union going step by step in dealing with such bandit outfits as Bethlehem Steel. The workers must realize, however, that they have taken only a small step. They haven’t won any “great victory,” as their officers will attempt to make it appear. The contract gives them a toe hold, and lays the basis for the fight for higher wages, for complete organization of Bethlehem and for better working conditions, including shorter hours.
Furthermore, the workers at Bethlehem should not be trapped by any the great contributions of Mrs. Herrick toward the “spirit of cooperation.” If Mrs. Herrick or any other NLRB official has so much influence with Bethlehem, why in hell wasn’t it used long ago?
The decisive event in dragging a contract out of Bethlehem was the mass strike and picket lines at Lackawanna, Bethlehem and Johnstown. Herrick, the NLRB and Hillman had nothing to do with it of any real importance. They came along with their honey and “cooperation” after the workers had used their own methods of educating Bethlehem.
 
Some More on the Mediation Board
Roosevelt’s latest and smoothest strike-breaking outfit, the “Mediation” Board, hasn’t yet found the “formula” for settling the differences between the UAW-CIO and General Motors. The union demands a 10 cents an hour increase. The company says that this would add $50,000,000 a year to its payroll. GM is willing to take $15,000,000 from the duPonts and other big shot stockholders, but not 50 million.
Charles Wilson, president of GM, says “there is no economic justification for the corporation to raise wages at present. The problem is how much General Motors is willing to pay to avoid a strike.” The company is willing to pay $15,000,000. The only inference to be drawn from the Wilson statement is that the union is attempting to hijack the company; the GM workers are holding up the company and trying to take something that doesn’t belong to the workers. The duPonts, Raskobs, Fishers, Sloans and Morgans are about to be robbed of their livelihood by a gang of merciless and mercenary scoundrels.
Mr. Wilson also is convinced that “strikes are expensive and are not necessary. Collective bargaining should not always mean collecting; it should mean bargaining too.”
We agree that collective bargaining should mean bargaining. The result of the bargaining, however, should be “collecting”: the collecting of higher wages, shorter hours, union recognition and better working conditions.
There is one question we should like to have answered in connection with this GM-UAW (CIO) dispute. Whose side is Philip Murray on? He is a member of the “Mediation” Board and he has been sitting in the negotiations, with Thomas, representing the UAW. How can Murray remain a member of this strike-breaking board and at the same time represent the CIO unions? He sits with the enemies of labor (the government and the employers) one day and the workers the following day.
Any labor leader who accepts a post on a government board or employer group dealing with labor relations should be forced to resign his post in the union.
 



Roosevelt’s letter to Knudsen, demanding that industry go on a 168-hour seven-day week, failed to go into details on the hours of work. For instance, the letter didn’t say week or whether or not each shift will work seven days or 56 hours and be paid at the rate of time and a half for the additional 16 hours.
Roosevelt says that it is imperative to increase production. His proposal. along with that of the bosses, is to increase the work week. The impression to be gained from the letter to Knudsen is that he is only demanding that the plants be operated continuously for 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
At present, plants operating under the Wages and Hours Act are running 120 hours a week if they are operating on a three shift schedule. But, for one reason or another, many plants are not running on a three shift schedule.
The report of Walter Fuller to Knudsen also shows that thousands of small and medium sized plants are not working on “defense” orders. Of 14,077 plants that made returns, only 28 per cent were engaged in “defense” production; 4,539 were prepared and willing to take some of this business if they could get it, and 1,881 were willing to install the necessary machinery if they were assured they would get “defense” orders.
Of the plants that reported, 72 per cent were operating only one shift, and only 8 per cent were operating three shifts.
Over 3,000 plants reported that it production were stepped up to three shifts, an additional 205,664 workers would be required.
This investigation supplements one made by the army and navy which revealed that of 20,000 larger plants surveyed only 10,000 had received “defense” orders.
All of this demonstrates several significant things about the so-called “defense” program. In the first place, it is clear that if present plant capacity were operated three shifts on the present 40 hour week, an additional million workers at the very least could be employed. Next, it is clear that the big industries have hogged or been given preferment in the allocation of the war orders.
 
The Bosses’ Interests
It is not the 120-hour week that is holding up “defense.” Roosevelt must know this unless he is a plain ass. It is not the 120-hour week that is the “bottleneck.” How about aluminum and the little deal with German aluminum manufacturers that the Aluminum Co. is charged with? The Department of Justice has whispered that collusion between the Mellon aluminum trust and the German aluminum trust gives Germany an advantage over the U.S. Also the government is at present “investigating” the tool industry in the Middle West with the suspicion that some gentlemen are not exactly pure in practicing their “American way of life.”
Also, the OPM has found it necessary to look into the matter of hoarding by industry, especially the metal industries. The OPM calls this hoarding, the aim of which is to increase scarcity and force a price rise, “overbuying for unnecessary inventories.” Also the new restrictions are “to stop the building up of artificially large inventories. The OPM evidently doesn’t have much faith in the patriotism of its friends of the business world. Despite the fact that buyers and sellers of the specified metals must report their transactions, “the division of priorities is now working on plans for a field staff which will be able, very soon, to begin making audits and spot checks on inventories.” Seemingly the bosses don’t trust each other.
Whatever the bosses and the government do between and among themselves to prosecute their war is no special concern of the working class. On all matters relating solely to themselves they can operate as they damn please. They can sell to Germany or Japan. They can pile up their raw materials and supplies and gouge each other to their heart’s content. They can lie to their government and to each other. They can set their cops, spies and stoolpigeons on each other to find whether or not their laws are being violated. That’s their business.
 
Where OUR Interests Lie
But we have something to say about the3 hours we work and how much we are paid for that work. That’s where we come in on this “defense” business. We’re not looking for more work but more money.
We don’t want longer hours, but a higher hourly rate of pay and shorter hours. If we don’t want to be turned into pack mules somewhere down the road, then we must watch Roosevelt and the bosses in their efforts to increase the work week. A seven day 168 hour week isn’t necessary. There has to be time to repair, clean and oil machinery. Furthermore the workers must have and. demand time off for rest, recreation and educational pursuits. Why should these be a monopoly of the bosses?
We Propose:
A SIX HOUR DAY AND A FIVE DAY WEEK.
MINIMUM PAY OF $30 FOR THIS 30 HOUR WEEK.
TIME AND A HALF FOR OVERTIME ABOVE THIRTY HOURS. DOUBLE TIME FOR SUNDAYS AND HOLIDAYS.
INCREASED WAGES ALL ALONG THE LINE WHENEVER THE COST OF LIVING RISES.
 



There Are Plenty of Strikes in England
Employers in the United States and their representatives are always anxious to make workers believe that there are no strikes in England; the British government, they say, has taken care of this by law or regulations of some sort. The idea behind these lies, of course, is to hasten legislation “outlawing” strikes in the United States.
Of course, it isn’t true that there are no strikes in England. There are plenty of strikes and many of them are won by the workers. Papers in the United States, especially the press outside of New York City, refuse to carry stories of these strikes. They don’t want the workers here to know that all the British workers are not “taking it” lying down.
Eight thousand young engineering apprentices in 18 plants in Lancashire stopped work on a demand for increases in wages. In order to break this strike the government sent the boys “calling-up notices” for military service. The Ministry of Labor, headed by Ernest Bevin, Labor party Leader, said that “if these men will not work in the engineering sheds, they must be made to aid in the national effort elsewhere.”
Six of the boys who were the leaders of the strike were arrested and “bound over” for 12 months. The government charged them with “taking part in a strike in a dispute not reported to the Ministry of Labor and National Service.” The magistrate who heard the case said that he was impressed with the way the boys had conducted the strike but that they had been “ill-advised.”
The coal diggers in Britain are demanding a guaranteed weekly wage and a share in the control of the mining industry. The owners are resisting such a demand, of course, even refusing recognition to the union on a national scale. The British miners have learned that the only way to get anything even approaching a guaranteed weekly wage is to have some measure of control in the industry. The worker can’t even keep a job, to say nothing of guaranteed wages, so long as industry is under the complete control and domination of the bosses.
 
Camp Scandals Here and in England
They are having training camp scandals in England, too, the same as in this country. some members of Parliament have the feeling that the government is hushing up the scandal. The Select Committee on National Expenditure reported that private firms had been paid $400,000,000 for building camps that had been estimated to cost only $84,000,000.
The U.S. Senate committee investigating profiteering in the building of army camps, reports that the actual cost of building Camp Meade will be 22 million dollars. The estimate by the War Department was $10,000,000.
The J.E. Greiner Co. drew up plans for Meade for which they were paid a fee of $55,000. It seems that the army officers in charge changed these plans and went ahead with their own ideas. The army idea was to build the camp on some good, tough, sticky clay land away from good roads which were already built. This would mean building more roads, which would give business to the cement companies. Major-General Parsons took full responsibility for the site selected, saying that it was the best area for training troops. Senator Truman, of the committee, said that the reason Parsons vetoed the engineers’ plans was because they put the camp hospital on the officers’ golf course. We suppose that some of the sites in England had to be changed because they were planned for the officers’ fox-hunting course.
 
There Are Finks All Over the World
The London Daily Herald (organ of the British Labor Party) has been carrying stories about strikes in the United States. The Daily Herald has suggested to its readers that the resentment of the United States public against the strikes is justifiable and that public support of congressional anti-strike legislation would be warranted. The British New Leader (Independent Labor Party) informs its readers: “... that the workers of America have ample justification for their present direct action, irrespective of any political considerations. The Daily Herald correspondent’s attempt to whitewash the employers is a crime against organized labour in america and a slander against decent workers losing the only means at their disposal to defend elementary trade union rights won against overwhelming odds in a long and bloody struggle against American big business.” The British Daily Herald is a paper similar to the New Leader published in New York City. This rag, which pretends to be a labor paper, is as viciously anti-labor as the New York Times. The New York New Leader is the organ .of the Social Democratic Federation. This outfit is for the war and was for U.S. entry even before John D. Rockefeller and Thomas Lamont.
 
Bevin’s Union Gives Bevin a Jolt
A clerk in South Wales was fired and 23,000 clerks walked out on strike. They returned to work after the management had agreed to restore the clerk to his job and meet with the union representatives. The striking workers belonged to the National Association of Clerical and Supervisory Staffs, a subsidiary of the Transport and General Workers. Aside from the fact that this was a war-time walk-out in England, the strike had interest due to the fact that the union was the one that Ernest Bevin belongs to. Bevin is Labor minister in the war cabinet and the chief labor lieutenant of Prime Minister Churchill.
 
For Aid to the Unions, Not to the Bosses
The shop steward movement is so strong in England that some bosses have devised a scheme to break their influence among the workers in the plants. They are trying out the trick of transferring shop stewards to other plants as soon as they have built up influence and prestige.
In one plant the convener of the shop stewards, who was in this post for seven years, was transferred. The secretary of the shop stewards’ conference was also transferred.
These accounts of what is going on in England demonstrate that the bosses are the same all over the capitalist world. capitalism is the same wherever you find it. The capitalists of the United States have decided on “all out aid to Britain.” Trade union leaders in the United States are asking the workers to give aid to England. This can only mean that they are asking the workers in this country to aid the British bosses so that these bosses can continue their oppression and exploitation of the English workers.
The workers in this country should aid the British workers, but not the British bosses. Money and supplies of all kinds collected by workers in this country should go to the British workers only. The distribution of these supplies should be under the direct control of the English trade unions, it should go direct to the unions and to them alone.
 



The Kind of Union Workers Want
The three-to-one vote of the workers at the Lackawanna plant of the Bethlehem Steel Co. and other victories of the CIO. demonstrate that the workers want to be represented by a union that will FIGHT for them. The workers want unions, but they want unions that do something more than just collect dues, initiation fees and pay death benefits. The workers want something while they are living: HIGHER WAGES, SHORTER HOURS and far better working conditions. Just to carry a union card in one’s pocket, showing that one is a member of something that calls itself a trade union isn’t enough. The union must get results, material results, or it is not much service to labor. Union leaders have to do something more than simply draw fat pay checks and order the membership around.
The results that the CIO has gained in recent weeks further demonstrate the only way to get results from the bosses. All of these gains were won on the picket tine. They didn’t come from the methods advocated by Bill Green: sitting down in the bosses’ offices exchanging cigars and handshaking.
 
How to Get Something from Ford
Before Labor Action appears again, the NLRB election will have been held at Ford’s. We expect the CIO to defeat the whole combination of Ford, Harry Bennett, the company union and the AFL. Ford’s man Friday, Harry Bennett, has announced that the CIO will win the election and that the company will bargain with the CIO until “hell freezes over.” Harry added, however, that the CIO won’t get anything. Of course, Harry is only trying to solace himself and the old scoundrel who pays him. He isn’t fooling his employees. They can get something from Ford the same way they got it from Bethlehem: put a mass picket line around the plant and keep it there “until hell freezes over.”
 
Coudert and the Stalinist War Position
A man by the name of Coudert, who is chairman of a legislative committee investigating “subversive” influences in New York City’s schools, says that the “red peril” is greater than the “fascist peril.” “The communist is the confidence man of totalitarianism,” says Coudert, “while the Nazi is the holdup man.” We are not quite certain what Coudert means by “communist.” Presumably he is talking about the Stalinists. At any rate there is something wrong in this picture. If Coudert is correct, then the United States is preparing for war against the wrong people. But even taking Coudert’s position, that “reds” are a danger, it is evident that the bosses are not in agreement with him. Coudert can’t get John D. Rockefeller to agree that Stalin is a greater danger to him than Hitler. John D. knows that it is Hitler that is preparing to grab his 90,000 square miles of oil lands in Iraq. That’s why he is ready for shooting war against Germany. He doesn’t want the German capitalist to grab the wealth through exploitation of the workers of Iraq. John D. wants to do the exploiting and robbing himself so that he can add to the fortune his old man piled up robbing the workers in the U.S.
There is something else too about Coudert. He and his kind prefer fascism to any social order that would strip the bosses of their power and profits. As between socialism and fascism these people will always choose fascism. If the workers fail to learn this, they will have a sad experience before this war is over.
Furthermore. Coudert and the boss class don’t need to worry themselves over the Stalinists “overthrowing the government by force and violence.” All that the Stalinists are concerned with overthrowing today are the groups which actually stand for socialism and the overthrow of capitalism, Stalin and his axmen are the enemies of socialism. The Stalinists claim today that they are against “imperialist war.” This is a lie. They are against the Churchill-Roosevelt camp of the imperialist war. They support the Hitler-Stalin camp.
Should Stalin get the assurance that he can hold on longer by coming over to the side of the United States and England, we will see every Stalinist, all their stooges and hatchet men hugging the flag, chanting the Star Spangled Banner and reciting the Constitution from every street corner.
The Stalinists confuse and betray the workers just as Hillman and his gang confuse and betray the workers. Some militant workers join the Stalinists because they believe that the Stalinists are against the war. These workers don’t understand that the Stalinists are against the U.S. going into the war because Stalin is tied up with Hitler.
There are other workers who go over to Hillman and the patriot-warmongers because they want to escape the Stalinist sell-out. Both groups of workers must learn that the correct road is neither the path to Stalin nor the path to Roosevelt-Hillman. Either of these roads leads into the imperialist war.
The Workers Party and Labor Action set forth week after week the only road for the working class in the United States. This is independent political action of the working class against capitalism, against the present war and for socialism. The Stalinists cannot be for this program because they are in a block with Hitler; one of the leading world imperialists.
 



What Does the UAW Mean by “Non-Defense”?
The General Motors strike, which had been voted by the United Automobile Workers (CIO), has been postponed at the “request” of the National Defense Mediation Board. Union and GM representatives .are “requested” by the board to appear at a hearing on May 2. The board further requested that the company and the union in the meantime attempt to settle their differences and that it be understood that any settlement arrived at be retroactive to April 28.
In deciding on the strike the union took a strange position. That is, the leaders of the union look a strange position. They decided that the strike would affect only “non-defense work,” The company replied that no distinction could be made between “defense” and ‘’non -defense” work. Of course the company is entirely correct in this and for various good reasons.
In the first place, the company, being a thoroughly class-conscious outfit, knows that the United States is preparing not for defense but for war: for active and aggressive participation in the present Second World Imperialist War. “Defense” to General Motors and to all of the ruling class means something entirely different than to the workers. Defense to the ruling class means waging aggressive war against Germany and Japan for the protection of profits, their class position and their power. Defense to GM, Ford, Bethlehem and all the ruling class means to be in a position to strangle the working ciass and wreck the unions. The chief role of the Mediation Board is to aid the bosses in accomplishing this purpose.
In the second place, the owners of GM, being interested only in profits position and power, don’t, of course, make any basic distinction, between “defense” work and “non-defense” work profits. “Defense” to the bosses means only an opportunity to make bigger profits while the war is on and while the government is pouring billions of dollars into the plants of the ruling class.
Also, the bosses know that the whole plant equipment of industry is being organized for the production of war orders. They are aware that it will be technologically impossible to make any important distinction between “defense” work and “non-defense” work.
The very fact that the leaders of the UAW could make such a nonsensical statement as not to strike on “defense” work shows that somebody is getting scared. That somebody is the union leadership and the CIO leadership. They are getting scared of the militancy of the rank and file workers.
Suppose it were possible to separate defense from non-defense work. How would this serve the interests of the workers and the unions? How would such a strike be conducted? Would the workers making pleasure cars strike and picket, while the workers making tanks and aircraft engines remain at work? How would the defense workers win an increase in wages? By remaining at the machines and producing war equipment that is going to produce a large brand new crop of millionaires?
At the bottom of such a crazy proposal of course is the position of the union leaders that the workers should support the war, that it is a war for democracy, that it is a “workers” war. There should be no doubt in a single worker’s mind by now that this is a monstrous lie. It is no less a lie when uttered by Knudsen, Sloan or Grace than when told by Murray, Green or Hill man. In fact it is far worse for Murray, Green and Hillman to mislead the workers in this mariner. They are representatives of the working class, whereas Knudsen, Grace et al. are our enemies. We don’t expect the truth and leadership from our enemies but we certainly have the right to expect own leaders.
It is precisely on the so-called defense work that the GM strike should be called. Primarily because this is imperialist war work and the workers should be actively against the war. Secondly, because these are the orders that are producing the big profits for the bosses and the workers should strike for an ever-increasing share of this wealth which they alone are producing.
 
Less “Aid to Britain,” More Aid to Scrubwomen
James J. Bambrick, president of New York City Local 32B of the Building Service Employees International Union (AFL) has pleaded guilty to stealing $10,090 of union funds. This local was a part of the international which was headed by the racketeer Scalise, who is now in prison. Bambrick was a tool of Scalise and the $10,000 theft was part of the Scalise racketeering method of running this AFL international.
If Bill Green and the other big shots of the AFL had paid as much attention to protecting the low paid scrubwomen, janitors and other members of the union from gangsters and thieving officers as they did to “Aid to England” this disgraceful condition could not have existed.
Not even a good Baptist deacon like Bill Green can make us believe that the executive council of the AFL did not know that Scalise was a racketeer and gangster and what was going on in the Building Service International. We suppose that Scalise was very scrupulous in paying the per capita tax to Green and his buddies of the AFL executive council.
 
Keep on Eye on the Rising Cost of Living!
Workers will have to keep a close watch on the rise in the “cost of living.” Isidor Lubin, commissioner of labor statistics for the Labor Department, reports that the cost of food has increased 22½ per cent during the past year. Rent, clothing, fuel and furniture have also gone up. The wolves are out to get theirs. All the little and big retailers and wholesalers are ready to defend their country by gouging the working class housewife. Every patriotic landlord feels that every time the workers get a 10 per cent raise he should increase the rent at least 15 per cent. Every shyster of a wholesaler and every little retail crook of a corner grocer will add a few cents or a few dollars to the price of their tainted meat, their cold storage eggs, their aging butter and their shoddy clothing.
Roosevelt has set up the “Office of Price Administration” with Leon Henderson in charge to deal with consumer prices. Henderson and his OPA will be about as effective as a ten year old child in front of a mad bull. Business is out to make a killing. They will do it one way or another just as the aircraft manufacturers. They will tell THEIR government to take it or leave it just as Bethlehem did during the last war; just like Girdler and Ford.
The government didn’t make these bandits toe the mark. It was the organized workers through their unions. It was the mass strikes and picket lines. In the days of the NRA Ford told the government that he would run his business to suit himself. He didn’t tell the union that because the union had thousands of men and automobiles bumper to bumper at the factory gates.
Wholesalers and retailers are raising prices only because the workers have won an increase in wages. The workers alone can take care of this banditry and in only one way: by a demand for more wages. The cost of food rose 22½ per cent but workers’ wages went up only 5 per cent last year! The recent increase in wages in some industries reduces this difference somewhat but does not cover it entirely. Furthermore Lubin says that the rise in the cost of living is still increasing.
Working class housewives must get behind their husbands and insist that they join unions and be good union men. If the crooks persist in raising prices, then these same housewives must have more money to spend. This means that their husbands must have more wages. The only way they can get more wages is through the union. The only road for the union is to strike for higher wages.
 



After the 1939 roadside sit-down of sharecroppers from southeast Missouri, many of these dispossessed and jobless workers went to a 100 acre plot about 11 miles outside of Poplar Bluff, Mo., and tried to begin life over again. The land had been bought by some citizens of St. Louis and presented to the sharecroppers. They moved in, began to clear the place, build houses and lay out plots for gardens. The federal and state governments did nothing. These Negro and white agricultural workers were forced to go on their own with no money and without clothing and food. There were no educational of recreational facilities.
They set to work to build houses out of any material afforded by the land on which they settled. This proved to be logs cut from the trees on the place and mud taken from the land. These were the more fortunate “settlers.” Others lived in old tents and in any old slapped-together shelter they could provide for themselves.
These workers are living today in the same poverty. There has been no improvement in their condition. They are still without adequate shelter. They have no work to speak of. They are literally starving and are without clothing. Medical care, educational facilities and such common things as radios and reading matter are luxuries to these workers at the Poplar Bluff camp.
Despite this, despite their poverty and their misery, these workers have no feeling of defeat and maintain a superb courage and loyalty to the working class. They belong to the Missouri Agricultural Workers Union which is a section of the Agricultural and Cannery Workers Union (CIO). They believe in their union and are always anxious to find out how they can improve it and make it stronger. They are real union people and thoroughly union-conscious. They understand that only through a strong union can they improve their condition and win better working conditions from the cotton planters.
There are many improvements that need to be made in the union and the way in which it functions. In the first place, the organization should be extended to cover all the seven counties in southeast Missouri. This applies especially to Pemiscott County, where there are thousands of day laborers. What is needed is a real organizing drive to bring thousands of these white and Negro cotton workers into the union.
Cotton is a war industry and the profits of the planters will increase by leaps this year. The cotton workers must get organized to make demands on the planters for increased wages.
 
Must Have a REAL Union
The union officers should be busy these days getting the organizing drive under way. A union program of action should be discussed in the union and adopted by vote of the membership. Demands on wages and hours of work should be formulated and adopted by vote of the union.
This means of course that the cotton laborers and croppers must have a REAL union, with real functioning officers at the top and in every local.
All of these questions can be taken up by the union at its next convention. These workers should prepare now for a show-down struggle with the cotton planters. They can only win their demands by using the same methods that are used by other workers. This calls for organization. For a mass union, for a militant and democratic union.
 



DETROIT – The CIO is holding its fourth national convention with 500 delegates in attendance. After the happenings of the past week one would expect to see a group of delegates tense, militant and giving the impression of a readiness and determination to carry on against the bosses and even against the government in order to guarantee substantial and specific gains for the millions of CIO members.
Everybody knows that the coal diggers in the captive mines are on strike. All the delegates to this convention at least know that this is not just a strike of coal miners; that this strike is really in support, first, of the steel workers and of all the workers who face the possibility of seeing their unions destroyed.
While the convention has taken a correct position formally on the issue of the “union shop” there is not the enthusiasm for supporting the miners that workers have a right to expect. There is not the enthusiasm that the miners have the right to expect.
The reasons for this are not hard to find.
In the first place, the convention and the CIO leadership felt constrained to make the record on the matter of the war. The leadership of the CIO and most of the leading CIO internationals were anxious to let the country know where the CIO stands on this question. Consequently the first important matter of business was the resolution in support of Roosevelt’s foreign policy. At the Atlantic City convention last November no definitive position about the war and the Administration’s foreign policy was taken. The organization made up for this today.
 
Back FDR on War
The resolution pledges complete support of Roosevelt’s foreign policy. It calls for all out aid to Great Britain, the USSR and China. It calls for complete cooperation with Great Britain and the other nations fighting Hitler, The resolution “commends President Roosevelt for his forthright foreign policy and the joint action of the President and Congress in the recent amendments to the neutrality law.” The membership of the CIO is urged to “a greater effort in our national defense program, to formulate policies, call conferences .and consult with members of our national administration, our employers and other local groups toward the end that by a mighty joint and united effort we shall have done our part to destroy Nazism and preserve for the future benefit of America our present free and democratic way of life.”
The resolution says that “American workers cannot and will not tolerate any appeasement ... Efforts of any such as Lindbergh to disunite the American people on such un-American issues as anti-Semitism must be ferreted out and exposed as Hitler’s fifth column. The American people demand that all aides of Hitler in this country, be they our home-grown Quislings or the representatives of his puppet states, such as Vichy France, must not be permitted to cause dissension.”
The debate on the resolution was an the whole very low grade and a waste of time. There were men there who were not in favor of the resolution. There were others who spoke in favor but who knew that this resolution didn’t square with what is taking place in the coal fields, with what happened on the National Defense Mediation Board and with their protestations that they will not relinquish the struggle to hold and increase labor’s gains.
There were some, like Krzycki, who were speaking for Hillman and therefore for Roosevelt. They were not talking for the CIO and particularly not for the miners. Krzycki’s speech got a big place in the papers. Sandor Jance, of the United Texile Workers, went the whole hog and proclaimed that “to every delegate here it’s more important that the emergency be met than that 2,500 workers get the closed shop.” Van Bittner, who was presiding, ruled Jance out of order on the ground that the resolution supporting the coal strike was passed the day before.
 
Hillman-Lewis Rift
One could perceive that the rift between the Hillman men and Lewis was breaking through the convention formalities and niceties. There were Hillmanites present willing and ready to bludgeon Lewis and condemn the miners, but they didn’t have the courage. Dalrymple, a miner delegate from Oregon, said that “they’re trying to say John L. Lewis is a traitor. There’s not a better American in the country today. Just because they’re fighting over in Europe is no justification for our giving up our rights over here. The industries are responsible for the coal strike, and the press is blasting Lewis simply because he is carrying out the mandate of the mine workers.”
Another miner took the floor to say that the miners will win and defeat the steel companies which own the captive mines. He said that this attack on the miners is an entering wedge to destroy the unions and “I thank God that they picked the miners to begin with.”
One got the impression listening to the supporters of the resolution that here were labor leaders who were mainly interested in purging themselves of any taint of “un-Americanism,” who were trying to prove to Roosevelt that they were good boys and he need have no fear.
They were bringing the CIO into the fold. But their speeches didn’t carry conviction, they were hollow. They seemed like men who had concluded that there was nothing to be done and they might as well go along.
 
Some Dissenters
The only open dissenters were the construction workers and most of the miners. A.D. Lewis (brother of John L.) and his construction worker delegates just sat, they neither spoke, voted nor applauded.
As I said before, there were delegates there who would have liked to pitch into the miners, but little fellows like Walter Reuther and others know that the miners don’t scare easily. Also, these Hillmanites now that they are in a serious contradiction. They know the meaning of the mine strike and what is involved for all of labor. At the same time they must support Roosevelt who is today devising plans for breaking the strike with the army.
When the vote was taken on the resolution, Van Bittner announced that it was carried “unanimously.” He knew it wasn’t and every delegate and spectator knew that it was not. All of the construction workers refrained from voting and the majority of the miners.
 
Stalinist Skullduggery
The discussion on this resolution in support of the war took place the day after the convention had passed a resolution in support of the mine strike and the action of Lewis and the UMWA. That resolution was unequivocal and called for full support. Murray in his speech blamed the strike on the employers and the “Mediation” Board.
Murray told the convention that he had said to the “Mediation” Board that if the mine owners would accept the union shop, Lewis was prepared to offer the government a continuous and uninterrupted flow of bituminous coal until March 31, 1943, and that there would be no disturbances in the continuity of mining during that period. He said that the vote of the AFL members of the Board was “arch treachery and definite treason.”
In the face of Murray’s condemnation of the “Mediation” Board, the attitude of the employers and the present mine strike, Mike Quill, of the Transport Workers Union and a constant supporter of the Communist Party’s political line, took the floor to offer an amendment. The resolution in support of the miners was too strong for Quill’s patriotic stomach. After telling the delegates that these were “perilous times,” Quill read his amendment which said: the “convention to go on record as sending the vice-presidents of the CIO to Washington to place themselves at the disposal of the President of the United States and the President of the United Mine Workers, to speak officially for this convention, to do everything in their power to bring this strike to a successful conclusion and to get the mines working, so that the national defense program can go ahead.”
In reply to Quill, Murray said: “I prefer immediate action on this resolution. Otherwise the public might get the crazy notion that there is division here on this proposition.” Murray said also that if further aid was requested by Lewis and the UMWA policy committee, they would get it. This ended the Quill amendment, and like a beaten snake that had crawled out to take a blow at the striking miners and the whole labor movement, Quill went back to his hole.
This is the main role that the Stalinists are playing in this convention: treason and treachery. Merrill of the Office Workers, who always like to protest that he is not a Stalinist, in speaking on the war resolution, said that “government, management and. labor are responsible for the lag in production.” And why is labor responsible, according to Merrill? Because labor in the United States has been apathetic to what is taking place in Europe. That is, labor has not been calling for an AEF.
This convention, of course, is not what can be called a rank and file convention. All of the big shots of the CIO are delegates and they run things. All the old wheel horses are here to keep things in order and see to it that nothing unseemly takes place. There are many important matters on the agenda to come and these will be reported on more fully in the next number of Labor Action.
 



Roosevelt Knows the Miners Are Tough
Myron Taylor, John L. Lewis and the President have come to some sort of temporary agreement about the strike in the “captive” mines. The question has been referred to the National Defense Mediation Board. Lewis announced that the calling off of the strike is only a truce and that it will be resumed November 15 if the Mediation Board does not render a decision favorable to the UMWA. This means a decision favoring the “union” shop.
No one can tell what the Mediation Board will do. They may feel that they burned their fingers in the Kearny shipyard case, where they decided in favor, of the “union” shop and render a decision against the union. Should the board do this there will be no other way for the UMWA but to renew the strike. It is to be expected that the board and Roosevelt will try by all means to come to some sort of compromise that will be acceptable to the miners, at least for a period.
It is interesting to behold Roosevelt proceeding more cautiously in this strike than, in the case of the North American strike. Then he was pretty cocky and rushed in the army with drawn bayonets. He didn’t feel the need .for any congressional legislation to deal with strikes in the “defense” industries. He could take care of these situations alone as commander-in-chief of the Army and Navy.
The miners, however, are a different matter. They are not a bunch of kids just out of high school. They are scarred veterans of a thousand battles. They are not scared by a couple of companies of soldiers or marines. The young workers at North American did a good job; they held out but they did not have the forces or the experience to continue the strike in the face of the bayonet assault by Roosevelt’s troops. Hence the strike was broken. The miners are something else and Roosevelt will hesitate a long time before he orders the Army in.
The setting of a deadline for the truce is correct procedure. The miners know what is involved in this struggle between 53,000 miners in the “captive” mines and the great steel companies. What is really involved is the matter of the “union” shop for the steel workers. U.S. Steel is the spearhead of a drive to break the unions by making it difficult for them to keep scabs and unthinking workers from getting jobs and refusing to become members of the union. If the steel and other corporations can get away with this it would be possible for them to pack the plants with stooges who of course would refuse to join the union. Under such a set-up the whole idea of industrial unionism would be destroyed. Also it would be possible for the AFL to creep into plants and industries where they have nothing now and where nothing of consequence is in sight for them. Think of the AFL getting an opportunity to enter the steel industry with its craft union layout. Bill Green’s outfit would divide the steel workers into about 21 separate crafts. Furthermore, the AFL would not attempt to organize all the workers.
Therefore it is imperative that the steel union (SWOC) obtain the “maintenance of membership” clause in its new contract with the steel companies. This is not a “closed shop” demand, as the capitalist press tries to make it appear. All that is demanded in a “union shop” agreement is that every worker be required to join the union after a certain period of employment in the plant.
Murray will be on the spot when the “Mediation” Board takes up this case. We can assume that he will vote for the “union shop.” There will be tremendous pressure on him however to remember the “national emergency,” and to come to the aid of “your country.” As we have said many times before: All the CIO leaders should resign from all government boards handling boss-worker relations. We confine our demand to the CIO, not because it is not correct for the AFL, but because we know that there is no possibility of the AFL leaders resigning from these boards.
 
“Orphan” Aluminum and Capitalist Skullduggery
After going through the nation gathering up all the old aluminum pots and pans to be used for the manufacture of bombers, we are now informed that this junk aluminum is useless for this purpose, due to the impurities it contains. This wouldn’t be so bad if it could be used for the manufacture of new cooking utensils. This can not be done, however, on account of aluminum priorities. There isn’t enough aluminum for airplanes and this demand has first call on all aluminum.
This scrap aluminum that was gathered in with such high and ostentatious “patriotic” fervor is now piled up all over the country and has been given the name of “orphan” aluminum. The New York Times business section reports that “unless this low grade ‘orphan’ aluminum is used in the near future, either by changing specifications or diverting it to civilian uses, it may be wasted for all time, for once the war is over there is sure to be a surplus, of high grade ‘virgin’ aluminum for civilian use.”
Thus we see one more example of capitalist skullduggery and “patriotic” hokum. These great “captains of industry,” these “industrial statesmen,” and government “economic experts” go through the country piling up thousands of tons of scrap aluminum that can’t be used. The government got into this jam because the “experts” couldn’t foresee how much aluminum is needed. They discover they are millions of pounds short and appeal to Mellon’s Aluminum Corp. to get out more. The Mellons don’t need any more aluminum production and sales because these would interfere with their aluminum monopoly prices. Then the government decides to give them a few million dollars to build new plants but the Mellons decide to take their own sweet time, and no plants are built.
There are the people who insult the workers by telling them that labor could never run the government and industry. The piles of “orphan” aluminum around the country are one more reminder that the present ruling class isn’t even competent to manage its own imperialist war.
 
Strikes Are as Necessary in War as in Peace
In his Navy Day speech, President Roosevelt told the country that the output of the war factories must not be hampered by “a small but dangerous minority of industrial managers” or by “a small but dangerous minority of labor leaders.” Roosevelt, was trying to serve notice on both these alleged small but dangerous minorities that he will crack down if they don’t behave themselves.
Some workers are inclined to fall for this kind of tripe. We will not enter into any fancied or real quarrel that Roosevelt may have with his buddies of the ruling class. He is their man and they are his men. All of them eat from the same trough. They can fuss with each other and be damned. If Roosevelt is having some difficulty getting his class of bosses solidified around their own imperialist war that is their business. Workers should take advantage of this temporary opportunity and try to get something for themselves.
Workers should never swallow Roosevelt’s hooey about equal responsibility of labor leaders and industrial leaders. Roosevelt has a right to get mad at the bosses who really sabotage the imperialist war that he is organizing for the benefit of the boss class. But this is not the workers war, and there can be no question of labor leaders holding up and hampering anything that is of any benefit to labor. When workers strike in the war factories they do no harm to labor but to the boss class, and it is the business of labor to do harm to the boss class. When the working class does something for itself it always does something against the boss and the bosses’ government.
Of course, strikes in the war industries hamper production. All strikes hamper production. If they didn’t hamper production they would be futile and useless. Workers win strikes because production is stopped., which means that the bosses’ profits, are put in jeopardy. The boss finally decides that it is better to give a small increase in pay than to have all profits stop. Also the boss is afraid that if he does not make a few concessions the workers will get mad, take over the industries and run them themselves.
There is no difference between striking in a war industry and in any other industry. The strike is just as necessary in war time as in peace time. The boss doesn’t give up his profits, interests and dividends in war time. He only demands that the workers give up their wages so that his profits, interests and dividends will be bigger. This is what is known as everyone sacrificing for the “national effort.”
 



An organization of Negroes in Harlem has instituted a campaign demanding that the bus companies of New York City supply jobs for 100 Negro workers. The campaign takes the form not only of a demand on the bus companies but also as an effort to have Negroes boycott the buses and refuse to ride them until Negroes are given the employment asked tor. Pickets are placed at bus stops in Harlem with signs and placards urging Negroes especially not to ride the buses.
The organizations in charge of the campaign have appealed to the Transport Workers Unions for assistance and to all organizations claiming to be friendly and sympathetic to the struggles of the Negro people.
 
We Go Further
The Workers Party is in full and complete agreement with the efforts of Negroes to get jobs; any and all jobs that they are qualified to hold, up to the very highest jobs in industry or government, elective or appointive, without any exception whatsoever. We go further than this.
We demand not only economic equality for Negroes but social and political equality also. SOCIAL, POLITICAL and ECONOMIC equality are inseparable, they are a unity, and one cannot be attained without the other. We are opposed to jim-crow at any point and in any way whatsoever. We are opposed to, and fight against jim-crow in industry, government or in the trade union movement.
Reduced to practice this means that the Workers Party is for Negroes having jobs, any jobs, with the bus companies or other industries. It is correct for Negroes to fight for these jobs; and fight in any way that will produce results. The Workers Party stands ready to fight at the side of the Negroes to obtain these results.
We would, however, like to see the Negroes of New York broaden their campaign to include the mass production war industries. In fact It is our opinion that it is these industries that should be the focal point of their campaign and not relatively small and unimportant industries like the bus companies.
Furthermore, 100 jobs are only a drop in the bucket. There are thousands and thousands of unemployed Negroes in New York City. There are thousands and thousands more working at menial jobs at very small pay. All of these are entitled to jobs and to jobs at far better wages.
There are vast war industries in New York and its environs. There are: the Brewster Aircraft Co. in Queens; three Bethlehem shipbuilding plants; Consolidated Shipbuilding Corporation in the Bronx; the federal Navy Yard in Brooklyn: numerous companies making radio equipment; thousands of large and small metal and machine industries working on war orders for the federal government. These are really the important industries. They employ hundreds of thousands of workers of all kinds. All of them are expanding and increasing their working forces daily. There are jobs for common labor, the semi-skilled, skilled, technicians and scientific workers.
There are Negroes by the thousands who can fill these jobs and they should demand them and fight for them. It is on these industries that the fight should be concentrated. There are vast opportunities in industry today not only for the skilled and semi-skilled, but all the important industries have made provisions for the training of their employees through company schools and apprentice courses. It is in these industries that Negroes can acquire the training that will fit them for a permanent place in industry.
Governor Lehman has recently appointed a committee to work with the State Defense Council to end discrimination in employment for “defense industries.” Two Negroes in close contact with Negro labor are members of this committee: Lester Granger of the Urban League and A. Philip Randolph of the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters. Prominent labor leaders and industrialists are also on the committee. The labor leaders and the industrialists can begin at home immediately; the labor leaders fighting against discrimination in their own unions, and the industrialists by giving Negroes jobs immediately.
Negroes must not fall into the trap of demanding jobs simply because they spend money with this or that corporation. This means that if Negroes don’t buy airplanes or ships, Negroes must demand jobs for the same reason that they are demanded by white workers. This is especially true of the jobs in the so-called “defense” industries. Negroes should test out this business of making the United States “the arsenal of democracy.” And they should test it out by the thousands; not merely with some puny demand for 100 jobs from an insignificant bus company.
There is one final point that needs to be discussed; this is the problem of the Negro worker and the unions. This has been and remains a sore spot. Many unions, particularly the AFL unions, have most vicious jim-crow policies and practices. This interferes with Negroes getting and holding jobs. This policy and practice must be smashed and Negroes are 100 per cent correct in their opposition to jim-crow in the labor movement as elsewhere.
Furthermore, it is correct for Negroes to demand that unions not only cease their jim-crow practices so far as membership in the union is concerned, but they are correct too in demanding that unions initiate a campaign against the jim-crow employment policies of the industrialists. The unions themselves must initiate a struggle for the employment of Negroes in industry.
The Negroes, on their part, however, must be prepared at all times to support the organized trade union movement. concretely this means that Negro workers, primarily as workers, must join the unions, be active in them, help to build them and participate in all struggles of the unions against the bosses. Negro workers must not be led astray by Negroes or whites who are confused on this point or who display any anti-union bias in the slightest.
 
Support ALL Labor Gains
Supporting the labor movement concretely means also to be prepared to support all the practical gains that have been made by the trade unions. For instance, the seniority rule sometimes might work against the employment of Negroes at a certain time. This is not only true for Negroas but for white workers as well. As a general practice it would be incorrect for Negroes to demand of the union that it violate the seniority rule even for Negroes to get jobs. This would be no victory for Negro workers. Without seniority the Negroes could be fired at the whim of the boss the same as a white worker. No practice that is detrimental to workers as a whole will prove beneficial to Negro workers.
For all the reasons given above and others that could be given, it is important that Negroes concentrate on the war industries in their fight for jobs. Here the level of production is being constantly raised and therefore the demand for workers is so great that the question of seniority cannot arise at the point of hiring. Where it does arise after employment it works in the interest of the Negro and white worker alike.
The majority of the organized mas production plants are in the CIO. This organization is founded on the .principle of industrial or vertical unionism: taking in all the workers in the plant irrespective of race, color or type of work. The CIO has made remarkable progress in breaking down trade union and industrial jim-crow. There is plenty yet to be achieved, but Negroes all over the country are learning rapidly that the place to do it is inside the unions and particularly inside the CIO unions. Negroes must not judge the trade union movement today by the past or by the present practices of the AFL.
All over the country today Negro workers are standing shoulder to shoulder with the white workers. This was especially noticeable in the recent Bethlehem and International Harvester strikes. This is as it should be.
Negro workers must not be influenced by Negroes or whites who do not understand the labor movement or whose primary interests are outside the working class, as a class. The overwhelming majority of Negroes are workers. Their fundamental interests are identical with those of the white workers. The majority of white workers of course do not understand this; but neither do the majority of Negro workers. The place of the Negro as a group is with the working class in the organized labor movement. This is not just a theory but has tremendous practical importance. A. Philip Randolph understood this thoroughly when he was going through the long ten year struggle, against terrific odds, to organize the sleeping car porters. They are an international, affiliated to the AFL. Despite the fact of the jim-crow policy of the AFL, the sleeping car porters are in there. They have been recognized by the company, they have won victories; they have had wage increases and today they are accorded the dignity of a worker, and not, as it used to be, the insulting status of a menial.
 



Bill Green on High Initiation Fees
In reply to & letter from Senator Norris, Bill Green, president of the AFL has a few words to say about the initiation fees of the AFL internationals. Green defends the present initiation fees on the ground that many AFL members object to a lowering of the fees because these members made sacrifices in building the unions and while fighting for decent wages. Green states that these AFL members “show that they were compelled to pay the same amount of initiation fees now collected from new members into the local when they joined ...” Furthermore, Green adds:
“they protest strongly that non-union men who now secure employment made no contribution toward the establishment of the decent wage scales which prevail, but in securing employment become the beneficiaries of the wage level established by the union, are entitled to all the benefits, and that the union requires the contractor to pay the newly admitted member the same wage scale and to accord to him the same favorable working conditions as every union member employed at the plant enjoys.”
This position of Green’s violates the fundamental principles of working class solidarity. He puts the thing on an out and out dollar and cents basis. This is “business unionism” with a vengeance. Of course, the men who built the labor movement made sacrifices. High initiation fees may be correct at one time and entirely unjustified at another time. The argument is as follows: “I paid $50 to joint the union 20 years ago and you should pay the same today.” Not so much because the union needs the money but because other members paid $50 years ago.
Furthermore, Green wails over the fact that new men in the union profit from union struggles of the past. The contractors are forced to pay the same wages to new men who didn’t participate in these struggles as did the old-timers. Of course! Does Green want to penalize workers who were still in their mothers’ wombs when a certain union was built? Or even workers who for one reason or another did not join the union as soon as they should?
To be sure, Bill Green is a muddle-head, but this is too much, even from him. One begins to realize why it is so easy for racketeers to get a hold in the AFL. They probably feel that if Green’s philosophy is the prevailing opinion in the organization, they may as well get theirs too. Also, on the basis of such a philosophy, these racketeers will find it easy to operate.
 
Tobin Also Writes His Views on Fees
Green sent his letter off last week. This week Tobin of the teamsters writes to Norris on the situation in his union. Tobin’s main argument is that Green does not have the power and authority to regulate initiation fees and dues in the AFL internationals. Also, he concerns himself only with the teamsters. He doesn’t mention Bill Hutchinson and the carpenters international.
Tobin writes that there a few locals of the teamsters that charge $100 initiation fees. He found one local in New York City that charges $250. He also cites the case of some locals in the midwest where the initiation fee is only $15.
However, Tobin, like Green, misses the main point. And this doesn’t concern Senator Norris or anyone else, friend or foe, outside the labor movement. That is: what is the chief function of the trade union movement and how it should go about carrying out this function? A union must have money and it can be secured only from its members. This is as it should be. The workers should and must support their own organizations. But Tobin, Green and other AFL leaders seem to believe that joining fees and dues should be directly proportional to wages received. Also that no matter what the size of the union or the union treasury, the joining fees and dues should remain stationary through the ages.
Tobin says that his international has six and a quarter million dollars in its treasury. Most of the locals and district councils also have fairly large sums of cash in their treasuries. One would think that it would be possible to reduce joining fees and dues from time to time as the membership and the cash balance of the union increase. Should the union face a special emergency such as a strike, then an assessment could be levied which the members would certainly be glad to pay.
One reason, of course, for the large fees and dues is the desire of officers, international and local, to be in a position to pay themselves huge salaries. Tobin gets $30,000 a year and other officers are paid generous sums. Besides this, they receive large “expense accounts.” Furthermore, a large treasury under the control of the officers gives them tremendous power. They dispense patronage to favorites and yes-men. They build up a machine that controls the organisation, often in violation of all the principles of trade union democracy.
To argue that a worker who will get a wage of $50 a week should not object to paying a fee of $100 to join the union is to make a racket of the union. If not a racket, the best that can be said is that such a union is a business like any other business. The function of the union is to better the economic conditions of its members. The rule and practice should be to have joining fees and dues as low as possible. This should hold especially for joining fees. Joining the union should be made as easy as possible to the end that the unions become mass organizations. Unions should not exist to pay large salaries to officers or to pile up large sums in the treasury in the manner of a business enterprise.
The Oklahoma Senate has passed a bill making it a penitentiary offense for a representative of a union to solicit workers on national “defense” projects for union membership. The bill passed 29 to 11 and was sent to the lower house for action. The fools who voted for this bill said that they wished to prevent the organization of laborers on airfield and army camp jobs in Oklahoma.
Of course, such legislation is unconstitutional and all of that. This is not what we are concerned with, however. Since the war projects are under federal supervision this bill can be only an attempt to keep labor organizers out of Oklahoma and to head off the further organization of workers in that state. These “lawmakers” are looking to the future. In their ignorant haste to protect Oklahoma businessmen they forget though, that labor has moved a long way from the 18th century when it was “illegal” for workers to organize. Such “laws” are not as easy to enforce today as they were then.
 
Some Figures on the Increase in Labor Productivity
The AFL has published figures to show that whereas the profits of business went up as much as 190 per cent in 1940, the average increase in wages was only about 5 per cent. Furthermore, the productivity of the workers increased to such an extent that the increase in wages was paid for by this increased productivity. This means that what the bosses are pleased to call “labor cost” didn’t cost the employers anything at all.
Since 1929, the AFL points out, hourly wages have been raised 30 per cent, but the output of the workers per hour has increased 40 per cent. The employers gained $2.00 in increased production for every $1.00 increase they paid in hourly wages.
What this means is very easy to understand. If one agrees that the bosses are entitled to profits (we don’t agree, of course), then one should understand that an increase in wages does not keep profits down one penny. Furthermore, when workers sometimes conclude, after an increase in wages, that they should produce more, they should understand that this greater production increases the corporation’s profits far out of proportion to the increase in wages. A few crumbs to the workers for increased production produces a whole loaf for the boss.
This is one of the reasons why workers should not be timid about asking for higher wages. We are talking about those workers who think it is O.K. in general for the boss to live off their toil. Modern machinery and technology make possible tremendous production from each worker. This high productivity guarantees huge profits for the boss. We say that even those workers who think that capitalism is a blessed event should not be hesitant about demanding more of the wealth they produce in the form of higher and higher wages.
 



So far on this trip I have been in four cities: Rochester, Buffalo. Cleveland and Akron. Each of these cities and the surrounding territory is humming with activity in connection with the preparation of the United States to participate in the war by rendering “all aid to Great Britain short of war.” This is the formula that most of the citizens of the Republic seem willing and ready to drug themselves with.
Plants are going up everywhere, huge plants, plants to make powder, gun sights, guns, airplanes, tanks, control apparatus of all kinds and for all sorts of machines used in modern technical warfare. There are plants for making machines that will make other machines; plants to make underwear so that the soldiers can be warm and keep a steady trigger finger. Soldiers can’t be allowed to shiver around in the face of the “fascist aggressor.” He might break through and destroy the “American Way of Life.”
Everywhere I go I find one paramount question being discussed and written about in the editorials and columns of the daily press. That question is LABOR. What are the workers going to do? Will they insist on the maintenance of the present work week? Will they keep up their disconcerting demands for higher wages? Will labor consent to “arbitration” and no strike clauses in new contracts?
While the bosses and their congressional friends discuss these questions and make their plans for lengthening the work week and reducing wages, the workers, especially those of the CIO, go right ahead with organizing campaigns of varying degrees of effectiveness and intensity.
 
Buffalo
Buffalo is an excellent example of this. In this city on Lake Erie, the aircraft industry is literally booming. Plants are expanding and the number of workers in each plant is increasing by the thousands. They are young militant workers. The drive is in charge of the United Automobile Workers (CIO). While I was in Buffalo a conference of UAW executive board members, regional directors and field organizers was held. Frank Snyder, president of district 11, said there were 50,000 potential automobile and aircraft workers in this area ready for unionization. Buffalo has been notorious as an open shop town and the drive, if carried out with energy and determination, should change Buffalo into a real union town. One thing is certain, the workers are ready to join the union. they are ready to carry on a real fight for higher wages. If there is any hitch, the trouble will be at the top and not in the ranks of automobile and aircraft workers.
 
Cleveland
Cleveland, that sprawling industrial city with a small town atmosphere, is also busily engaged in preparing for “national defense.” All sorts of articles are made in Cleveland useful in the crusade of “all aid to Great Britain short of war.” Most of Cleveland’s steel, textiles, automobiles, machine parts and tools will be at the service of the country as it goes forth to make the world safe for “democracy.”
The Cleveland Chamber of Commerce is rejoicing that “jobs here are within a hair of ’29 level.” The report says that 57 of the 100 firms surveyed, added 2,400 persons to their payrolls in December. This was the sixth consecutive month showing an “improvement” in employment.
The workers I talked to didn’t seem to be impressed much when I mentioned improvement in employment. There is still a great deal of unemployment, and along with other places, Cleveland can stand quite a boost in the wage rate. The Steel Workers Organizing Committee and the United Automobile Workers are a long way from any reasonable goal such as complete organization of the steel and automobile industries.
Cleveland businessmen and local college professors have been making “forecasts” for 1941. Russell Weisman, professor of economics at Western Reserve University and associate editor of the Plain Dealer, told the Rotary Club that 1941 will probably be one of small profits. Weisman said that present industry should be adapted to “defense” work instead of putting a lot of capital into expansion on a large scale. Weisman didn’t say why he thought that profits would be small in 1941 nor what he considers “small” profits.
 
Akron
Akron, the “Rubber Capital of the World,” was in quite a dither. (Akron’s transportation system is enough to put anybody in a dither. Buses are few and far between. Yet the city fathers have just granted the company a new 15 year franchise). The local Chamber of Commerce predicts a bumper year for Akron. The chamber gives one bit of advice however. This piece of advice is, “Pay Your Debts, Save Your Money.” They fear a “day of reckoning” that will follow the “boom.” The chamber might have mentioned the beaver and the bee that store food and supplies against the “day of reckoning.”
Akron had its New Year’s “forecasters” also. P.W. Litchfield, Chairman of the Goodyear Tire and Rubber Co., was a little gloomy and sorrowful. (Goodyear profits for the first six months of 1940 were only 15% higher than for the same period in 1939). Litchfield said that “we” must make “the best possible use of every single minute that goes to make up the quarter year.” “We” must provide adequately for national “defense” and for England. “No consideration can be permitted to stand in the way of this objective.” John S. Knight, editor of the Akron Beacon-Journal, said that
“there is little reason for long-term optimism when one considers that the present so-called business boom is based almost entirely upon a false prosperity created by our stupendous rearmament program ... once we are finally armed to the teeth and circumstances dictate a forced peace in Europe, start looking for the storm cellars. The next deflationary Period in this country will make 1933 look like good times.”
Labor editors of Akron papers do not expect strikes of any consequence in the rubber industry this year. The Beacon-Journal commentator says that the absence of strikes’ will not be due to government or congressional action but to the maturing of bargaining procedure. Also the power of the government to rally public opinion against strikes will keep them at a minimum.
The year 1940 “was marred by only one major strike and one serious incident of violence” says Harold Leng of the Beacon-Journal. This was the strike at General Tire which lasted for 12 weeks. The case of violence was the bombing of three CIO construction jobs: One of the bombers was jailed and his brother and an AFL business agent were arrested and indicted by the grand jury.
The United Rubber Workers steadily increased its membership during 1940. The largest local, Goodrich, has 10,000 dues paying members. Goodrich has a new president. John House, who was president for seven years, was defeated for re-election. House had aroused a great deal of opposition in the rank and file. The defeat of House was evidence that unions can get rid of undesirable officials.
 
In Contrast
There is one important part of the population that I have not mentioned and will treat in a separate article. That is the Negro worker. This is a special and very acute problem and demands separate handling.
One thing I was impressed with everywhere, especially in the smaller cities. That was the spirit of going after the new business, getting “our” share of the federal money being handed out by the billions. Every chamber of commerce is on the job and in high glee. Except when these corporations face the probability of having to lay out some of the capital of their own corporations. They have the true Christmas spirit waiting to see what the government will place in their stockings.
Another thing that stands out everywhere is the shacks the workers live in. All of the industrial cities and towns look alike. A business center of tall buildings and elegant shops. Then the factory centers surrounded by scrap heaps, and the shacks and hovels of the workers. And of course the “heights,” the “drives” and the “roads” where the owners and the masters live.
 



“Defense” Needs Not Our Concern
Not being production experts it isn’t easy for us to say whether or not- the Reuther “Plan” for plane production is a good one. Furthermore we are not interested in telling the bosses how to organize for the purpose of waging imperialist war. Reuther, we suppose, conceives of his “Plan” as a method of aiding the “defense program” and at the same time spreading and increasing employment. We would like to see more and better employment, but. we don’t give a rap about this so-called “defense” program. It’s not a defense program but a war program.
The fact that much of the supplies will go to little England doesn’t change the facts. There are all manner of ways of participating in imperialist war without jeopardizing one’s own hide. The ruling class as a whole goes to war in that manner. Not that they are physically cowardly but that they have other things to do. They remain at home and manage the “free” enterprises and the “people’s government.” The workers’ organizations should let the ruling class plan its own war production. To be sure it’s rather difficult for the bosses to plan anything successfully except champagne parties, strikebreaking, raids on union headquarters and the federal treasury, gyp stock deals and holding companies. But the workers should be concerned with planning their own wars for higher wages and shorter hours.
Shorter hours will take care of unemployment. The CIO should be giving its entire attention to organizing the unemployed and getting more money for them and less work. If the bosses fall down on their war planning, that’s their funeral, not ours. If they fall down on the job of running the country, and they have, we’ll pick up the reins and go ahead. That’s what workers should be thinking about Of course, the airplane manufacturers should be exposed before the workers. It has to be explained that the aircraft makers don’t want to expand for mass production. They are running an industry that believes in organization for small production with a relatively low investment combined with high profits. If there is to be any expansion, they want the government to pay for the expansion and then give the new plants to them.
 
We Paid Billions in Dividends to the Loafers
The workers in the U.S. certainly did well by their oppressors and exploiters in 1940. We paid $3,927,629,933 in dividends, most of which went to a gang of loafers who never do any work. The workers are certainly keeping the bosses in grand style. We gave them more in 1940 than we did in 1939 or 1938. We paid them over four billion in 1937. Perhaps we were a little ashamed of ourselves and decided to raise their income in 1940. We even paid these loafers something on their back dividends, and, to make bosses supremely happy, we gave them a few millions extra. Perhaps there are some workers who think that this is a joke and that we are trying to be funny. But that’s not true. We really gave them these billions. They can only draw these huge dividends because we consent to the continuation of a system that permits those who don’t work to have everything while those who produce get nothing.
 
Labor and Capital Cannot Be Equals
Matt Woll has been talking again. He agrees with the president that strikes and lockouts should be avoided in the arms industries. Well we are against lockouts also, that is lockouts of the workers by the bosses. Should the workers lock the bosses out, that’s the bosses’ business and they will have to look out for themselves.
In order to “avoid” strikes and lockouts, Mr. Woll proposes that organized labor be made a “partner” equal with the employers in the “defense” production machinery. Woll, of course, doesn’t mention the fact that those who don’t own anything can’t be partners with those who own everything, even if those who don’t own are a numerical majority on the various boards. This is what Philip Murray evidently doesn’t understand or he wouldn’t be so strong for his scheme of “equal” labor and management representation.
The workers can not be equal to the bosses under capitalism, and under socialism they won’t be equal to the present boss class. Under socialism, the workers would have all the rights, power and privileges, and the present owners, as a class, wouldn’t have any power, rights or privileges.
 



ST. LOUIS – Southeastern Missouri is a land of cabins in the cotton; a region of poverty and misery; violence and oppression; exploitation and downright robbery. There is no constitution down here, no pretense of practicing democracy – not even the small measure of democracy that workers have in some other sections of the United States. This is an area of black and white sharecropper and tenant farmers who own nothing, not even the barest necessities of life that a worker on home relief can get in a northern city. These people have nothing but the air they breathe. Perhaps they wouldn’t have this, if there were any way for the planters to install a nickel-in-the-slot method of selling the air. If they could, these planters might be found telling a “cropper” or a tenant at the end of the year that so much had been deducted from his cash income for so many cubic yards of air breathed.
This is not an exaggeration; that’s the kind of place the cotton region of southeastern Missouri is. These conditions do not exist because the soil is poor and will not yield a living for the people. One planter told us that the cotton yield here is the largest per acre of any section of the cotton belt. Here the soil is black and rich. The land is level and lends itself to cultivation by the most modern mechanical methods. The difficulty arises through the fact that the planters own everything and the sharecroppers have nothing. A small planter, that I spent a few hours with, a “liberal,” has 1,100 acres. A nearby planter has 30,000 acres scattered over southeastern Missouri and northern Arkansas.
 
Worse Than Chattel
The sharecroppers live on these cotton plantations under conditions that surely must be worse than in the days of chattel slavery. They live in shacks and hovels that are indescribable. No one could get even the faintest idea of what these cabins are like without actually seeing them. They seem to be made of anything that the croppers could lay hands on: clapboards and logs of all kinds and shapes. Two rooms: one to cook and eat in, the other to sleep in. The planters refuse to keep holes in the roof patched. When it rains the beds must be moved so that the family can keep up the illusion that they are not living out in the open.
Although there is plenty of food, the sharecroppers don’t get it. To be sure they do all the work that produces the food – just like the workers everywhere. The planters eat all the food they can hold and sell the rest. They sell the cotton that the sharecroppers have worked to raise and put the money in their pockets. I went into a corncrib bursting with thousands of bushels of corn but the croppers do not have enough meal for corn bread. The corn yield per acre here is very high and the land could feed all the people.
The average cash income for a family is about $100 to $150 a year. One cropper told me that last year he and his wife together had a cash income of $100. The other income is the tumble down cabin, sow belly, meal and a few other things of like nature. With the cash income they buy clothing, soap and other things that a human being must have to maintain life even on the lowest scale.
When I was down there the croppers and day laborers were still picking cotton on some plantations. I never knew before that cotton was picked in January. What they were picking was what is called “scrap.” This is cotton that either is not ready for picking in the regular picking season or is of an inferior grade. The pickers are supposed to get a higher rate per hundred pounds for this “scrap” but on most of the plantations they are paid a lower rate per hundred.
In one county on the Arkansas border, the croppers and day workers had another grievance. They were not only the victims of capitalist exploitation; their misery was added to by being openly and brazenly robbed by the planters. That part of the AAA payments which should go to the croppers is kept by the planters and the croppers get none of it.
The federal government went into this area with the idea of attempting some improvement in the lives of the people. A housing project was planned that would make possible a higher standard of living. One project was built with comfortable sanitary dwellings, adequate garden space for food, and acreage for raising cash crops. Provision was made for seeds, cows, horses and pigs. Here the croppers and laborers can live like human beings and have an opportunity for a measure of independence.
But this was just what the planters are opposed to. They fought against it and won out. The government compromised on another plan which provides for a house, garden plot and a commons that all are expected to use for the growing of the cash crop. Of course this commons is not adequate and the understanding is that the people who live in the project will work by the day for one or another. For this work, the croppers are paid seventy-five cents a day.
The sharecroppers object to this scheme and rightly so. They want the original plan of the government because this plan gives them enough acreage for food and a cash crop. This tends to make them independent of the planters. That is why the planters fought so hard and viciously against the original government plan.
The planters stand ready always to resort to violence to maintain their rule of misery, nakedness and hunger. Flogging is prevalent in this region; all the law is planter’s law and the “justice” is planter’s justice. The ideas expressed in the Wagner Labor Relations Act, or any other social-betterment idea, have no standing in this region.
Of course, the planters are against the sharecroppers’ union. The sharecroppers are in about the same situation as the workers in Germany. There is no democracy in the United States for them. These sharecroppers know that the place for them to fight for democracy is right on the cotton plantations where they slave and starve. That is what they are doing in their union, trying to free themselves from an oppression, starvation and misery just as bad as in Germany.
 



CHICAGO – Any opposition lo the draft by Negroes seems to be centered in Chicago, It is here that at least two Negroes have received publicity in the daily papers by registering opposition to conscription on the ground that the Negro is Jim-Crowed both in the military service and in industry.
The first. Negro here to come out as an opponent of conscription was J.G. St. Clair Drake, a research student at the University of Chicago. Drake issued circulars calling upon Negroes to resist the draft, and to take the stand that they were “Consciousness Objectors Against Jim-Crow.” Negroes were advised to return their questionnaires to the draft board using the slogan against Jim-Crow.
At the time this is written, the draft board had before it a questionnaire of one of Drake’s followers. The board was forced to make a decision in connection with a similar position taken by Ernest Calloway, educational director of the United Transport Service Employees of America (“Red Caps”).
 
Objects to Negro Status
Culloway had a low draft number. He wrote the draft board that
“as a Negro I have accepted many of the responsibilities of my limited citizenship without benefit of a number of its blessings ... The practice of relegating certain types of service to Negroes and refusing their service in other branches of the armed forces ... is not obeying the spirit and letter of the constitution. I can not accept the responsibility of taking the oath upon induction into the military service under the present anti-democratic structure of the United States army and ask to be exempted from military training until such time that my contribution and participation in the defense of my country can be made on a basis of complete equality” Then Galloway proceeded to say that “the present U.S. army is the most anti-democratic institution in American governmental life.”
The draft board held that Calloway’s objections do not come within the definition of conscientious objection to war by reason of religious training. His petition was rejected. Members of the board said that they had no suggestions as to how the ills of society complained of by Calloway could be corrected. They said that the board had no remedy and that the board could not be used as a forum for the discussion of this question. Also the board held that Calloway could not make an appeal because the local board, they said, had no authority to send the case up on appeal for the reasons that Calloway gave. Calloway was classed as a conscript.
 



Negotiations between the coal operators and the United Mine Workers of America began Tuesday morning. Conferences between the United States Steel Corp, and the Steel Workers Organizing Committee are also in progress. The negotiations between the miners and the coal mine owners overlap with those between the steel workers and the steel operators. This, because some of the largest mines are owned by the United States Steel Corp. and other large steel companies such as Jones & Laughlin. These are the “captive mines” such as those operated by the Frick Coal Co., subsidiary of U.S. Steel.
The present two-year contract of the miners expires March 31. The contract of the steel workers with U.S. Steel runs perpetually unless it is called off by the SWOC or the Corporation.
 
Central Demand
The central demand of the miners and the steel workers is an increase in wages. At present the miners have a 35-hour week and a basic daily wage of $6.00 in the North and $5.60 in the South. The miners will probably demand a 30-hour week and a $1.00 a day increase in pay.
The SWOC has already rejected the 2½ cents an hour increase offered by U.S. Steel. The union wants 10 cents an hour increase. Among other demands of the union are:

To be recognized as the exclusive bargaining agent for all employees of the corporation, instead of the present arrangement under which the agreements are plant by plant and the union is the bargaining agent for union members only.
 
A 48-hour rest period in each calendar week, the work week to run from Monday to Friday. This would eliminate the practice of the company in working the men for 10 consecutive days and on Saturdays and Sundays without a rest period.
 
Time and a half for overtime in excess of eight hours a day and for work in excess of 40 hours in any calendar week.
 
One week’s vacation with pay for one to five years’ employment and two weeks for all employed over five years.
 
Improvement of the present grievance machinery.
 
Creation of a joint commission of the union and the company to consider equalization of rates in various labor classifications.
 
Reinstatement provisions for draftees.
 
Seniority to be based on continuous service.
 
Arrangements for machinery through which the union can collect dues.
 

Weaknesses of SWOC
A reading of the present demands of the SWOC reveals a number of important points that were not covered in the original contract with U.S. Steel. At present the SWOC is bargaining agent only for union members. This despite the fact that there is no union in steel other than the SWOC. There has not been any other union that could in any sense be called representative of the steel workers for at least 40 years.
The way, of course, for the SWOC to push this demand and to make the demand effective is to complete the organization of the steel industry and to set up a real steel international. At present the SWOC is a loose aggregation, completely controlled from the top. The top officers of the SWOC sign contracts without submitting the contract to the workers involved for approval or rejection. Contracts do not cover all the plants of a company or all of the several subsidiary companies of a holding company like U.S. Steel. The SWOC is seeking now to correct this weakness in its relations with U.S. Steel but nothing has been done yet to strengthen the union internally by making it a more militant and better fighting organization. For this more internal democracy is needed, the encouragement of more initiative from the Union membership and locals, the complete organization of the industry and the formation of a steel international union.
 
Sore Spots
U.S. Steel is not paying time and a half for overtime in excess of the basic work day of eight hours. Furthermore, by judicious juggling of the work week fay the “stagger” system, the corporation is in position to tamper with the time and a half provision. Added to this is the fact that the workers lose Saturdays and Sundays off.
The union demands do not define what is meant by “improvement of the present grievance machinery.” However, it is evident that here is a real sore spot. This is usually the case in all loosely drawn contracts. If grievance procedure is not clearly defined, well understood by the workers and an efficient grievance committee established, the company can render a contract completely useless. This is a further reason for establishing an international in steel and putting the union under the democratic control of the workers.
It is impossible for a committee, at the top, and removed from the daily practical problems that come up in every plant, to handle grievances efficiently. This holds not only for the national leadership but also for any local or regional leadership appointed from the top. Day-to-day grievances can be handled effectively only by elected representatives or committees of the men in the shops. These representatives should be employed in the shops. When it is necessary for international officers to step in, it should be at the request of the men in the plants and in consultation with their elected shop representatives. No union contracts should be signed until the union membership has had the opportunity to approve or reject them.
From demand “9” it seems that the SWOC has had some difficulties in collecting dues. In the final showdown, the inclination of workers to pay dues will be decided by the service which they feel the union is giving them. No company-union “machinery” can take the place of a militant, loyal and democratic union leadership.
The demand SWOC makes of U.S. Steel for an increase of ten cents an hour is far too low. The present base pay is 62½ cents an hour. The demand should be for a $1.00-an-hour minimum for a base 30-hour week. All work over 30 hours should be at time and a half rates, with double time for Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. This should hold, of course, not only for U.S. Steel but for all the steel companies.
The miners have a higher wage rate than the steel workers and they are asking an increase. This is correct. The coal industry is beginning to boom again. Holders of coal company stock are sitting by gleefully waiting for the dividends to begin rolling in. Coal output increased in 1940 by 61,000,000 tons over 1939. The output of 1941 will be greater than for 1940.
The steel corporations are making fabulous profits. These profits will increase during 1941. Workers are far too modest in demanding move of the wealth which they create by their sweat and toil. They are too willing to divide up with the boss. The way this works out in practice is for the boss to get the lion’s share although he performs no useful and necessary service. In fact the coupon clippers and those who draw down the big dividends are not entitled to anything.
 



The Senate Gives The Rich a Gift
The bill to tax the starvation incomes of millions of workers went through the Senate with the same speed that these representatives of big business always use in passing out benefits to the rich. That’s what this new income tax bill is: a gift of millions of dollars a year to the rich. Lowering the exemption has absolutely nothing to do with any kind of “defense.”
Congress hasn’t finished its plunder of the lowest paid workers yet. There is more to come. Next they will pass a sales tax and 3 tax on payrolls. Right now, under the present law, a single person with a $1,500 income pays a tax of $24.20. Under the new law this same person will pay $69.
$2,000 pays no tax now, but under the new act the family will have $40 taken for “defense.”
At the same time the Senate was voting a tax on the lowest incomes they took the tax off soft drinks. This will be a big benefit to the Coca-Cola Co. of Georgia. Senator George of Georgia is chairman of the Senate Finance Committee. The Coca-Cola Co. is very active in Georgia politics. Also, the rich families will be permitted to file separate tax returns. This will cost the federal treasury over $300,000,000 a year, according to estimates of the Treasury Department.
In reporting on net profits for the first half of this year the Associated Press remarks that “all profit is not being taxed out of defense.” This is correct: all that is happening is the increasing pauperization of the poor, those least able to bear the terrific expenses of the imperialist war.
Labor doesn’t seem much disturbed over this new tax grab from the poor. If the boss tried to cut wages the workers would strike. But when the government cuts their wages through a tax levy they take it and do nothing. If the boss threatened a wage cut they would throw a picket line around the plant. But when Congress passes a bill to tax them into starvation, they only raise mild objections. This demonstrates that labor does not understand the role of the government and the relation of the government to the bosses. They don’t seem able to get it into their heads that the government is the bosses’ government and it there is represent the interests of the boss. Right now the main business of the government is to get money to fight the bosses’ imperialist war. But the bosses don’t want to pay for the war. Therefore the government attempts to get it from labor. Labor is forced to do both the fighting and the paying.
The working class could smash this tax bill. All that is necessary is the same kind of treatment for Congress that is given the boss. A mass demonstration in Washington and mass picket lines around the Capitol and the White House would teach Congress and Roosevelt a lesson just as surely as similar tactics teach lessons to the bosses.
 
Much to Learn in the British Lesson
The British Trades Union Congress has rejected proposals for the stabilization of wages. The workers in England are facing the problem of rising cost of living just as in the United States, only in more acute form. Wage stabilization was a part of the government’s plan for price stabilization. An attempt was made in a “White Paper” to advocate the necessity of pegging wages if there was to be a halt in the rise of prices.
The workers discovered, however, that the government really had no price stabilization policy until, very recently. That is, for the first 18 months of the war there was no attempt to hold prices down. Despite this, an effort was to be made lo get the Trades Union Congress to vote in favor of wage stabilization. The New York Times correspondent says that the government has succeeded in stabilizing the cost of living index at around 28 per cent above the level at the beginning of the year.
It was discovered, however, that control only covered the “rationed” goods. Much of the supplies that the workers must have comes from products that are not on the “rationed” list. This brings the actual increase in the cost of living to the workers nearer to 40 per cent above the pre-war level than 28 per cent. Wages have advanced to about 15 per cent above the pre-war level. AT THE SAME TIME, INDUSTRIAL PROFITS ROSE ABOUT 30 PER CENT IN THE SAME PERIOD.
Workers in the United States can learn a great deal about what is in store for them by watching what is happening in Great Britain. The bosses and the government are only just beginning here. The capitalist and imperialist nations will all follow the same course. They cannot do otherwise. Imperialist war demands and enforces the utmost in sacrifice from labor. The workers must pay and pay, while the bosses improve their financial condition by profits, graft, stealing and in any other way that guarantees the stabilization of the boss class, at least for a period. The stabilization that every boss class is really concerned with is its own stabilization.
 
Contractors Make Plenty on “Cost Plus” Basis
Senate has been investigating the national “defense” program in its spending aspects. They find that all those receiving government contracts are not the sterling patriots they pretend to be when they are trying to get the government to break a strike. The committee found that the army camps have cost more than one billion dollars instead of the estimated cost of $500,000,000. Just a slight error of a half billion dollars in the calculations of the government experts? Not so. Of course, there was incompetency there, as there always is, but this was not the main reason.
The main reason is to be found rather in the fact that this war is being conducted by the government for the benefit of the boss class. There must be profits; profits for everybody in business. It isn’t necessary for the War Department to do efficient planning in order to buy materials most advantageously. It isn’t necessary to have contractors toe the mark, use the best materials and give rock bottom prices. It isn’t correct to buy lumber when it is selling for $30 a thousand board feet. The thing to do is to wait until it is $40 a thousand feet and then buy. This procedure makes it possible for all the big business men who get in on the deal to make a larger profit. Furthermore, you put out contracts on a “cost plus fixed fee.” This is an incentive to contractors to run the costs up and therefore make more profit.
The Truman Committee, of course, does not give the facts they dug up this interpretation. No one should expect that from the Senate “investigation.” After all, the business of a senator is not to go too far in exposing his friends among the bosses.
The committee recommends, as a means of correcting the “faults and failures,” that the War Department practical men – who know how to build and what it costs.” The big construction and supply companies should certainly welcome this. Get their own men in the army engineer corps, just as they have them in OPM and the various other agencies of the “defense” set-up. Then the profits would fly into the pockets of contractors, cement manufacturers and lumber dealers.
What we would like to point out to Pegler and the capitalist press in general is: that it really wasn’t the “high” wages that the workers got that ran up the cost of camp construction, but the stupidity and collaboration of the War Department with the contractors that made the job cost twice as much as estimated.
 
Small Chance of Railway Unions Striking
It is a little difficult to get very expectant over the strike vote of the railway workers. The five operating brotherhoods are demanding a 30 per cent increase while the non-operating unions want 30 to 34 cents an hour increase. We think that they should have the raise.
The railroads are really piling up the profits. Dividends will be extremely good for the non-workers who own the stocks. But we just can’t get it in our heads that the railway unions mean it. We really doubt that these workers would strike even if they didn’t get a cent increase in wages. They haven’t had much practice in recent years at militant action. And to have a railway strike now would require real determination and genuine militant action. And we just can’t envisage engineers and conductors having a real honest to goodness strike. At any rate, the strike cannot take place according to “law” until after 60 days of the time that the President appoints a fact-finding committee.
The committee must report to the president not later than 30 days after the appointment. The strike cannot begin until 30 days after the President receives the report.
Lots of things can happen in 60 days in the way of “mediation” and of “national emergency.” Also, it is certain that if there is a strike, Roosevelt will call out the army to run the trains. Or he will impress the railroad workers into the army and put them under military discipline.
Surely the leaders of the Railroad Brotherhoods know this. That’s one reason no one is excited over their taking a strike vote. The capitalist press gets very excited when the miners, shipyard workers or steel workers talk strike. But on this railroad strike vote it is perfectly calm and serene. there is a reason for this attitude on the part of the capitalist press. Where there’s no smoke there’s not likely to be any fire.
Furthermore, there are 19 unions involved in this strike “threat”; five “operating” and 14 “non-operating.” That’s a lot of separate unions trying to conduct a unified strike. That means 19 presidents and general boards to come to agreement with each other and to stand out together against the government. We remember a strike some years ago on the railroads when a few of the “non-operating” unions were on strike. Did the engineers, firemen and conductors render aid and assistance? They did not. They kept right on running the trains as though nothing was happening to the striking unions. If that can happen in a period of peace, what probability is there of a different course in this Roosevelt period of “national emergency.”
 



The International Hodcarriers, Building and Common Laborers Union held its first convention in thirty years in St. Louis last week. The president, Moreschi, was re-elected in the first election held since 1926. The main issues that came before the convention were the matter of holding conventions more frequently, stricter accounting for union funds and racketeering. On all of these important matters the convention acted as though they were of no importance and that everything derogatory said about the union and its officers was nothing more than slander and an attempt by unnamed evil forces to destroy the international. Of course anyone who knows anything about this international is well aware that this is not the case.
To begin with, any union that holds a convention only once every third of a century has something very fundamentally wrong with it. Why do the officers of this international refuse to give the members the opportunity to review the stewardship of the leadership oftener than once in 31 years? Why do these same international officers refuse to give the membership indubitable proof that the funds of the organization are conserved and properly disbursed? Why did these same leaders refuse to take steps to clean the racketeers out of the international?
It was Bill Green who clapped the lid on tight and made it impossible for the insurgents in the convention to get to first base. Green praised the officers of the international for cooperating with him and for raising wages, but was silent on the 30 years. Also, Green wasn’t interested in the charges that the officers were not as “efficient” as they might be in the handling of the international’s funds.
Green made the astounding statement that of 5,000,000 members of the AFL, “4,999,999 are honest and law-abiding men.” If we understand simple arithmetic this means that there is only ONE dishonest member of the AFL. Who is he, Bill?
Perhaps we don’t understand what Green means by “honest.” There are AFL unions shot through with racketeers, gangsters, thieves and crooks. This has been proved again and again. Green knows this and he knew that he was lying when he made the statement he did to the hodcarriers. But racketeering seems to be all right with Bill so long as the officers of his internationals turn in their per capita taxes to the AFL.
It made no difference to Green and the officers of the Hodcarriers International that the officers of one of its locals had squandered $200,000 of the local’s funds from 1933 to 1940 and now has a bank balance of less than $108. Furthermore the financial report to the convention gives only two items, receipts and expenditures. The receipts for the 30 year period were $1,062,575.34 and the expenditures were $534,539.65. The delegates and the membership were given no hint as to how the $528,000 was spent and what for. And this was a report covering 30 years of the administration of the present officers! Some of the delegates wanted a decision by the convention to hold regular conventions every five years. But the officers and their machine beat the proposal back and defeated it. They submitted the provision that a referendum be held every five years to determine whether or not a convention should be held. It is easy to guess what would happen in a referendum if conducted by the present administration. They had such an easy time in this convention that the officers will probably decide not to hold a convention until the year 2000. They don’t want to report on finances every five years; thirty-year reports are better. Even if you get kicked out at the end of 30 years you are sure to be pretty well heeled by that time.
Under the whip of the Moreschi machine the convention voted against barring from office those found guilty of racketeering, embezzlement or larceny of funds. Moreschi generously agreed to a resolution CONDEMNING racketeering. The racketeers and thieves in the international are therefore free to go on plying their trade as before. They can steal from the union, embezzle its funds or racketeer to their hearts’ content, and yet remain eligible to ran for office even though, as in the case of Scalise, they have been proved guilty and sent to the penitentiary.
The delegates who came in for a real raking were not the racketeers and crooks, but those who wanted to democratize the union, establish an honest system of accounting and make a real working class union of the organization. They were accused of “insubordination.” The New York Sandhogs Local will be brought to trial for “constitutional irregularities.” This local, along with a West Coast local, wanted to bar the racketeers and have more frequent conventions. This, to the Moreschi machine, is “insubordination” and “constitutional irregularities.” As far as we know, this convention was the lowest point reached in any labor convention this year. Compared to the UAW convention one would never know that both of them were conventions of workers’ organizations and that both are integral parts of the labor movement in the United States. In no CIO convention has even the faintest whisper of racketeering, embezzlement or larceny been heard. The UAW delegates unanimously voted down a proposal for biennial conventions. Their convention was run in a democratic manner and no strong-arm tactics or procedure were in evidence. No officer of that international would have dared, even if he had been inclined, to conduct himself in such a manner.
The hodcarriers and building laborers should think about this. If they can’t get a democratic union, an honest union in Bill Green’s outfit, they don’t have to stay there and neither do they have to remain “independent.”
 
Rubber Workers Gain in Membership
The six conventions taking place this week are the United Rubber Workers at Indianapolis, the Marine and Shipbuilding Workers at Atlantic City, the Oil Workers International Union at Baton Rouge, the Transport Workers Union at New York City and the County, State and Municipal Workers at Lansing, Mich.
This year’s URW convention is the biggest ever held by this union. The international increased its membership by 28,000 during the past year and the membership now numbers 82,000. The first sessions of the convention were consumed listening to war speeches by Sidney Hillman, who is getting around to all the CIO conventions which will admit him, Allan Haywood and President Dalrymple.
Haywood told the convention that “the “CIO is for defense – absolutely.” The industrialists, he said, “have taken advantage of the nation’s effort to defend themselves” and pile up huge profits. Haywood told the convention: “There’s got to be organized planning for national defense. It can’t be done by the employers alone – they will commit hari-kari and take the nation with them.”
Haywood’s idea is that since the employers can’t win the war it is the business of labor to pitch in and win it for them. This is what his statement means although he doesn’t put it that way. The bosses will commit suicide and this means the death of the “nation.”
Therefore, according to Haywood. the workers must step in and save the “nation.” But Haywood doesn’t say to the rubber workers that to save the present “nation” is to save the employers and the capitalists. That’s exactly what the bosses want from the workers. That’s why they passed the conscription act and forced the workers into their imperialist army.
Labor should save the nation from Hitler. But IT SHOULD ALSO SAVE THE NATION FROM ITS PRESENT OWNERS; that is, the workers should take the nation away from the present owners and then defend the nation against Hitler. The working class should possess the land, mines, mills, factories, power houses and banks. They should save what is good in capitalist democracy and incorporate this into real workers’ democracy based on the ownership and control of the wealth and the machines that produce wealth.
Vice-president Thomas Burns, who has the big title of “senior labor consultant” in the OPM, announced that he would not be a candidate for re-election. Presumably he will give all his time to OPM. This is a correct step. All the labor leaders should either resign from government boards that deal with labor questions or resign from their union posts.
 
Oil Workers to Organise Standard Oil
The UAW organized Ford and voted at the last convention to begin a real drive on aircraft. The Oil Workers International voted to tackle its biggest boss, John D. Rockefeller, Jr. President Knight told the convention that the No. 1 job is the organization of the 65.000 Standard Oil workers. Michael Widman, who led the Ford drive, has been appointed to head the Rockefeller drive.
Union officers reported that the main accomplishment of the international, aside from raising wages $156,000,000, was defeat of a plan by the oil companies to increase the work week from 36 to 40 hours. On the matter of the Ickes oil shortage, Knight told the delegates that the union would not hamper “national defense in order to promote our own welfare” but by the same token “we are determined that the industry shall not take advantage of the national defense program to retard our progress ...”
The report also took up the alleged oil shortage. Knight said that behind the alleged shortage was a scheme of Standard Oil to get permission for a refused pipe line from the Gulf to Norfolk, Va. He also told the convention that while the U.S. is transferring tank ships to the British Empire, England has 500 tankers, many of which are being used by the British oil companies to carry on “business as usual” for private profit.
 
Hillman to Speak to Shipyard Men
Sidney Hillman didn’t get to the oil workers convention, but according to announcements he will be on hand to urge the shipyard workers to whoop it up fervently for the imperialist war. These workers certainly have something more important to attend to than listening to Hillman tell them that he has the full confidence of Roosevelt. The delegates might concede that and turn their attention immediately to the pressing problems of their industry.
The most important of these is the situation at the Federal Shipbuilding & Drydock Co. at Kearny, N.J. This situation is not clear yet. Secretary Knox announced in a Navy Department statement that “the government has not yet decided on the course it will pursue ...” In the meantime, however, according to the statement, should any dispute arise over the status of any worker the matter is to be referred to the “Mediation” Board for action. The union considers this a victory, since this board had already made such a recommendation before the government took over the plant.
Roosevelt expressed doubt that the granting of the “maintenance of membership” is in accord with provisions of the National Labor Relations Act. He wrote to the board chairman, William H. Davis, expressing such doubts. The reply of Davis was that there was no violation of the National Labor Relations Act and this was concurred by the general counsel for the NLRB.
The officers of the IUMSW do not seem to consider this one of the pressing problems to come before the convention. They evidently think the matter settled and want lo forget it. But obviously this is not the case. The question arises and may come up for discussion in the convention, on the correctness of a union inviting the government to take over plants as a means of settling a dispute the union is having with the bosses. What is the difference between negotiating with the government and negotiating with the owners of the plant? Does the union believe the government will be softer and more pliant, more reasonably than the bosses7 That wasn’t true in the North American affair. The union officers may escape from the Kearny trap but they bad better think it through the next time they face a similar situation.
 



On Ways and Means of Pauperizing Labor
Leon Henderson, “price administrator,” and Henry Morgenthau. Secretary of the Treasury, during the past week have announced some plans they have for labor. Henderson wants to be given some authority in the settlement of wage disputes and Morgenthau wants Congress to adopt a plan for “forced savings” by the workers. Under this plan every worker would turn over two months’ wages to the government for the promotion of “defense.”
It is assumed that Henderson wants to become a wage fixer as well as a price fixer. He talks about the price of wages along with the price of meat, bread and shoes. To be sure, Henderson has done nothing effective about the rising cost of living to labor, but he perhaps believes that he can be more successful setting a ceiling for workers’ wages.
For 66 consecutive weeks retail prices have advanced. The rise week before last was 1.2 per cent over the week before. The Labor Department reports that during the last year the buying power of the dollar has DECREASED 15 per cent in industrial centers. During the past two weeks the retail price of bread, beef, pork, coffee and shortening has gone up all over the country. Butter, eggs and fruits are now real luxuries to the thousands of families with low incomes. Added to this, the increase in clothing, household articles and rent must be taken into account.
This ten year high for the cost of the necessities is what Henderson should be giving attention to. He hasn’t been successful in the tasks that he was assigned. And so now he pretends that if he can meddle a little in the wages question he will be able to get the commercial capitalists to stop the hiking of commodities. This is nonsense, of course. Wholesalers, retailers and landlords are going to squeeze every cent they can get from labor. If they can help it, they don’t intend to let the manufacturers take all the gravy flowing from the “defense” spending. All the capitalists, great and small, are out for profits and they, won’t let any small fry like Henderson stand in the way.
Morgenthau doesn’t believe in any small-time stuff when he is ready to rob the working class. He is a big-lime highwayman. According to the new tax bill, a worker earning $65 a month must give part of that to the government in income taxes. Now Morgenthau wants to take an additional $130 from that same worker for “defense.” All the while, prices will continue to rise. Next, the employers will decide it is about time to lengthen the work-week without increase in pay. A few more opportunities of this kind offered the workers to demonstrate their patriotism and loyalty while the bosses are increasing profits 100 per cent, will, we are sure, add to the joy of living for every single worker.
Organized labor is taking all these plans for its pauperization entirely too calmly. The unions certainly would not let the bosses have such a field day in the factories. Why do they permit these same bosses to accomplish their wage cutting plans through control of the government? What’s the difference between being starved out by a direct wage cut from the boss and being taxed into starvation by the bosses’ government? Also, what’s the difference between starving in peace time and starving in war time? The bosses don’t starve at any time. In fact, if there is any difference, they are in position to eat better during war time because they make more profits then. It is only the working class that becomes so damned patriotic in war time that it is willing to undergo all manner of hardships and misery. Roosevelt says, “You can’t strike against the government.” Why not? If we can strike against the boss, then why can’t we strike against the boss government? At one time, even strikes against the boss were “illegal”.
 
What to Do About Hodcarriers Situation
Bill Green’s International Hodcarriers and Building Laborers Union is a queer labor outfit. It’s a sort of unlimited monarchy. This international has not had an election of officers for 30 years. Nobody seems to know why no elections have been held and by what authority officers elected 30 years ago continue in office. All that one can say is that the ways of this international and its officers are inscrutable. However, these things don’t seem to worry Green and his brother officers on the executive council of the AFL.
At least there will be an election conducted by one local of this international, No. 17 of New York. Some members of the local went to court to compel the officers to hold an election and account for union funds. The officers were put on trial, ordered to hold an election and give an accounting for some rather suspicious actions in the expenditure of the local’s money.
It was brought out at the trial that the officers of the local had taken in $200,000 in dues and fees from 1933 to 1940. At the time of the trial, the local’s bank balance was less than $108. The money had not been used in strikes or in benefits paid to the members. It went for “administrative expenses.”
It might be said that the members of this international have just about the kind of international they deserve. There are many things they could have done to cure this situation. They could have formed a committee to present their case to the AFL convention. We don’t pretend to believe that this would accomplish much, but it is a correct first step. There are many other steps to be taken inside their own AFL body. If none of these worked, there is nothing that can force them to remain within the AFL. After all, there is an organization known as the CIO United Construction Workers.
 
Feeding Boss Propaganda to the Soldiers
A New York preacher, Roelif H. Brooks, pastor of St. Thomas Episcopal Church, has been giving the soldiers at Camp Stewart, Ga., some anti-labor education. Speaking to members of a New York regiment at the camp he said: “We find men refusing to work unless their wages are increased, or there is a closed shop, or there is a recognition of one union opposed to another. What care they if men like you are prevented from receiving complete training because you have no equipment.”
First we want to dispose of the not very subtle lie uttered by this preacher. The men in the army are not training with broomsticks, stovepipe and other play-yard substitutes on account of strikes and union disputes. They lack equipment for the sole reason that the government is administered by a bunch of stupid, ignorant and out-of-date generals who don’t know how to prepare and equip an army for modern technological warfare. Next come the bosses who refused to turn a wheel until their stooges in the government had granted the demands of the employers for higher profits and lower taxes.
Brooks knew he was lying when he made this speech. He is the pastor of a fashionable church in New York. His fine salary is paid by the wealthy bosses and he has to make the kind of speeches they want made or he’ll get fired. This parasite and mouthpiece for his capitalist pewholders who performs no useful work and holds no necessary place in society, was attempting to create a rift between the workers in the camps and those in the factories. That has been tried before and didn’t work. There are workers and trade unionists in the army and they are not falling for the boss propaganda of a paid agent like Brooks.
 
A Gasoline “Pipeline” To Greater Profits
It has been revealed that there is no gasoline shortage in the U.S., and that all this business of closing gasoline stations at night is at bottom a scheme of the big oil companies to put over a pipe-line project financed by the government. The program for the night-time gasoline blackout was formulated by Interior Secretary Ickes’ advisory committee, made up of 100 oil company officials.
After Ickes had made an agreement with the oil companies for the closing of stations at 7 p.m. he agreed with seven of the big oil companies to build a pipeline from the Gulf to the Atlantic seaboard. The line was to cost $80,000,000 and the government would supply the money. Nearly a million tons of steel would be required as well as tons and tons of cement and other materials.
Railroad officials told the Senate committee investigating the alleged gasoline shortage that the roads could take care of any real Atlantic Coast shortage that might develop by delivering 200,000 gallons daily by tank cars. When the committee inquired why this wasn’t being done, they were told that it was cheaper to deliver oil by pipeline. That is, of course, if the government supplies the $80,000,000 to build the pipeline. The oil companies are broke; they only increased their profits 200 per cent the first six months of this year.
When the investigating committee expressed indignation, the oil companies decided to use all available tank cars and the roads reduced rates 50 per cent.
There is one other factor that motivated the oil companies in scheming with Ickes to close the gasoline stations at night. This would throw 90,000 workers out of jobs and save the big oil companies $1,000,000 a day. Thus boss patriotism winds its profit-making way.
 



The convention of the United Electrical, Radio & Machine Workers (CIO) which met in Camden, N.J., last week gave most of its attention to three items on the convention agenda. They were: adoption of a resolution backing in full the war policy of the Roosevelt government; defeating James B. Carey in his attempts to get a constitutional resolution passed which would give locals of the international the right to bar Stalinists from office; and, finally, the surprise action of the convention, defeating Carey for re-election.
The resolution supporting the war policy of the government was adopted without debate by a vote of 382 to 5. The resolution called for full aid to England, Russia and China and all other nations fighting against Hitler, “to the end that this menace to our country may be defeated for all time.”
One interesting fact in connection with this resolution and the overwhelming vote in its favor was the solid support given the resolution by the Stalinists. The former position of the international had been against aid to Great Britain, and for the United States to remain out of the war. With the change in line of the Stalinists, however, it was understood that they would be for the support of the war and Roosevelt’s foreign policy. It is not surprising that there was no discussion on the resolution, since virtually all of the leaders, including Carey, had long before taken an all-out position in favor of the war. The Stalinist rank and file delegates, being under the control of the party leadership, would, of course, raise no objection. They have been taught to change silently and passively whenever their leadership dictates.
The rest of the rank and file delegates, except those who followed Carey, were leaderless. There was no militant force of any consequence in the convention to rally them against the resolution on a working class anti-war platform. Hence the passing of such a resolution was merely routine, like a motion for a recess.
 
The Big Upset
Having got this resolution out of the way the first day of the convention, the Stalinists were ready to do a little fighting on the other issues before the convention. There was the matter of giving locals “autonomy” to exclude Stalinists from office if they so desired. This was Carey’s position and he tried hard to get it included in the union’s constitution. But he didn’t have the votes; the Stalinists were too strong. And, too, Albert J. Fitzgerald, who took the union presidency from Carey, was opposed to the inclusion of such a section in the union constitution.
Fitzgerald was a leading figure in the convention and his leadership manifested itself even before the question of the elections arose. Fitzgerald told the convention that he did not want this question to become a national union issue because it would destroy the union’s effectiveness. His formula was that the union should expel people not for political beliefs, but for being “anti-country and anti-union.”
The big upset came when Fitzgerald defeated Carey for re-election. There have been various interpretations put on this action by the convention. It seems likely that it was caused in part by Carey’s refusal to make a compromise with the Stalinists on the matter of Stalinist exclusion. There was a great deal of caucusing, and no doubt an attempt was made at a deal with Carey.
Added to this was the feeling of many delegates that, because Carey was taking time out for his duties as secretary of the CIO, he was not giving sufficient time to the affairs of the UERMW. The Stalinists, of course, exploited this attitude to the limit, with the result that Carey was defeated.
 
Not Like UAW
The UERMW convention was a different affair from the automobile workers meeting. One gets the impression that it is in many respects a different kind of organization. It is loose, not so well organized, and lacking in the militancy of the automobile workers. One gets the impression, for instance, that its membership report was padded. What is the membership of the UERMW and how does the international count its membership? It has collective agreements covering 316,000 workers, but this does not tell the paid-in membership.
Furthermore, one got the impression that this union has no distinctly union problems to deal with. Most of the five days were consumed with political problems of the nature that have been mentioned, with the greatest emphasis on the question of Stalinist exclusion. Organizing campaigns, trade union education, improving working conditions and wages did not receive the attention they deserve, especially in such a Union as the UERMW.
Improvement will perhaps come in time. It must be remembered, of course, that the UERWM has had a sort of mushroom growth and the leadership has not had the time, inclination or ability to gather up all the loose ends. The Stalinists, of course, have their own plans and ideas and are never much concerned with the real problems that confront the unions and the mass of their membership.
Fitzgerald, the new president, comes direct from the shop. He may take hold, weld the organization together and pay attention to all the pressing problems the international faces. There are reasons to believe that this would be welcomed by the membership.
 



A War Department Labor Day Message
Labor Day this year, as heretofore. brings forth the usual flood of “Labor Day Messages” from all sorts of organizations, individuals and the government. The Under-Secretary for War, Mr. Patterson, writes the AFL and CIO and expresses the War Department’s “profound gratification over the matter in which they (labor) are rising to the needs of the present emergency.” Then Mr. Patterson goes on to remark that “labor has most at stake in the preservation of democracy.”
We take it that when Mr. Patterson is speaking of “democracy” he is thinking of “our system of free enterprise” – capitalism. That, of course, is exactly what Mr. Patterson is talking about. Therefore Labor Action would like to remind him, and labor also, that there is another group that has something at stake “in the preservation of democracy.” We are talking of precisely what Mr. Patterson is talking about: that is, what the workers get out of “our system of free enterprise,” and what the bosses get.
We read, for instance, that in 1939 one-fiftieth (1/50) of American families got one-ninth (1/9) of the national income. The income from the ownership or control of property amounted to over 21 billion dollars. Fewer than one million persons or families got nearly 5 billion dollars of this amount. That is, these people got 5 billion dollars in income not through productive labor but only because they OWN the mines, mills, factories, land and banks. They do no useful work. They only sit and wait for their hired corporation officials to drive the workers to the production of wealth, which these take.
In 1939 “our system of free enterprise” gave 43 persons net incomes of over one million dollars. After allowing for salaries to themselves and other expenses, this group had left control of property a total of over 73 million dollars. Their average income from property was over one million dollars each. What does Patterson mean when he says that “labor has most at stake in the preservation of democracy”? Furthermore, we read about 26 corporation executives who were paid over $100,000 each as salary in 1940. Do these gentlemen have no desire for the “preservation of democracy,” that is, American national capitalism? Mr. Grace, of Bethlehem Steel, got $478,144 in 1940. Mr Vaughn of Curtiss-Wright got $148,671. Mr. Weir of National Steel got $245,000. Mr. Girdler of Republic Steel got $176,000. Mr. Fairless of U.S. Steel got $139,610 and Mr. Wilson of General Motors, $278,324.
The workers who created the wealth that made these huge salaries possible got between $1,500 and $2,500 for a year’s work. And yet Mr. Patterson has the brass to write to the leaders of the AFL and CIO and tell them to say to AFL and CIO workers that “labor has most at stake in the preservation of democracy” (Capitalism).
 
Green Crawls On His Belly – As Usual
Brother Green of the AFL and Brother Murray of the CIO also issued Labor Day manifestos. As is his custom, Green crawled on his belly before the bosses and the government. Green is “gratified to report” that the AFL workers “have refrained from strikes SABOTAGING the defense program.” To Green strikes in the war industries represent sabotage. Green knows of “no single thing that the government has asked the AFL to do for the sake of the defense program which we have hesitated or failed to do ... the members of the AFL ... are determined to prove now and for all time that free men never can be conquered by slaves.” The members of the AFL may “never be conquered by slaves” but they better watch or they’ll be conquered by Green, Hutchinson, FBI Tobin and strikebreaker Frey for the benefit of the bosses and their man Roosevelt.
Green pretends mighty concern over the workers of Europe. They are “slaves” and “in tragic plight.” The AFL has learned a lesson from this, says Green. And what is this lesson? Nothing more than that workers should “love their country.” Didn’t the workers of Germany and France love their countries? Did this save them from Hitler and Petain? Green says that there has been an attempt of selfish individuals and interests to “smear labor and snipe at its basic rights.” And how was this attempt thwarted, according to Bill Green? By the goodness of Congress, for “every anti-labor bill had been rejected in Congress by overwhelming majorities.” The pressure of the organized workers, particularly those in the CIO, had nothing to do with the votes in Congress: such reactionaries as Silk Stocking Baldwin, of New York, voted against the May-Connally amendments out of love of labor and “democracy.”
Murray of the CIO has more sense than ex-Deacon Green. He mentions the victories over Ford and Bethlehem. (Green, perhaps, isn’t so stupid as to mention the “victories” of Frey and Tobin.) In the last six months, the CIO has won wage increases of over $800,000,000. Murray doesn’t have as much faith in the goodness of Congress as does Green. He reports to the workers that “there will be new proposals and new hysterias.” Murray also recognizes that “in a period of war production, the real wages of American workers will be beset on all sides. They will be threatened by rising costs of living, by wage taxation and by all kinds of schemes for forced savings.”
At least Murray understands that the workers have something more to do than just “love their country.” This wouldn’t occur very vividly to Bill Green. John L. Lewis remarked at the last CIO convention that he had explored Bill Green’s mind “and I’ll give you my word, there’s nothing there.”
 
And What Is the “Spirit of Capitalism”?
The Federal Council of Churches also issued a Labor Day message. They want the American people to work together democratically for a better order of society. They want this better society based on the twin pillars of religion and the productive labor of hand and brain. (Norman Thomas will agree with the hand and brain part.) These comfortable and well-fed sky pilots say that the fundamental religious concern with industry has to do with its spirit and purpose ... “if we are to develop an the spirit of Christ, who came not to be ministered unto but to minister, the primary test of production and distribution must not be a private advantage but the common good.” Then the theologians go on to talk about the necessity for industrial civilization extending more democratic control to producers and consumers, or face a totalitarian state.
We don’t pretend to any proficiency in the mystery and oracles of theology and such like, but we do know would like to inform these gentlemen of the cloth that the “spirit and purpose” of capitalism is to get more and more profit and bigger and bigger dividends and interest every passing year. Industrial civilization (capitalism) is interested in religion and the pronouncements of the Federal Council of Churches only to the extent that it can aid in this “purpose.” In fact, this is one reason why the Christian capitalists maintain such organizations as the Federal Council of Churches. Such organizations help make capitalism palatable to workers and make them believe they are getting something. The capitalists know better even if the preachers don’t.
We are a little skeptical about the effectiveness of the preachers. They have been at it now for several centuries but they don’t seem to get far. One reason for this is the fact that the preachers, especially those of the big churches and such outfits as the Federal Council of Churches, are part of the baggage of the capitalists. They don’t have an independent existence. The capitalists build their churches and pay their salaries. The capitalists are members of the churches and such organizations as the FCC. These capitalists can kick the preachers out of the churches and break up the Federal Council of Churches whenever they feel that the “spirit and purpose of capitalism” are not being served.
We should like to remind the preachers also that their group supported the First World War and that they didn’t learn anything. They are also giving full aid to the Second World Imperialist War.
 
Hillman’s Got A “Plan” – For Tomorrow
Mr. Hillman, “labor’s representative in the government,” was also dripping with Labor Day fervor. He is concerned with tomorrow: “the ability to produce today guns and tanks and planes would tomorrow be used to provide better homes, better clothes and better food for every American family. According to Hillman, the proper way to get adequate food, clothing and shelter for the people is to get an imperialist war started. This war will require tanks, airplanes, guns, bullets and powder. You build an airplane factory in every city, huge new powder plants and tank factories. Then you turn the automobile factories away from the production of passenger cars and refrigerators. You stop the aluminum factories from making pots and pans. You stand peacetime industry on its head, dislocate it. You tell a typewriter manufacturer to begin making bullets and shells. You take mechanics away from the construction of homes and put them at work building barracks and military camps.
You take millions of young men off of consumer production, send them to camps to learn the art of modern warfare. You take these same young men out of teh factories where the managers do know a little about tractors, steam engines, chemistry and electricity, to fumble around in military camps under officers who know next to nothing about modern military organization and operations.
All this is for the purpose of teaching these young men how “to provide better homes, better clothes and better food for every American family.” This is what the Second World Imperialist War means to the boss-Roosevelt lackey, Sidney Hillman.
When all is said and done, the workers won’t get much from the Labor Day messages, sermons and speeches. This annual love feast of the bosses, the government, labor leaders, reformers and those whose mass militant picket line will produce more wages than all the hokus pokus about love of country, service to human need and the spirit and purpose of industry.
 



ATLANTIC CITY – The Industrial Union of Marine and Shipbuilding Workers (CIO) opened its seventh national convention here with 290 delegates in attendance representing approximately 86,000 paid-up members. The convention began its sessions with the address of John Green, international president, President Green set the tone and gave the line for what is to follow in the next few days. His opening speech revolved around the war and what, in his opinion, should be the attitude of the shipbuilding workers. “Yes, we support Roosevelt’s foreign policy,” said Green. “We agreed with his pronouncements, with the eight-point program he and Winston Churchill gave to the world, and we agree with his actions to implement these pronouncements, and we say there is no turning back. If the Neutrality Act stands in the way, and I believe is does stand in the way, let it be wiped off the statute books.”
This pronouncement of Green’s can only mean, of course, that it is his opinion that the decks should be cleared for the full active participation of the United States in a “shooting war,” with all that means, including an AEF. Since this came in the presidential address in the first hours of the convention and since no resolutions have been presented, it is too early to say what the reactions of the delegates will be.
Green said further that workers in American unions know “in their hearts that unless we slop this spread of Nazism, this cursed system will engulf us all, and the workers will be the first and last to suffer.” He is evidently attempting to clinch his argument for full support to Roosevelt when he asked:
“Is there any American worker today so blind, so deaf, so unknowing as not to realize that the fate which Hitler imposed upon labor in Germany, Austria, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Holland, Belgium and France is the same fate which he holds in store for us if he has his way with the world?
“Is there any so blissfully unconscious as to think that we can pursue our leisurely course in this country and live happily afterward while the rest of the world is under the heel of the Nazi tyrant? If there are any such, I have never met them among the shipyard workers.”
 
Hillman Influence Strong
The position advanced by Green was carried forward by Charles Irvin of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers, who spoke to the convention. Irvin was evidently present for Hillman, whose influence is very strong in this convention. Irvin spoke as a “radical” who was warning the shipyard workers against the present-day Republicans and Democrats. That is he warned the delegates against all Democrats except Roosevelt, who “is the only President since Lincoln who recognizes that there is a working class in the United States.” Irvin told the delegates that the workers must get “power” but they must do it without “violernce.” All this communist stuff, he continued, is only the wildest fantasy. If the workers learn to look out for themselves they can get “power” and all their rights by using the democratic means already provided. Irvin’s idea was that the workers must begin to make the Declaration of Independence work. Also labor should learn what Lincoln said about the priority of labor and take advantage of Lincoln’s position on this question.
The next speaker was Allan A.H. Findly, a member of the British trade union delegation now touring the United States in the interest of increased production of war supplies for England. Mr. Findly is a member of the United Pattern Makers Association, a past president of the Engineering and Shipbuilding Trades Federation and has been generally prominent in the British labor movement for many years.
Findly explained that his delegation, although appointed by the British General Council of Trade Unions and approved by the British government, did not officially represent the General Council of Trade Unions. The reason for this is that the official British movement is formally associated with the AFL in the United States. It is probably true that the CIO is looked upon as a sort of “outlaw” organization. Findly said that it was difficult for the British unionists to understand why there was a split in the American movement; thy can not understand the lack of unity. He suggested mildly that it would be a fine thing if the two organizations would get together so that production of war materials could be increased.
From Findly’s remarks it was clear to the delegates and others that he did not understand the nature of the differences between the AFL and CIO. Also, that he did not understand the history of the CIO industrial union movement and the intense feeling of rank and file CIO members against the AFL.
 
A Day of Pro-War, Political Speeches
I have emphasized what I have in connection with the first day of this convention because these speeches represented the important and significant part of the first day’s sessions. This is especially true when it is taken into consideration what it is that these speakers represent and what it is they are after.
The Hillman point of view prevails in the convention. This is clear. It is a Roosevelt to Hillman to the shipbuilders convention. The first day was a Roosevelt pro-war day, a day of pro-war POLITICAL speeches. This is interesting when I remember how often I have heard workers in unions and other workers’ organizations resent “politics” coming onto the floor of the union meeting. But today the convention opened with “politics” from the international president; more “politics” from Charles Irvin of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers and then pro-Churchill “politics” from a virtual representative of the British government. But no one took the floor with any anti-war, pro-working class politics.
No one should get the impression that this convention will do nothing but yell for Roosevelt and Churchill. That isn’t the situation at all. There are important matters to come before the union that are the business of the shipyard workers. They will certainly give attention to these matters as they have in the past. This will be reported on in the next Labor Action.
One thing must be commented on: this is another democratic convention. It is not so well organized as the UAW convention, nor as efficient, but operated by the officers just as democratically.
 



THE RECENT CONVENTION of the United Automobile Workers (now the United Automobile, Aircraft and Agricultural Implement Workers: UAW-CIO) was an excellent laboratory in which to study not only the technical problems of trade union functioning but also certain specific problems of the class struggle and working class politics. For here were assembled nearly 1,000 delegates representing workers in a basic mass production industry who had in the past few years been organized into an industrial union that now has 438,000 members. Here were workers who were beyond the exuberance and carefree attitude of youth but who were still active, alert and far from the blight of age. Literally hundreds of these delegates, in recent times, had been leaders of picket lines; they were shop stewards, officers of locals, members of wage committees and of various other committees that go to make up the administrative, organizational and educational apparatus of a mass labor international. These were the men who had been on the firing line, who had engaged in the battle of the picket line, the conference room and the legislative hearing. As the labor movement goes they were comparatively young in length of service but they had crowded in much experience, education and trade union training.
Since their convention was meeting in the days of the Second World Imperialist War, economic, social and political questions attendant upon imperialist war thrust themselves onto the floor of the convention and forced discussion and the adoption of policy. This means that the major questions before the convention were political and not the old fashioned isolated economic matters that formerly occupied the time of trade union conventions. It was this fact and the practical handling of some of these political questions that revealed both the weakness and the strength of the new industrial union movement in the United States. Because of the political nature of the topics before the convention and the presence of political party groups, it was not of course mere chance that almost from the start the convention was confronted with two well-organized political factions: the Stalinists on one side and a Hillman-OPM pro-war block of social-chauvinists, in charge of the “socialist” Reuther brothers.
 
The Two “Power Caucuses”
The leadership of these two factions were arrayed against each other in open, venomous and usually reactionary combat through the twelve days of deliberations. It is necessary to emphasize that this was really a struggle between the leadership of the two “power caucuses” for the reason that on a few important occasions the delegates rejected or sent back proposals coming from their own leaders or from the leadership acting in unison. And, too, there were independent delegates who were not members of either of the “power caucuses.”
The Reuther brothers’ faction contained many good militant workers, but due to their red-baiting and pro-war line they gathered in the most reactionary elements in the convention. This leadership, with some loose and tame connection with the Socialist Party, brought under its banner the most backward delegates of the Association of Catholic Trade Unionists, all the Hillmanites, the most blatant pro-war delegates and the most vociferous of the red-baiters and witch-hunters.
The Stalinist faction also contained many real militant workers, but they were also liberally supplied with old fashioned and stupid Stalinists whose skullduggery at times was truly amazing. They were in a bad position. There were no principled differences between them and the Reuther brothers’ faction or between them and Hillman, the real leader of the Reuther faction.. There was no real difference between the Stalinists and the Reuthers on the “Red” question, for, as we shall show later, the Stalinists also went in for a little red-baiting, in the circumstances, the fact that the Reuthers are American social-patriots and the Stalinists reactionary Russian patriots establishes only a very thin superficial difference between the two groups, neither of which is against the war. The fact that both factions were social-chauvinists and therefore could not oppose each other from a platform of working class political principles made it inevitable that the struggle should become a tug of war for mechanical control of the international union. Many of the delegates sensed this and that was the meaning of their description of these two factions as “power caucuses.” But it must be said that most of the delegates did not understand the motives and maneuvers of the convention politicians. This was notably so of the rôle played by Frankensteen. Neither the Reuther nor the Stalinist faction gave them any assistance.
Here was Frankensteen of North American Aviation infamy, the Horatius at the bridge to hold back the Stalinist hordes, coming to an understanding with the Stalinists that if they would not oppose him for vice-president and keep quiet on that section of the North American resolution dealing with his role, he on his part would deal gently with them and Michener. Frankensteen carried out his part of the bargain and so did the Stalinists, but the delegates failed them: they decided there should be no vice-president. The Reuther caucus knew about this deal. Nordstrom, a member of the Reuther group, took the floor and explained what a good job Frankensteen had done on the Stalinists in the international board. He lamented that Frankensteen had done no such job in the convention. The delegates had heard rumors and they wanted the facts but no one dared speak openly and frankly despite repeated demands from rank and file delegates.
Addes also came in for a great deal of criticism. There were some forces in the convention who were looking to him to take the lead in steering the delegates toward a militant and independent formation. But while Addes took a generally progressive position on the various questions, his chief activity seemed to have been centered around getting re-elected to office. He was the chief organizational target of the Reuther faction and it was necessary for him to clear himself of the charge of being a Stalinist before the day of the elections rolled around.
President Thomas is generally looked upon as a sort of middle of the road person. This description is neither adequate nor accurate. Thomas seems to be a person who realizes that the two factions in the organization will tear it to pieces if he does not insist on listening to many of the democratic demands of the ranks. He therefore ran the convention in an unusually democratic manner, paying attention to the pressure and the needs of the rank and file delegates, who acted as a barrier against the machinations of both the political factions. Although it is probably true that Thomas is not a formal member of the Reuther machine, he expressed a preference for most of the positions held by Walter Reuther at the convention. One notable instance in which he did not agree with Reuther was in the vote for Addes to be secretary-treasurer. There is reason to believe that he finally decided to vote for the re-election of Addes after telephone conversation that he and Addes had with Murray. It is this writer’s guess that Murray was favorable to the re-election of Addes. Thomas is a strong Murray man and if he has any real and fast alliance it is with Murray. He made this clear more than once at Buffalo.
Some of the capitalist papers and the social-democratic New Leader are insisting that it was a John L. Lewis convention and that Alan Haywood, who was in Buffalo, was there, not as was announced by Thomas, representing Murray, but Lewis. Most of this chatter should be discounted. Addes is also said to be a Lewis man. This may be true, but it seems that he is also a Murray man. Most of the talk and propaganda about Lewis being in command or that he is reaching out to take over the leadership of the CIO again is based partly on fear that the return of Lewis will cause a loss of prestige in some quarters, also opposition to John L.’s isolationist stand by the outright pro-entry leaders in the UAW. It is probable that the Stalinists will eventually come out in opposition to Lewis and swing all their support to Murray. They laid the groundwork for such a step at Buffalo when they voted for a Reuther faction resolution binding the UAW delegates to the CIO convention to vote for Murray for re-election. When the vote on the resolution was taken Thomas was careful to urge that all who opposed the resolution should be men enough to stand and vote against it. Only a handful of Stalinists stood. The resolution was sprung from the floor by Richard Leonard and the Stalinists did not have an opportunity to caucus before voting.
These were some of the issues that the delegates were confronted with, sometimes getting them openly from the convention floor but often having them blow in from the faction rooms through rumor-mongering. This was the high internal lad ion politics that the mass of the rank and file delegates was confused by. This political “power caucus” jugglery and scheming created great difficulties for the delegates when they faced the important questions such as the war resolution, the elections, the North American and Allis-Chalmers events and the anti-Communist, Fascist and Nazi constitutional amendments. This was especially true in the case of the independent militants who did not have the consolation of blindly and passively following their caucus or party leaders.
 
Politics and Politicians
There was plenty of talk in the convention about “politicians.” This word was on everybody’s tongue; even Frankensteen was disturbed, he said more than once, over the activity of the “politicians.” He was sure that sweetness and light would prevail if the “politicians” would only be less active. No one was willing to be labeled a “politician”; every faction activist, according to his own representation, was only interested in defending the union constitution and preserving democracy in the organization. No one wanted to touch politics or a politician. It is not necessary to go into this matter any further in relation to the real faction demagogues, but there is something to be said about the sincere worker-delegates who took this position.
It was plain in Buffalo, as it is at other workers’ gatherings, that militant and honest workers fall prey to the demagogic, opportunist and social-patriotic schemes of clever trade union leaders on this question of politics in the unions. Not understanding the class organization of society and the nature of the class struggle, these workers look upon “politics” as being only or primarily the intervention of working class parties in the union. This is a troublesome and difficult problem for any revolutionary party. A representative of Secretary of the Treasury Morgenthau spoke at the convention in the interest of the sale of “defense” bonds. To the overwhelming majority of the delegates this was not “politics,” and the speaker of course was not a politician. But if a delegate, known to be the representative of a revolutionary party, had spoken against the purchase of the “defense” bonds he would have been lucky if he was permitted to finish the ten minutes allotted to speakers from the floor. Such political immaturity was of course exploited to the utmost by the Hillman-Reuther faction. The Stalinist delegates, who knew better, joined the chorus at every opportunity and helped add to the confusion of delegates who were really willing to learn a few things had there been anyone around to teach them.
When they understood, the actions of these automobile workers were superb. The voted unanimously against the proposal of the international board to hold biennial conventions. This, after all the heavy artillery on the rostrum, including Thomas, Addes and Frankensteen speaking in favor. They voted almost en masse against a recommendation to have three classifications for “organizers.” Their attitude was: “Give all the organizers the same pay and make them all earn it.” Although they voted for the Murray-Thomas-Frankensteen whitewash in the North American affair, they would not yield to the pressure for Michener to be expelled from the union or barred from holding office below the rank of board member and regional director. Neither would they yield to pressure to let the eight blacklisted workers from North American remain blacklisted without help from the union. They voted at first not to seat the Allis-Chalmers delegates but were insistent that a new election be held immediately so that these workers could be represented at the convention. They refused to be trapped by the criminal scheming of the Reuther faction and Nordstrom which was planned to let the convention go by before the new election could be held. When the original committee returned with a lurid report about Christoffel’s low estimate of the worth of the union leadership and that he would not “cooperate,” the delegates brushed this aside, added four members to the original three, and told them to go back and stay there until the election was held.
They refused to permit the dues to be raised from $1.00 to $1.25 monthly. They refused to increase the number of paid officers by adding a vice-president. They passed a resolution against the freezing of wages over the protest of the resolutions committee, who felt that this should be left to wage-negotiating committees. There was virtually no flag-waving at the convention despite the fact that these workers are “patriots.” Their deep concern over the practically day-to-day problems of the automobile industry was really more active than their “patriotism.” They understood thoroughly the need for intensifying the organizing drive in aircraft. They were indefatigable protagonists of constitutional procedure and zealous defenders of internal union democracy.
 
Convention Shortcomings
These were the things they understood, the aspects of trade unionism they had learned from their own experience. But there were fundamentally important questions they did not understand and grasp. For instance, the real meaning and implications of the North American affair either from the side of the government and the bourgeoisie or the rôle of Murray and Thomas. Since Frankensteen’s strike-breaking was so open and crass, they could get their teeth into this so far as his objective acts were open to their gaze. They missed completely, however, the motivations of Roosevelt and the easy manner in which Murray, followed by Thomas, was trapped into covering the union-breaking plans of the North American employers and the imperialist war plans of Roosevelt. In fact, it never seemed to have occurred to the independent militants in the convention to emphasize that the real culprit was North American and not Michener, even though Michener may have violated the discipline of the union. Had the delegates or any part of them attacked this situation with the same alertness and perspicacity they did some other issues, Roosevelt and the ruling class would be having sleepless nights wondering what the automobile workers were planning to do next, for instance in connection with the coming lay-offs in the industry.
These delegates, as is the case with the majority of workers, did not understand the real dangers of Stalinism. Due to their lack of political understanding of the Stalinists, they play into the hands of the vilest anti-Stalinist reactionaries, into the hands of people who politically are really not anti-Stalinists, but anti-progressive and hostile to all suggestions for revolutionary program and activity. In the Allis-Chalmers case they virtually closed their eyes to the real essence of Stalinism. They rejected the credentials of these delegates at first because it was proved that the election was unconstitutional: that is they had been nominated and voted for on the same day. When the same delegates were re-elected the convention was satisfied: the constitution had been upheld. It had not, however, settled the relevant question of Stalinism in the union as manifested in the course of the Stalinist handling of affairs in this local.
It was not brought out and emphasized in the convention that despite the fact of Stalinist undemocratic tactics and strong-arm practices at Allis-Chalmers, as elsewhere, the workers there had in all probability voted for Christoffel delegates again because this was the group that had led their 76-day militant strike. The workers at Allis-Chalmers didn’t vote for the Nordstrom-Reuther delegates – despite the fact that Nordstrom is director for that region – because they evidently believed that in the circumstances of that strike, if it had been led by Nordstrom, the strike would have been sold out long before the 76th day arrived. This is, the workers at Allis-Chalmers, most of them, were voting for militant action when they supported the Christoffel Stalinist delegation, and not for “radicalism.”
Nobody in the convention emphasized this point or the further point that red-baiting as a substitute for militant action or as a cover for one’s Hillman pro-war politics will not advance the interests of the labor movement. There were independent militants at the convention who know this but they did not know how to formulate, present and fight for their views.
The convention knew that it would deal with the Stalinists and the delegates just waited for the so-called “red issue” to come to the floor. It did in the form of a constitutional amendment. There were three of these amendments, one from the Stalinists. But lo and behold! all three of them were identical in that each called for the barring of “Communists, Fascists and Nazis” from holding office in the UAW. The Stalinists opposed the other two resolutions only because they did not include the “Socialist Party.” This should have been a lesson to many of the militants in the convention: that you will have a devil of a time catching the Stalinists if you are armed with nothing more than a constitution. “You want to do a little red-baiting,” the Stalinists said in effect to Reuther, Leonard, Doherty, et al., “all right, we’ll show you how it’s done, for after all, we are experts at this game. Under our great leader, Stalin, we have had a whole decade of experience at this sort of thing. All that we insist on is that you include everybody except Roosevelt and Harry Hopkins, even the palest of the pink groups, even the Socialist Party.”
The workers have not yet learned that the attack on the Stalinists must be a political and programmatic attack; that to attempt to eradicate Stalinism from the labor movement by mere constitutional means is reactionary and that such amendments in the hands of a reactionary leadership will serve as a club against all and any militants, whether Stalinists, true revolutionists, Republicans or Democrats.
 
The War Resolution
When the war resolution came up the delegates also demonstrated their political incapacity. This resolution, which embodies the position of President Thomas, was for defense but against an AEF. The country must prepare to defend itself against aggression but must not participate in any foreign wars. The convention gave far less attention to this resolution than to the question, say, of competitive shops. The best of the militants did not know that when he is voting on a war resolution he is taking a political position and not deciding a trade union question like wages or reclassification. True, the worker is interested more in wages than in the war but he doesn’t understand that he must not be more interested in the question of wages than he is in a resolution committing his union to a position on the imperialist war.
The war resolution of the UAW convention was particularly dangerous and pernicious. Resolutions calling for “defense” but no “foreign wars” may give the impression that their sponsors are against the war and thereby draw support of labor. This is due to the political backwardness of the mass of workers. Thomas and the workers who vote for resolutions of this type are perhaps convinced that there is a fundamental distinction to be drawn between defending “one’s own country” from inside against an aggressor and going out to meet the enemy or the potential enemy elsewhere. To accept such a position is to swallow whole all of the propaganda of the ruling class about the present war. The workers fail to grasp the problem and find the correct working-class solution because they do not comprehend the nature of imperialist war and how and why national states become involved in such wars. They get bogged down and wrapped in muddle and mystery about “defense” and “aggression.” Such questions are beyond the political range of the trade union leaders.
The matter of strikes was also the subject of constitutional amendment. This was to be expectd after the North American affair. The regulations against “unauthorized strikes” were made more rigorous. It is now mandatory for the International Board to withdraw all financial support from a union that continues with an “unauthorized” strike. The problem of strikes is a hard nut for the non-political trade union militant. He knows that there must be union discipline and that “unauthorized” strikes must be held in check. But he also knows that if strikes are confined to those authorized by the leadership, something bad for the union is likely to happen. This was brought out in the convention, one delegate reminding the delegates that the great Ford strike began as an “unauthorized” strike. The point is that a provision in a union constitution giving complete control over strikes to the union leadership can work against all progress by the union and the working class. If there were never an “unauthorized” strike in time there would probably be no strikes at all and labor would be faced with virtual slavery.
This question of strikes ties up with the problem of “legality” and the unions. The trade union leadership, as a rule, wants to proceed within the framework of bourgeois legality. To the bourgeois there is a certain “illegality” about an “unauthorized” strike, even though no statute is violated. He will call the strike illegal and then go to the courts or to Congress and ask for protection. This was what happened in the case of the very effective sit-down strikes.
The last point that we wish to cover that was revealed at the UAW convention was the inability of the non-political trade union militants to truly grasp the nature of the real problem before the labor movement. We have said that these problems were mainly political. Despite this fact there is a strong hangover of former days and a persistent tendency to seek solutions by economic action alone. Even among those unionists who are beginning to get a glimmer of the necessity for political action, there is lack of experience and capacity for understanding the method of translation from economic to political action. But the responsibility for this immaturity cannot be laid at the feet of the militant trade unionists. They are doing their job as best they know how. This was clear at the UAW convention. They understand the day-to-day practical struggle against the employer but they do not understand capitalist society. They do not understand any kind of politics, bourgeois or proletarian. In this field the revolutionists and Marxists alone are competent to assume the rôle of teacher, leader and guide. Leadership cannot be left to a brute empiricist like Lewis or a religio-social patriot like Murray. All of this was very clear at the UAW convention. Marxists claim to understand this but they haven’t done much yet in a practical way.
 



BUFFALO – The sixth annual convention of the United Automobile Workers of America (CIO) has just completed its first week of deliberations. The name of the organization is now the “International Union, United Automobile, Aircraft and Agricultural Workers of America” UAW-CIO. Aside from changing the name of the organization the convention has performed more significant tasks.
For one thing, the delegates to this assembly of 1,000 workers, all elected from locals of the union, have demonstrated a firm determination to have their say and vote as they see fit on the important matters that came before the convention. The convention is not “bossed” in the sense that AFL conventions and the CIO steel workers conventions are bossed. This proves the advantage of having a real international and not just an “organizing committee,” such as exists among the steel workers.
There are “factions” in the convention and numerous attempts on the part of some of the leaders to dominate the delegates, but in every instance where the delegates understand the issues clearly they do not hesitate to talk, act and vote as they see fit and as they understand. They are insistent on their democratic union rights and on strict adherence to the international constitution.
This was made very clear when the constitution committee, headed by Victor Reuther, recommended that the constitution be changed to provide for biennial conventions.
Virtually the whole of the International leadership favored this change, including Thomas and Addes. The reasons given for recommending the change were that it would be better to have the convention in the spring. Also, it was argued that it would be better not to hold the convention at the time when car models are being changed. Addes argued that year did no give the GEB time to carry out the mandates of the convention and really get things done before another convention was upon them.
The delegates had other ideas. One delegate said that the international representatives and organizers could stay in the field and keep organizing activities going while the rank and file of the union came to the convention and transacted the business for the international. Frankensteen argued for taking “politics” out of the question. He favored the recommendation of the committee. “Take the politics out of it,” said Frankensteen, “take the personalities out of it and come together on issues, meet and discuss policies of the International Union, and in that way you will have a union that goes forward, not on the basis of politics, but on the basis of building our International Union.”
Addes remarked that the cost of conventions was very high, there being a “direct cost of $16,270.23 and an indirect cost of $23,500 – approximately $39,000 to convene and hold a convention of the Automobile Workers.” Addes also felt that one year was not sufficient time for the officers to carry out the instructions of the convention; they should have more time before another convention rolled around. But a delegate, speaking for the opposition, answered that “from what has happened in the last two days on this floor, you are hearing arguments from one officer and then another officer, and I think we had better make darned sure that we do not stay out of conventions for more than a year, so that we can see just exactly what is going to happen after this convention.”
When the vote was taken not a single delegate voted in favor of biennial conventions and the matter was referred back to the committee, according to the rules of the convention. This means that conventions will be held annually as the sentiment of the delegates was so strongly against any change.
 
Reject Proposal on Staff
The next recommendation of the committee was also rejected. This concerned the national organizing staff of the International. The committee recommended that “the Organizational Staff of the International Union shall consist of’ international representatives, regional representatives and organizers ...” Chairman Victor Reuther explained that at present there are only international representatives with the same authority and the same credentials. The committee proposed that this be changed so that there would be a difference in authority. Some would conduct “negotiations in the top stages with the large corporations, while others with far less organizational experience are laying the groundwork in new organizational campaigns, distributing leaflets, ringing doorbells and button-holing prospective members.”
The delegates had another idea. They began to talk about “class distinctions” and “second-class citizens.” They didn’t want any A, B, and C classifications for their organizers. As one delegate put it, “I believe one classification here and one title of international representative would be sufficient, and I like the name ‘representative’ better than ‘organizer,’ only that we understand a representative is an organizer.” Another delegate said that “a guy that goes out in the field and fights on the picket line, agitates organisation, should fall in as good, if not a better class, than the guy that sits in negotiations.” Another delegate wanted to know the classification of an international representative “who serves in a capacity of a bodyguard, a traveling companion or chauffeur.” The chairman replied that he was out of order and that no reference had been made to such classifications.
The recommendation of the committee was lost with no votes in favor of it.
 
Several Proposals Withdrawn
Numerous proposals made by the Constitution Committee were withdrawn before coming to a vote when it was seen that the delegates were overwhelmingly against the proposals. Most of these were recommendations for changes in the present constitution. One was a proposal to change the eligibility for delegate to the convention. The committee had a continuous good standing for one year prior to the nominations, to continuous good, standing for each 12 months prior to the nominations. This would mean that a member who had been in the union for two years, for example, and who had been in continuous good standing for the 12 but who was not in good standing at some time, say 35 months before, would not be eligible for nomination.
Another proposal withdrawn by the international secretary-treasurer to raise the price of local union charters from $15 to $25. Addes said that the cost of supplies was going up. The delegates insisted that they were not going up that much and that fast. They were willing to pay the increase in the cost of supplies, but were insistent that the international make no profit from the sale of charters. It was agreed that the charters be sold to the locals “at cost.”
 
The Allis-Chalmers Affair
The Allis-Chalmers affair took up considerable time and stirred up a lot of heat and words from all sides. It revolved around the contention that the delegates from the Allis-Chalmers local had been elected in violation of the constitution. There has been a great wave of talk in this convention about the constitution and living up to the letter of the international constitution. Much of this talk has come from delegates who really want the constitution used to protect the democratic rights of the membership. There are others, however, who use the constitution as a platform only for factional politics and as a club against those who are opposed to certain powerful leaders. This was exposed in the Allis-Chalmers affair.
It was brought out in the discussion that there was no question that the Stalinist leadership of that local had proceeded in the usual Stalinist manner to strongarm the election, to deny democratic rights to the opposition in the local, and to carry on all the filthy tactics that the Stalinists have become infamous for in the labor movement. This traditional Stalinist tactic gave the most reactionary forces in the convention an opportunity to go in for the most vicious red-baiting in the name of defending the constitution of the international. Not only this, but also to make the most demagogic speeches in the name of democracy and workers’ rights. This was true of such arch-union political tricksters as the Reuthers and of such extremely reactionary red-baiters as Doherty from Detroit.
Sincere militant rank and filers really didn’t understand what was going on. They do want the constitution lived up to, they want democracy in the union, they are correctly against the Stalinists; but they are not political red-baiters of the type of Hillman’s stooge, Reuther, or the reactionary representatives of the Association of Catholic Trade Unionists. It is on such issues as this that these workers get sucked in and derailed, They talk about “power caucuses” but they do not really understand the meaning of these caucuses in their political aspects. The delegates voted not to seat the Allis-Chalmers delegates but they were determined that the local should have representation at the convention. Therefore, a committee of three was appointed to go to Milwaukee and conduct a new election so that new or old delegates could be seated before the convention adjourned. This committee went to Milwaukee and did exactly nothing.
 
Do Not Discuss the Issue
The committee returned to Buffalo and reported that they had failed to get “cooperation” from Harold Christoffel, president of the local. The reporter for the committee prefaced his report with some irrelevant remarks about the names that Christoffel had called Thomas, Reuther, Nordstrom and Leonard. The reporter, Bioletti, said that Christoffel had called these international officers, “phonies, rats and Hillmanites” and that they were all a bunch of bastards.
It should be said that this was not part of the official report of the committee but it proved to be the issue around which much of the discussion revolved. It was clear that Bioletti intended this to be so. His report on this name-calling (there is no reason to doubt that Christoffel used the words attributed to him) was well flavored and plainly intended to prejudice the situation and cover up the fact that the committee did not make any great effort to have the election. Furthermore, one got the impression that Bioletti was doing a little twisting and distorting of the facts in order to swing the convention against Christoffel. They were out to get the Stalinists by hook or crook.
The fact that Allis-Chalmers men had gone through a 76 day militant strike against a union-busting corporation and the OPM was prominent in the minds of the delegates. Christoffel had led that strike. The red-baiters wanted to “get” Christoffel and at the same time not give the delegates the impression that they were not sufficiently aware of the real grievances the workers at Allis-Chalmers had.
Also it is important to report that when the committee was sent to Milwaukee it was not instructed how it was to carry on the election and what power the committee had. It was brought out that the one point of disagreement that stuck was the question of determining the eligibility of members to vote and who was to preside at the election meeting of the local. According to the international constitution, the local determines eligibility; according to the by-laws of the local, the president presides at meetings of the local. Christoffel insisted on this procedure. The committee had not been instructed on the matter of its authority and, when agreement could not be reached on the two points in dispute, two members of the committee called Thomas and were instructed to return to the convention. The third member of the committee reported to the convention that he had not been consulted about this step. There had been an agreement with Christoffel that there would be another meeting but this meeting never members of the committee were anxious to get back to Buffalo to report that Christoffel did not have a very high regard for some of the international officers. They forgot that they were sent to Milwaukee to hold an election so that the Allis-Chalmers local could be represented at their international convention, just a few months after they had gone through a very militant strike.
George Nordstrom, regional director of the Milwaukee region and international board member, did not play a very enviable role in this affair. It was established that Nordstrom had issued press releases to the Milwaukee papers after the committee was appointed, advising the workers at Allis-Chalmers of the action of the convention and expressing Nordstrom’s personal opinion in the case. Also that Nordstrom had caused a leaflet to be issued from the regional office advising the Allis-Chalmers workers not to vote for Christoffel delegates in the special election.
It developed that Christoffel had a “representative” in Nordstrom’s office. This young lady took a peek, in the office waste paper basket one day and saw something that interested her. It proved to be the stencil and scrap copies of the leaflet that was distributed at the Allis-Chalmers plant in connection with the special election. This material of course found its way to Christoffel’s hands. He used them as exhibits at the convention.
Nordstrom took the floor to explain his role. Although he went through all the motions, he did not come to the point: and that was why he concluded that he was in charge of the Allis-Chalmers elections. The case was in the hands of the convention. The convention had taken a certain action. A committee was sent to Milwaukee to take charge. No part of the negotiations was in Nordstrom’s hands. He, as regional director, had not been authorized to conduct an election campaign at the plant. It was not a Reuther caucus affair. this was an important aspect of the situation that the delegates did not explore on the floor of the convention. They let Nordstrom hide behind some demagogic remarks about what Christoffel had said about the morals of the international officers.
Christoffel was called down out of the gallery to defend himself. He made a long speech that told of many things, but he also did not come to the main point. That was, his conduct of the local and the original election of the delegates by the usual Stalinist strongarm and undemocratic methods. Christoffel did not touch on this nor on the direct charge made by President Thomas about some experiences that he had had with the officers of the local. Christoffel closed his speech with the traditional Stalinist “honest worker” platitudes.
Here was another one of those dilemmas that have faced the plain worker delegates at this convention. There they were caught between two reactionary groups: the Stalinists and the Hiliman-Reuther group; neither group really interested in the needs of militant labor, but in gaining power in the international. There was one thing the delegates did understand, however: this was the fact that they wanted the Allis-Chalmers workers represented at the convention and that this committee failed to carry out its mandate and provide for that. The majority of the delegates didn’t like Christoffel and the Stalinist methods. But they didn’t like the committee’s report, either SO THEY VOTED IT DOWN. They didn’t believe that the important point to be settled in connection with this affair was whether or not Christoffel had called the international officers “phonies” and “bastards.” These workers knew that many of them had called Frankensteen worse names than these during the past few weeks. Many of them agreed with Christoffel when be applied these names to Frankensteen. And they weren’t Stalinists, either.
The delegates were not satisfied just to send the same committee back to Milwaukee. Their instincts were very sure on this point. They added four new people to the committee so that these new people would be the chairman. The committee was instructed this time. It was to determine eligibility and select the chairman for the nominations and election meeting.
 
Dispute over North American
One of the highlights of the convention was the discussion around the North American Aviation strike. This matter was before the grievance committee in connection with the charges against Lou Michener. Before this report was made there were rumors that Frankensteen had made a deal with the Stalinists. He has announced his candidacy for vice-president if that office is restored. He will of course make a fight to have it restored. The delegates’ expected this to be the big fight of the convention. They had been told that the Stalinists had fomented this strike to embarrass the “defense” program. They had been told that Michener was largely responsible and that his conduct had been reprehensible and anti-union. They were prepared to hear Frankensteen go to town on Michener in the convention and mop the floor with him. But they were in for a strange disappointment. The “power caucuses” had been in session on this question. The Reuther caucus was fully armed and ready for the anti-red, pro-Hillman battle. Hillman’s men, Hardman, Kryzski and Daniels, were at the convention.
The grievance committeee came in with a resolution. Many of the delegates were stunned at the mildness of the resolution and the fact that they were informed that Michener could run again for international board member. They had been led to believe that this would not be permitted since Michener had been held up to the international and the whole labor movement as a scoundrel who had no business being in the leadership of the international. The Reuther caucus demanded suspension for a year.
Frankensteen was asked to explain. Nordstrom said that Frankensteen had convinced him at the board meeting. “I was convinced,” said Nordstrom, “at that board meeting, by the adept speaking of our brother Frankensteen that he did that job [at North American]. Where is that job to be done today on this floor? ... I only wish that some of the boys who had so much guts on the executive board to do the job ...” (Nordstrom’s time was up.)
Victor Reuther was shocked that the “committee has not made one suggestion or recommendation as far as penalties for that individual who dared to tell Phil Murray, R.J. Thomas and the director of aviation, in so many words, to go to hell. Why?” Again, as in the Allis-Chalmers, the Reuthers were interested in the moral issues and the niceties of polite social intercourse. They didn’t like such words as ‘”bastard” and “hell.”
Victor Reuther said that he believed that “Phil Murray lies sick today in a Pittsburgh hospital because such individuals put him there by their constant disruption of the activities of the CIO.” Readers will realize that Reuther is not only a moralist but also a medical man. Murray got heart trouble because of Michener’s activities at the North American strike. He demanded that Michener be suspended “for at least a period of a year.”
 
An Obvious Case of Politics
One delegate said that he believed what Frankensteen had said about the Stalinists. “I believed at that time there was an attack on the Communist Party’s part to sabotage national defense. Now, I believe the same individual who made that statement (Frankensteen) is actually guilty of playing politics in this issue by getting up and defending the majority committee’s report be accepted ... I am not going to place myself in a position to have this thing squashed by cheap politicians who want to whitewash this thing on the floor today ... Let’s get these dirty politicians out on this floor while we have the opportunity and let us see ii we can straighten this thing out once and for all.”
Walter Reuther was for one year’s suspension for Michener. He was a brave defender of the constitution and was against “wildcat” strikes. When he had finished, a delegate took the floor to say that there had been more wildcat strikes in Reuther’s local than in any local in the convention. He also reminded Reuther on the matter of democracy that the Reuther local had a resolution in asking the convention to permit them to hold membership meetings once a year. (The convention voted for monthly membership meetings.)
One delegate said that he had been to a caucus where pictures had been shown of Communist activities at North American. These people made “pledges to the delegation they will bring that same information to the convention floor and let the entire delegation know about the matter, suddenly overnight have a change of heart and change their entire line. ... If a few days ago the actions in the North American situation and the actions of Michener were detrimental to our union ... I would like to call on Frankensteen to present what has happened in the past two weeks.” (He should have said, past two days.)
 
A Deal with the Stalinists
With such tremendous pressure on him, not from the “reds” but from his own side, so to speak, Frankensteen was forced to take the floor several times to “explain.” The Stalinists sat quietly and were prepared of course to accept the resolution. (Had they been instructed?) Frankensteen said that the report was a complete vindication of himself, Thomas and Murray. “I don’t want blood in this situation. I don’t want somebody’s hide in this situation ... (all he wanted was the vice-presidency) ... the way to get a clean labor movement on the West Coast is not to bind them. Yes I have been bitter on this case, very bitter. I agree with what has been said. There has been Communist domination on that West Coast situation. I am not pulling my punches one single bit on that. Brother Michener made bad mistakes on this situation, but I do not think it is the thing to do to go out and crucify him because he made those mistakes. Brother Michener will go back to that West Coast and cooperate, as he did before this situation and will cooperate again.” (At this Frankensteen was greeted with boos.)
Frankensteen continued with a hope that the “fair-minded delegates will forget their factional politics.” The report of the grievance committee was rejected and sent back. Every delegate who understands these things is convinced that Frankensteen and the Stalinists have made . a deal. They know that there is something phony about the whole ill-smelling mess. Frankensteen was on the spot and still is. The committee must bring back another report. I suppose that there will be an effort to compromise the matter. (The convention finally barred Michener from his present post for a year, though allowing him to work for the union in a lesser capacity. – Ed.)
There is much unfinished business at the time this report is written; much that has not come before the convention at all and many things that have been returned to committee and must come out again. More on this and the rest of the convention agenda next week.
 



The United Automobile, Aircraft and Agricultural Implement Workers Union finished its two weeks of deliberations last Saturday with the installation of the newly elected officers and international executive board members. The election of the two officers, particularly the election of the secretary-treasurer, caused quite a stir in the convention due to the fact that the incumbent, Addes, was opposed for re-election by Richard Leonard, regional director in Michigan. Leonard was the candidate of the Reuther brothers’ caucus. Addes was re-elected by a vote of 1,759 to 1,307.
The elections, of course, were to be a decisive test of strength ietween the Reuther brothers’ faction and the Stalinists. It must be said that this statement is not wholly accurate. While it is true that there were two main caucuses in the convention, the Reuther brothers’ and the Stalinists’, it is mere correct to say that each of the main questions over which there was factional division was a test of the strength of the Reuther brothers’ faction: This for the reason that the faction was attempting in a most outright manner to gain control of the international, they were irreconcilable and maintained a tight caucus on almost every important question.
The Stalinists, on the other hand, knew that they were on the spot and were forced into a bargaining position. In order to hold on at all costs in the face of their record, the attacks of the Reuther Brothers and general opposition to them, including that of Thomas, the Stalinists had to be a little cautious.
 
Murray Evidently Backed Addes
The support of Leonard by the Reuther caucus was a straight out-and-out faction move. Leonard was supported by the most reactionary delegates to the convention as well as by some delegates who were convinced that it was necessary to take the most extreme steps to wipe out the Stalinists The point that I wish to make is that virtually all the most blatant and hidebound reactionaries flocked to the Reuther banner. The majority of the delegates, however, were convinced that Addes was the best man for the post and they were motivated mainly by this consideration. This outweighed any ideas they may have had about his connection with the Stalinists. Also, they knew that Leonard was a 100 per cent Reuther faction candidate.
There is reason to believe that Addes had the support of Murray. President Thomas announced on Friday morning that he and Addes had been in consultation with Murray by telephone and requested that the elections which had been set for Friday morning be postponed until the afternoon so that he and Addes could confer further with Murray. Thomas also reported to the convention that Alan Haywood was in Buffalo as the personal representative of Murray. This is in contradiction to a statement in the Social Democratic New Leader that Haywood was there as the personal representative of John L. Lewis. It is interesting in this connection that Thomas voted for Addes. Frankensteen also voted for Addes.
 
Seat Allis-Chalmers Delegation
The Allis-Chalmeirs elections were finally held and the outcome was what many of the delegates and observers expected. All of the original delegation were re-elected. There were 1,488 ballots cast. The Christoffel delegates got from 1,121 for Christoffel to 1,086 for Schemling. The highest-vote for a Reuther-Nordstrom delegate was 337.
The new election was held under strict supervision of the committee of seven sent from the convention with a certified public accountant to certify the vote. The committee determined eligibility and selected the chairman for the nominating meeting. These were the two questions under dispute when the first committee returned after having done nothing.
When the delegates had been seated everyone thought that the Allis-Chalmers affair was ended but the Stalinists would not have it so. One of their wild men got the floor and made a motion that the convention send an apology to the “Allis-Chalmers workers” for having refused to seat the delegates. This almost threw the convention into turmoil again. Christoffel finally came to his senses and in a short speech declared that, the Allis-Chalmers incident should be closed. Hs asked that the motion be withdrawn. It was finally expunged from the record.
 
Settle North American Dispute
The North American affair was also finally concluded. This came up under a report of the grievance committee. This was quite a complicated affair. First the convention was called on to decide what to do about Michener and then to decide what to do about placing the region under an administrator. The majority report recommended that Michener be “severely censured ... and barred from holding either elective or appointive office in the International Union or any subordinate body ... for the period of one year.” One minority report recommended that Michener be expelled from the union, that all international representatives in the North American affair who defied the officers of the international and the CIO be prohibited from holding office for five years, to place an administrator over the region but to attempt to get the black-listed rank and file union members reinstated.
The second minority report, presented by Delegate Schuller, recommended that the position taken on the strike by Murray, Thomas and Frankensteen be upheld, that efforts be made to have the eight black-listed workers reinstated, that the cases of the international representatives who were fired bo taken up by the board on their individual merits, that no administrator be appointed, that Michener be barred only from the right to be elected to the international board.
The Schuller recommendations were carried by the convention. This was the resolution that was the soundest of the three and in which an attempt was made to settle the matter by keeping the interest of the union in mind. The signers of the majority resolution were out to get Michener and had no concern for the concrete situation that developed the North American affair. The other minority resolution was a vicious faction affair that was out for blood and was determined to have it even though the entire union was disrupted. In the course of the discussion, Mortimer took the floor and made a long speech. He severely attacked Frankensteen and defended his own course, but admitted that Michener had made some mistakes.
 
Discussion on “Red” Issue
One other highlight of the convention was the discussion and vote on resolutions dealing with the so-called “red” issue. These resolutions were proposals to amend the constitution to bar members and followers of “subversive” organizations from holding office in the UAW. There were three proposals: the majority coming from the Reuther brothers faction, the Stalinist minority proposal and the super-minority proposal submitted by Delegate Kitzman of Local 180.
The Reuther brothers faction amendment was as follows:
“No member or supporter of any organization whose loyalty to a foreign government or who supports organizations which approve of totalitarian forms of government, shall be eligible to hold elective or appointive office in the International Union or any subdivision thereof. The regular trial procedure provided for in this constitution shall be observed in this regard.”
The Stalinist minority amendment read:
“No member of any local union located in the United States of America shall be eligible to hold any elective or appointive position in the International Union or any local union of this International Union if he is proved to be a member of the following:
“(a) A member and subject to the discipline of any political organization such as the Communist, Fascist or Nazi organizations which owes allegiance to any foreign government.
“(b) A member or agent of any minority political party such as the Socialist Party which seeks to impose upon the UAW-CIO a trade union policy and principles separate and apart, or in opposition to, the policies and principles of the Congress of Industrial Organizations.”
The Stalinist amendment also provided that no member should be barred from holding office until charges have been preferred by a member of his local organization and found guilty in a trial conducted by his local organization.
 
Kitzman Resolution Passes
The super-minority report said:
“No member of any local union shall be eligible to hold any elective or appointive position in this International Union or any union in this International Union if he is a member or subservient to any political organization, such as the Communist, Fascist, or Nazi organization, which owes its allegiance to any foreign government, directly or indirectly.”
The amendment then set forth the trial procedure which is essentially the same as that provided for in the minority amendment. This is the amendment which was passed.
It is clear that the three proposals are essentially alike in excluding from office those who are members of organizations having allegiance to a foreign government. It should also be clear that the real intent of the amendment was to get at the Stalinists. Nobody was very conscious of the present of organized groups of Fascists and Nazis. The fact that these elements work in an entirely different manner from the Stalinists, and the further fact that such groups or individuals are difficult to spot, due to the manner in which they function, led the delegates to take this factor rather lightly. This was not really what they were hitting at despite the fact that they are opposed to these groups and individuals.
Also, they did not seem to realize that there are reactionaries in the union who for all practical purposes are similar to “Fascists and Nazis” in that they hold similar viewpoints in relation to union democracy and militancy. The inclusion of “Fascists and Nazis” was really a formality and had no real and concrete meaning. for instance, there are groups in the Association of Catholic Trade Unionists in the international which are as reactionary as Henry Ford himself. There are members of the Black Legion and the Ku Klux Klan. These members are virtually “Fascists and Nazis,” but the amendment does not reach them.
 
Typical Stalinist Trickery
The worst and most criminal role in this situation was played by the Stalinists. This was to be expected, of course. Their amendment was the traditional Stalinist trickery, skullduggery and treachery. They were the best “democrats,” the true and simple trade unionists. Their main attack, made by Lindahl, was not against barring members for their political beliefs: they amendments because the Socialist Party was not included and named. Lindahl made a long speech in which he read extracts from the Socialist Party program dealing with the manner in which socialists should function in the unions through their Socialist Leagues. The delegates could not take this seriously because they knew that the SP is perfectly harmless and that its revolutionary fervor is only a literary exercise and a topic for windjamming at party conventions. The delegates knew that the SP members in the unions function as they please and do not submit to party discipline.
Furthermore, any delegate with any intelligence and experience could see that the Reuther brothers faction was not an SP caucus, but only an odd collection of a few SP members, muddleheaded liberals and the most blatant and stinking reactionaries in the convention. The Reuther brothers faction was really a personal “power caucus” led by union politicians who only wanted to assume control of the international, some of them for personal aggrandizement and prestige. Functioning as a disciplined SP group was farthest from their thoughts.
The delegates voted for the super-minority amendment because they believed that it was this amendment which really aimed at protecting the international. They knew that the Reuther majority amendment was a factional amendment They knew that the Stalinist amendment was purely a maneuver. They wanted to tie the Stalinists and the only way they knew was to vote for the super-minority amendment. They voted for this amendment after they were told by Thomas that he favored the majority amendment.
The point that most be made is that there was no force, no group at the convention that could give correct political leadership and guidance to the delegates. There was no group or individual among the delegates who took the floor on this and other questions to discuss the many political issues that came before the convention. The progressive and militant delegates did the best they could alone. There was no one to educate them, present proposals and fight for their adoption. There was no difficulty about this because the convention was democratic and any delegate could take the floor and say what he wanted on the various questions that arose.
The convention was really in the control of the delegates. As I remarked last week, on every issue that they understood, they voted what they believed to be in the best interests of the international, no matter what position the leadership took. President Thomas remarked once that most of the proposals he had made had been voted down.
A majority of the delegates were in somewhat of a fog on the major political questions that came before the convention. This is not surprising, since workers do not and can not get correct political education from their trade union leaders, the Stalinists or from the careerist and opportunist stuff dished out by such people as the Reuthers and Frankensteens. This was clear in the resolution passed on the war. This resolution, which embodied the Thomas position, said that the international supported the “defense program” but was opposed to the participation of the United States in “foreign wars.” Any delegate with a correct political program and the necessary ability could have taken the floor on this resolution and explained the true character of imperialist war to the delegates.
 
How the Leaders Acted
The worst individual role in the convention was played by Frankensteen. He displayed himself as the worst type of trade union job seeker and opportunist. He was ready to make any deal that would give him place, publicity and prestige. On the whole he was a dud and no one seemed to have any respect for him despite the formal whitewashing which he received in connection with his strikebreaking role in the North American strike.
The Reuthers were a couple of Hillmanite hypocritical and pious red-baiting union politicians who were anxious to tie the convention to the imperialist war moves of Roosevelt. The Stalinists we have already discussed enough. they and their reactionary antics are well known.
It must be said that the convention, on the whole, was an excellent demonstration of the power of the industrial union movement. Here were serious, intelligent and militant workers who wanted to see a job done. They want and will insist on a democratic union. They want the aircraft factories organized. They want higher wages and without longer hours. They are not warmongers. They can be directed toward the liberation of the working class if some political movement arises that will honestly educate, inspire, lead and conduct them through the internal and external entanglements of capitalist society and imperialist warmongering.
 



In the Daily Worker for July 14, 1941, the Stalinists state their revised confession of faith for the trade union movement, in line with the 1941 edition of the People’s Front. The party “line” for the convention of the United Automobile Workers is stated in an article by Roy Hudson. In line with their general policy since Stalin and Hitler ceased to be friends, the Stalinists are out to prove that they are ready to go along with even the most reactionary elements in the unions provided only that they are willing to help Stalin save himself and his fellow murderers in the Kremlin.
Hudson, speaking for the Communist Party, begins his article with felicitations to the UAW but soon gets down to the real business.
“The UAWA convention will, of course, have to devote considerable time to the discussion of the foreign policy, of the government and steps to assure the full mobilization of its membership to influence and determine direction of the adoption and execution of policies guaranteeing the defeat of Hitler and Hitlerism.”
What, specifically, is that foreign policy of the government that the Stalinists want the UAW members to be concerned with? They want the members of the UAW to be concerned with the war. “The UAWA membership ... has shown in the past that it was opposed to the United States becoming involved in the war ... the workers saw no practical way of defeating Hitlerism by supporting the Anglo-American bloc of imperialists.
“But now with the Soviet Union ... battling Hitler’s hordes, the workers know that the character of the war has changed. They know that the dangers to their own freedom and independence have increased immeasurably by this attack on the USSR.”
 
What Hudson Means
Mr. Hudson, of course, doesn’t stop in his flow of eloquence to explain his reasoning. According to Hudson, the workers saw no way of defeating Hitler by supporting England and the United States. But now that Russia is fighting against Germany there is a way of defeating Hitler. Does Hudson mean that the workers saw no way for the Anglo-American bloc to defeat Hitler and therefore refused to support this bloc? Is he saying that since another country, Russia, has joined the Anglo-American block, that bloc, now has a chance to win and therefore should be supported by the workers in the United States? Furthermore, how have the dangers to the workers in the United States increased by the attack on the USSR? All of the capitalist statesmen and capitalist newspapers say that the danger to the workers and others in the United States have lessened due to the Hitler attack on Russia. They mean that while Hitler is busy with Stalin, England and the United States have an opportunity to make further preparations. Also England can attack Germany from the rear. It is a fact, too, that the mass of the workers take this view of the matter.
This of course isn’t what Hudson means. He hints, only hints, at his real meaning when he writes: “but now with the Soviet Union ... battling Hitler’s hordes the workers know that the character of the war has changed.” Hudson doesn’t attempt to explain to the workers why the Stalinists hold that the character of the war has changed and that therefore they should now be for the war, for the Lend-Lease Bill, for aid to imperialist Britain and why such aid should “be carried out with the greatest speed.”
Hudson and the Stalinists are a little shame-faced about the participation of Stalinist Russia in the war changing the character of the war. They should be; for in order to demonstrate to any worker with two grains of sense that the character of the war has changed they must prove that the participation of Russia in the war has a progressive character, that such participation aids the cause of the workers of the world. Hudson hints that Russia is still the workers’ fatherland as it was in the days of Lenin. The Communist Party tries to make it appear that the Stalinist gang in the Kremlin still fights for world socialism and for the liberation of the peoples of the world from capitalist oppression. Hudson wants to make workers believe that the Communist Party in the United States has a clean and consistent working class record of militant revolutionary activity in behalf of labor. He forgets that some of us can read and that we can remember what we read.
 
Stalin’s Record
We remember that Stalin framed up and murdered the old Russian revolutionists, the leaders of the October Revolution. That he sent thousands of militant and revolutionary workers to concentration camps; that he destroyed the trade unions and the workers councils; that he destroyed the workers’ revolutionary party of Lenin and Trotsky.
We remember that Stalin and his gang set up a criminal and cruel bureaucracy in the Soviet Union; destroyed all civil liberties; established forced labor and put the GPU in charge not only in Russia, but sent these murderers and spies roaming all over the world to destroy all those who opposed Stalin.
We remember the Stalin-Hitler pact that gave Hitler the green light to march into Poland and start the Second World Imperialist War. We haven’t forgotten either that Stalin marched into Poland, Lithuania, Estonia and Latvia on a grabbing expedition.
We know that none of these things was in the interests of the world working class, but solely in the interest of the Stalinist bureaucracy. Such actions could not serve the working class and socialism because Stalin was working hand in hand with Hitler and the most reactionary people inside the Soviet Union. Furthermore, Stalin did not and does not now have the confidence of the workers because he had betrayed them and sold them down the river.
The Communist Party in the United States has carried on all the anti-working class policies and activities of the Stalinists in Russia. They jumped backward and forward through the hoop any and every time Stalin cracked the whip. They have put the Internationale on the shelf and poured forth the Star Spangled Banner whenever the “line” changed. They have been militant or reactionary in the unions, depending on the particular intrigues Stalin and the GPU were engaged in at the moment. their activities have not been determined by the interests of the working class in the United States but by the position the stupid and treacherous Stalin found himself in.
Workers in the United States remember these things and more. That’s why Hudson can not explain how and why the character of the war has changed. The Stalinists, can’t say that the entrance of Russia into the war has changed the character of the war because the workers’ fatherland has been attacked, because the “land of socialism” is being assaulted, because the Stalinist bureaucracy is leading the world working class to victory. Labor would throw this monstrous lie back into their teeth. They know that the Stalinists have betrayed labor all over the world.
 
A Little Shame-Faced
There is another reason the Stalinists are a little shame-faced in explaining how and why the character of the war has changed because Russia is in it. It is very noticeable that they do not talk at all now about socialism, the class struggle and the world revolution against capitalism. Russia is fighting only for home and fireside, for national independence; the same thing that England is fighting for. One Russian poet said that the Red Army was fighting for “humanism.” According to Stalin, they are not fighting for socialism; there is no call on the workers of the world to overthrow their own national imperialist masters. On the contrary, the Stalinists of the world are now calling on the workers in England and the United States to support the war, support the bosses who only yesterday they were calling imperialist bandits.
Thus they say that the character of the war has changed; that it has changed because Stalin and his GPU gang have changed camps. They have quit stooging for Hitter and are now stooging for Churchill and Roosevelt. First, they betray the workers to Hitler, now they are ready to betray them to the Anglo-American imperialists. And all this to save Stalin and his gang, to keep them in power. This is the real meaning of what the Stalinists call a change in the character of the war.
 
In the Unions
How do the Stalinists attempt to carry out their new (also old) line in the trade unions? First on the matter of Stalinist wrecking tactics in the unions. Here is what Hudson says: “The Communist Party as an organization never did, does not now, and never will attempt to dominate a union.” This, of course, is a barefaced lie. They have attempted to dominate unions in the most vicious anti-working class manner. They have planted their GPU agents in workers’ organizations. Wherever the Stalinists got control all democracy was at an end in that union.
They have given up “fraction” work in unions. They used to have “’fractions’ for the purpose of making certain that all Communists behaved as the best union members and did nothing that would hurt the union or discredit the Communist Party.” These scoundrels seem to think that every worker is a dope. The Stalinists never gave up “fractions,” they only substitute GPU control of the party trade unionists for fraction democratic procedure. Also, why do the Stalinists apologize for having fractions in the unions? Why do they lie? What’s wrong with a working class political party attempting to win trade unionists to its political point of view. The Democrats and Republicans have “fractions” in the unions. Quite often the boss party “fractions” are composed of the union officers. The function of the working class party “fraction” in the union is to combat the propaganda of the boss party “fraction” in the union, demonstrate to the struggle and lead labor to a complete break with the Republican and Democratic Parties.
Why should any real working class political party make apologies for such procedure? It doesn’t have to unless it is a party of betrayal, union wrecking, and a party that subordinates the interests of labor to the interests of the Stalin gang. This is what the Communist Party is.
But the Stalinists are not through crawling yet. Hudson explains their attitude on strikes. “Communists do not always favor strikes. They are not for strikes for the sake of strikes ... its members are often able to judge even better than the workers in a particular plant, if the time to strike is ripe, if other methods of struggle might not be better under the circumstances.” What does all this ducking and dodging mean? It means that Stalinist attitudes today on the strike are not going to be determined by the conditions in any plant. They will be determined by conditions in the Kremlin. They will be against strikes today because their blood-stained hero, Stalin, has ordered them through his GPU agents to adopt “other methods of struggle.”
The Stalinists, according to Hudson, support strikes if the workers insist on going through, but after the strike is over, “then, naturally, the Communists try to bring the lesson home to the workers, showing them that often other forms of struggle can be adopted, that there is need to be not only militant but FLEXIBLE in the application of the tactics of struggle.” We want to emphasize again that this flexibility is not determined by the concrete conditions that the workers face and their degree of preparation; but by the conditions that the Stalinist gangsters find themselves confronted with. The Stalinists will be bringing a lot of lessons “home to the workers” these days. Yes, there will be “other forms of struggle” proposed!
 
More Fakery
The Stalinists are astounded that anyone should attempt to “speak in our name and try to divide the UAWA with lies about our being opposed to this or that leader ...” But since the question has been raised, the Stalinists admit that they are for the re-election of Thomas.
Here is more fakery and fraud. Who was preparing to fight for the UAW convention, if not the Stalinists? The only reason that they have changed is that Stalin is now a partner of Churchill and Roosevelt, who yesterday were imperialists but now, along with Stalin, are champions of “democracy.”
They urge a stop to all discrimination in the unions “because of political opinions.” The Workers Party urges the same thing. But the Stalinists have been the chief offenders in this. They have persecuted and hounded militant workers out of the unions who refused to follow the Stalinist political line. They are prepared to follow the same course today. They will support the most reactionary forces in the unions. They will yell for support of the “defense” program. They will support the war all down the line and will join with the FBI to hound and harass all militant workers who refuse to bow to
The workers therefore are face to the will of the warmongers. The workers therefore are face to face again with Stalinist treason and betrayal. Labor Action and the Workers Party months ago warned workers about this. We said that if the Stalin gang fell out with Hitler, the Stalinists in the United States will turn around and become supporters of the imperialist war. Now it has happened. Labor must turn, a deaf ear to all the pleas and proposals of the Stalinists on the war. They should defeat them for every union office, including membership on leading union committees and boards.
 
How Fight Them?
This is not what the Stalinists call “red-baiting” and no worker should be taken in. The Stalinist party is not a revolutionary party, not a party that struggles in the interests of the workers of the world but against their interests. All their power and influence should be washed from the labor movement.
Does this mean that the Stalinists should be barred from union membership? Most emphatically, NO. But they should be barred from office and leadership. NOT BY UNION CONSTITUTIONS AND RESOLUTIONS, BUT BY REFUSAL OF THE UNION MEMBERSHIP TO SUPPORT THEM FOR OFFICE IN UNION ELECTIONS. No worker should be barred from union membership except for concrete anti-union actions. This should apply to Stalinists, Republicans and. Democrats alike.
Also, what we say about the Stalinists should give no support to other reactionaries and warmongers in the unions. There are Hillman and his group of bootlicking war shouters. Some of them will be present at the UAW convention. They are real “red-baiters” and should get no support. They also will attempt to tie the convention to the Roosevelt imperialist war chariot. They will be against the Stalinists despite the fact that both groups, will be supporting the imperialist war. The convention should give no support to the war, no support to the imperialist war plans.
AGAINST ALL THE IMPERIALIST WAR CAMPS!
CONSCRIPT THE WAR INDUSTRIES UNDER WORKERS’ CONTROL!
FOB A WORKERS’ GOVERNMENT AND A PEOPLE’S ARMY!
NO CONFIDENCE IN THE ROOSEVELT GOVERNMENT!
 



Last week in Labor Action I reported on the first day of the shipbuilders’ convention and indicated that the convention was strongly under the influence of Hillman and that it would go strongly for “all-out aid” to Britain. Green started the ball rolling the first day in his presidential address. This sentiment increased as the days passed and by the last day one got the impression that the shipbuilding workers were convinced that the main role of their union today is to beat the war drums, build ships tor England and not worry too much about the outcome of their struggles with the government and Bethlehem Shipbuilding Corp.
President Green and Secretary-Treasurer Van Gelder, both ex-socialists, steered the convention resolutely around even the smallest obstructions that arose from delegates who expressed any doubts whatsoever on the correctness of blind support to all the pro-war resolutions and statements presented to the convention. Like the British laborites and certain people in the ranks of labor in this country, Green’s position is that many of the economic demands of labor must wait until the war has been won.
When a delegate spoke against the “incentive system” in the shipbuilding industry, Green replied that “you can’t tell me that you can pass a motion at this convention and the members back home will take a cut in wages. You know they won’t. Your union has gone on record to support the defense program. Take your time and we’ll lay the foundations for improvements later. I agree with the sentiments expressed. I am against piece work wages.” Seemingly it hasn’t occurred to Green that the shipbuilding industry’s profits are large enough to grant substantial increases, in wages and yet leave unusually large sums for dividends.
 
Pro-War Barrage
The delegates to this convention were under a daily barrage of pro-war aid-to-Britain agitation. I reported last week on the speeches of Charles Irvin; of Hillman’s union, and Findlay from the British Trade Union Council. This came on Tuesday, the first day. On Wednesday, Hillman and Jack Jones of the South Wales Miners Federation, spoke. On Thursday, Carey, CIO secretary, and Thomas, of the UAW, added their bit to the parade of pro-war oratory and propaganda.
The low point in all this orgy of flag waving, drum beating and crawling over to the camp of the government and the bosses was the speech of Hillman. Coming from an alleged labor leader, Hillman’s utterances were shameful, brazen and traitorous. Hillman’s speech was no different from one that might have been made by Knudsen. In fact, Knudsen, not being a labor leader, would probably have been more cautious and not so brazen.
Hillman’s whole speech was directed at labor, what it must do and what its responsibilities are, with not a word about or against the bosses. The only body outside the working class that had anything wrong with it was Congress.
“I get tired,” said Hillman, “when I hear people talk about aid to Britain. It’s not Britain we are aiding. They are already fighting. It’s aid to ourselves you are providing. We must have production. Democracies have always done a little less than the emergency required. Our own labor groups have a great deal to account for. They have talked peace when dictators have prepared for war. Labor leaders of Europe said: ‘This is not our war.’ Where are they now? Where is the labor movement of France. The labor movement has its Quislings. You are the conveyor belts between us and Britain, Russia and China. We haven’t got our own timetable. The timetable is made by Hitter. You may not be able to hold a convention a year from now.
“I was called by the President to represent labor. I am responsible for the labor policy of the nation. I have not been turned down by the President even once. If there is anything wrong, blame me, not the President. Congress may not give you houses but Hitler will give you only concentration camps. I am sure that eventually the isolationists in the labor movement will stand by themselves. Everything that can be done to avoid stoppage of work must be done if we are to have national defense. If we have to take aluminum for planes, naturally we are not going to get it for kitchen ware.” Despite this, Hillman later remarked: “We are expanding our economy.”
Then Hillman told the delegates that “we called in your people for conferences. National collective bargaining was established. You got something by this that it took labor 50 years to get before these agreements. The battle for collective bargaining has been practically won. Labor is so well organized that I believe the only people that can injure the labor movement are those inside the labor movement.”
In the whole course of Hillman’s speech not a word was said against the employers or the OPM. Not a word about wages, hours or working conditions. The battle of labor, for Hillman, has been won and all necessary now is more and more production. His was a most scandalous effort not only to drug these workers to blind support of Roosevelt and the war, but an effort to frighten and terrorize them into a slavish submission to the demands of the bosses and their government for more production. There was only one dissenting voice after Hillman’s speech. A delegate from the West Coast took the floor to say that his local had written to Hillman several times but had received no reply. Green answered for Hillman, saying that he knew about these letters and that they would be answered.
Being a “foreigner,” Jack Jones of the Welsh miners, was far more subtle than Hillman. He made an eloquent appeal for aid to Britain and received tremendous applause from the convention. He assured the delegates that “no matter what past wars have meant, Britain, in the opinion of the vast majority of Englishmen, is now waging a war for human rights.”
“We are not fighting for territory or any particular class,” said Jones, “and we’ll fight with hammers and pickhandles” if necessary. He told the delegates that the South Wales miners had voted to work an extra shift on Sunday nights. The miners get about as much meat, he said, in one week as a worker in the United States has for a single meal.
“You are backing a good horse,” Jones told the convention. “You are backing a winning horse. If you will sweat for Britain, Britain will be prepared to bleed for democracy.”
 
Stalinist Issue
Another matter which aroused the interest of the convention was the Stalinist issue. This came up to three phases: the anti-communist resolution, the appeal of the expelled officers of a Baltimore local and the action of the convention that an attempt be made to have the CIO enact anti-communist legislation at its forthcoming convention in Detroit.
The anti-communist resolution passed was presented by the Brooklyn Bobbins Drydock Local No. 39. It read as follows: “Be it resolved that this organization shall not condone the workings of fascism, nazism or communism within our ranks. Be it also resolved that any member who advocates to overthrow the democratic constitutional government of the United States shall be, on proven guilty, asked or be forced to resign from national or local membership from our union.”
This resolution passed without objection, except from one delegate. This delegate proposed that nazism be separated from communism, saying that nazism is not a philosophy of government but that communism is, whether you like it or not. A delegate from Local 39 remarked that “if we have commies, and we have them, we should oust them.” A GEB member from the South got up on a “point of order” to say: “I have been a dues paying member since 1937. I came here to represent my local and I’ll be damned if I’m going to sit here and listen to a speech to the advantages of communism.” The point of order was not sustained and the delegate was allowed to go on but to no avail. The convention, from President Green down, was solidly for the resolution.
The appeal of the former officers of the Baltimore local from the action of the GEB in expelling them from the union as communists was referred to a committee. This committee reported back unanimously to reject the appeal and to sustain the action of the GEB. The convention had already expressed itself on “communists” and no one expected anything else from the committee hearing the appeal, nor was there any doubt that the recommendation of the committee and the action of the GEB would be overwhelmingly approved by the convention delegates. In his closing remarks to the convention, Green said that at the coming CIO convention strenuous efforts would be made by the union’s representatives to have a resolution passed condemning communism. “We firmly advocate aid to Russia;” said Green, “in its struggle against the Nazis, which is our struggle too. We are not embracing the American communists who would suborn our movement.” Of course it did not occur to the delegates that there was any attempt on the part of Hillman to “suborn” their movement and betray it to the bosses and the government. Also that Hillman and the Stalinists are making identical speeches today and singing the same song.
 
Other Business
I don’t want to give the impression that all this convention did was to cheer the pro-war speeches they were drowned in and to pound the Stalinists. I emphasize these because they were the highlights of the convention. By a vote of 98 to 53 the delegates voted against increasing the GEB from 8 to 10 members. Since this had to be done by constitutional amendment a two-thirds vote was required. The amendment had the support of Green and Van Gelder but was defeated by Camden Local No. 1 voting a solid block of 48 against the proposal. By voting solid, Local 1 also defeated a proposal to make organizers eligible for election to the GEB. This proposal was also supported by Green and Van Gelder along with the smaller locals and locals from areas that do not now have representation on the GEB.
The convention passed a resolution calling for support solely to candidates who are pro-labor. The resolution also called for independent political action and the formation of a Labor Party. As was the case with many other resolutions, this was passed. without discussion either from the officers or from the floor.
A telegram was read from John L. Lewis commending the union for its stand in favor of the “union shop” and pointing out that this was the cause of the conflict between the UMWA and the steel companies owning the captive mines. Van Gelder reported that this question is the “biggest issue today in the field of labor relations. The CIO is headed for a showdown on this issue. Our union has 15 agreements open on this issue. We have not been able to close any except with the New York Shipbuilding Co. at Camden.”
 
Hillman Convention
Despite the fact that the convention concerned itself with many important questions in connection with conditions in the shipyards, as for instance a resolution against the freezing of wages and to conduct an intensive campaign of organization at the Fore River shipyard of Bethlehem, these were not the questions that aroused the delegates. This was true because it can be said that it was a Hillman convention. And Hillman, of course, as was clear from his speech, is only mildly interested in such questions. This struggle to tie the CIO unions to the Roosevelt war plans will go on right into the CIO convention in November. Hillman is out to capture the organization and get enough votes to place the whole CIO solidly to the camp of the makers of the Second World imperialist War.
It was clear that the shipbuilding workers did not see and understand what was going on. They will probably learn what is being done to them when the cost of living and taxes continue to rise and they find themselves helpless before hostile employers demanding wage increases to meet the rising cost of living. At the same time they will discover that their leadership has been bound by the Roosevelt administration in support of the war. Then they will have to strike out with or without their leadership to fight the battle that they should be waging right now.
 



After being in session for about two weeks and accomplishing little of benefit to labor in the United States, the Green-Tobin-Frey-Hutcheson Federation of Labor convention adjourned and these leaders went home to another year of friendly and peaceful collaboration with the bosses and the Roosevelt government.
For all the good this totally bossed convention did for the working class it might as well not have been held. The delegates voted “right,” danced, looked at Mt. Ranier and the other scenic wonders of the Northwest, but as to taking a progressive stand on any of the great issues facing the working class, they showed no inclination whatsoever.
Such lethargy and inertia can not be accounted for by the absence of important labor and political issues: they were there, all right, but on every important question the convention took a completely reactionary position. There were the war, racketeering, strike policy and the Roosevelt message, race discrimination and CIO-AFL unity. These were matters of real working class importance that came on the floor of the convention. On each of them however, the convention took a position that cannot possibly be of any benefit to labor. On most of these questions the action of the convention was strictly in line with the desires of the bosses and the government.
 
FDR Sets the Tone
To make sure that the right ‘tone’ was given the convention, Roosevelt sent a message and Secretary of Labor Perkins was on hand to “greet” the delegates. Roosevelt called for the end of “organizational rivalries and jurisdictional conflicts.” He also said that government “mediation” machinery “must be used” before strikes were called.
Madame Perkins also took a lick at strikes, saying there should be no “strikes which hamper the national effort.” Perkins also hinted that the government is about to change its course in connection with the Wagner Act and the closed shop. She told the convention that the public demands that the closed shop be “studied with a view to the public welfare.” She also said that the government may be preparing to make further demands on the unions for “voluntary cooperation,” the same as the government gets from the manufacturers. Perkins then called on the unions for a “self-imposed discipline.” This discipline and “voluntary cooperation” with the government would presumably save the unions from attacks by Thurman Arnold or the army’s bayonets. Roosevelt’s message and the speech by Madame Perkins were enthusiastically received by the convention. Nobody moved to reject either or both of them. Nobody suggested that labor should and can take care of its own affairs without advice from Perkins and Roosevelt. Nobody took the floor to explain that by “self-imposed discipline” Perkins means that the labor movement should subordinate all its real interests to support of the boss imperialist war, and that by “voluntary cooperation” she means that labor should voluntarily give up the right to strike and place itself completely at the mercy of the boss class.
 
A Jingo Field Day
No, none of this was evident in this AFL convention. The delegates had been prepared in advance to receive the impudence and veiled threats of Roosevelt and Perkins with loud applause and approval. For over a year, Green and other leaders of the AFL have been bowing and scraping before the bosses and the government. They have been haranguing the membership about their “patriotic” duty and insisting that the organization pass resolutions against striking for the period of the “national emergency.”
All the heavyweights among the top bureaucrats were present to head the leading committees and guide the convention in the way that Roosevelt would have it go. There was, first, Bill Green, who was re-elected to the presidency for the 18th consecutive year. There was AFL “historian” Frey, of the Metal Trades Department, who made himself infamous in the eyes of all militant workers by inviting the Navy to break the Bay Area strike and going through the picket lines on a Navy truck. Hutcheson was there with all his immense hulk and stupidity, speaking against Randolph and using the term “nigger” in his harangue from the. platform. Tobin was present to receive the congratulations of his fellow “leaders” for his role in calling in the FBI against the militant Local 544 in Minneapolis. All in all the convention was a field day for Roosevelt and his collaborators in the leadership of the AFL.
The convention had the ever-present problem of racketeering before it. Green had made the rather asinine remark that of the five million members of the AFL, 4,999,999 of them were honest. Strange to say, this remark was made at the time Green was attending the hodcarriers’ convention in St. Louis, which is held only once in the active lifetime of the average hodcarrier. While the AFL was whooping it up for the war, Roosevelt and no strikes, St. Louis papers were carrying the news that warrants had been issued for four of the officers of a local of the hodcarriers union. They were charged with stealing $47,000 of the local’s funds. The district attorney’s office was also trying to locate an additional $79,000 which had been raised but which could not be located.
When Green heard about this he admitted that perhaps he had made a mistake when he said there was only one dishonest person in the AFL; he would be forced to change his estimate: there were perhaps two. The convention was faced with the brazen attempt of George E. Browne, president of the International Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees, to be re-elected to his post on the executive council.
The AFL had sought to get rid of Browne by reducing the number of the executive council from 15 to 13. But this didn’t work. Browne ran anyhow, but was defeated, 37,944 to 421. Only members of Brown’s union voted for their favorite son. Since Brown is under indictment for racketeering and extortion and since he was not re-elected to the executive council, these pious gentlemen feel that they have made a real start to clean the racketeers, from the organization.
As is their custom, however, the convention was very tender with the racketeers and gangsters. A suggestion was made to the internationals that if they find it necessary they should amend their constitutions so as to expel any member guilty of “serious wrong-doing which reflects dishonor on the trade union movement.” The report of the committee repeated the old story that the national organization had no authority to discipline international unions. The report closed with the usual refrain that the dishonest individuals in the Federation are “considerably less than those found in other organizations.” The executive council always makes this statement, but it never mentions what other organizations it has in mind.
The convention correctly took a blast at Westbrook Pegler, “but” it did absolutely nothing to disarm Pegler. Also it did nothing that would give comfort and hope to the hundreds of thousands of honest and militant members of the AFL who want to see racketeering and gangsterism out of their organization. These honest and militant members are left to the tender mercies of the gangster and racketeering leaders of many AFL unions and locals. Members of this type have little opportunity to make their strength felt because they don’t get elected delegate to the conventions, and if they did the top bureaucrats would smother them with their united steamroller.
While it is true that, the internationals are “autonomous” (and this is a charmed word among the AFL leaders), it is also true that the most powerful international presidents, 13 of them, are members of the executive council. It has not been reported that any of them have made a fight in the council to give the council the authority necessary to take drastic steps against the gangsters and racketeers. It is also not recorded that Bill Green has ever put up a real fight against racketeering.
 
No-Strike Policy
The convention approved the no-strike policy in national defense industries. Green said that this action would “strengthen and develop the national defense program and result in carrying out the no-strike policy of the AFL in a more universal way.” Green went on to say that Roosevelt’s no-strike appeal was almost a “word-for-word ... declaration issued by the executive council of the AFL six months ago ... More than 99 per cent of the AFL membership had refrained from striking.” Mr. Green understood how “impatient men and women” might act “hastily.” They may forget for the moment “the broader issues involved and the ultimate effect of their ill-considered conduct.” Green appealed to his membership to remember that the “national interest comes first.” He urged the AFL membership not to “gamble for pennies at the risk of losing everything we hold dear in America.”
Green’s idea is very simple: that is, keep at work and don’t bother about wages and hours during the national emergency.” It’s all right for the bosses to refuse to move until they are assured of bigger profits than they made last year, but the AFL workers should plug along hoping that somehow a few crumbs will fall into their plates. Of course Green and the others on the executive council don’t have to worry; they have their fat salaries and expense accounts.
But there is another element in this situation. The AFL unions, that is; the leading ones, are craft unions composed of skilled workers who are in the higher wage brackets. Their regular wage for an 8-hour day, 40-hour week runs from $45 to around $60 a week. For overtime they are paid time and a half and double time. It is these unions, along with the teamsters, which control the AFL and are its main base.
These unions have large treasuries and are numerically strong. They are stabilized and have established themselves with the employers. Because their occupations are the skilled trades, they do not have much difficulty in renewing their contracts. On the whole, these unions have developed into an “aristocracy of labor” and do not give much attention to the lower orders even in their own Federation. It is not very difficult, therefore, to convince these workers that the “national interest” comes first. In many respects (in their own minds) they can equate the “national interest” with their own financial welfare. The bosses of course reason in a similar manner. The war effort becomes a happy hunting ground for all those seeking to make more money. In these times of high prices and high taxes it is easier to be a “patriot” at $10 a day than at $5.00 a day. A $10 a day patriot may be less inclined to strike than a $5.00 a day one. Furthermore, it seems to be established that some, kind of a deal has been made between the AFL and the government with Sidney Hillman as the front for Roosevelt. The Currier fabricated house incident has made it clear that some promises were made to the AFL that if there were no strikes, the AFL building trade unions would get preference on government “defense” industries that came within the occupation field of these unions. That is, the government must have said something to the effect that “if you agree against strikes we will be prepared to throw some choice employment morsels your way.”
 
On AFL-CIO Unity
Following Roosevelt’s message the convention had to say something about “unity” with the CIO. Green replied to Roosevelt’s request on “unity” in a national broadcast. He said that the President should direct future appeals to the CIO and use “all the influence at your command until the representatives of that organization agree to confer with us ... We are willing to talk peace and make peace at any time.” This was as far as the matter got: Green replying to Roosevelt in these vague sentences in a broadcast. It would appear that all that stands in the way of “peace” is the refusal of the CIO to confer with the AFL. But, as is well known, this is not the case. The point is not just “peace,” or any old kind of “unity,” but a unity that will not destroy the CIO and industrial unionism.
This is what the bosses want to do – DESTROY THE CIO. They want Bill Green and Sidney Hillman to help. Such a labor traitor as Hillman, of course, is ready to do the will of Roosevelt and the bosses. A pious and impotent fraud like Green also is ready for such a consummation. The craft unions, the backbone of the AFL, at present have no interest in the maintenance of industrial unionism. This does not create a situation favorable to unification that will preserve industrial unionism.
The chief “unity” howlers today are Roosevelt and the war-mongers among the bosses. All workers, AFL and CIO, should turn a deaf ear to this type of “unity” plea. This is not a plea for unity but for the regimentation of the entire labor movement and specifically a scheme for breaking the CIO. If the AFL and the CIO can come together on a plan and program that will really strengthen the labor movement -- the entire movement – then the workers should be for it. But labor, especially the CIO, should beware of the Roosevelts and the Hillmans bearing gifts.
 
Vote Aid to Russia
In line with the signs of the times, the convention decided to support aid to Russia, but the convention resolution said that “the proper support now being given to Russia so that her people may more adequately defend their national existence” does not in any way change the attitude of the AFL toward communists. “It is the opinion of your committee that a victory by Stalin over the other countries in Europe would be as disastrous to free institutions as a victory by Hitler.”
It seems as though the committee wasn’t quite certain just what position the convention should take. It wanted to help the Russian people defend their “national existence” but at the same time they seem to say that this isn’t what is at stake, but rather only the existence oi the Stalinist bureaucracy. The AFL seems to be saying also that it would be well if neither Stalin nor Hitler wins, that they should destroy each other.
This is probably what the AFL bureaucrats really would like to see happen. They are not interested in the “national existence” of the Russian people. These high placed and high salaried bureaucrats have only lapped up the propaganda of the government and the bosses about aid to England and her allies. Green & Co. are for aid to Russia for the same reason that Churchill, Roosevelt and the bosses are for aid to Russia. They all want to save their own hides, profits, salaries and jobs. They believe that right now the best and cheapest way to do this is to give material aid to Russia with the hope that Stalin’s armies will defeat Hitler’s armies.
These hypocrites and “democrats” are willing to see the last Russian man, woman and child slaughtered by Hitler’s tanks, if only this will keep Hitler away from their factories, mines, mills and banks. Therefore their cheap talk about “brave Russia,” “national existence” and “religious freedom.” Also Deacon Green will have a tough time keeping the Stalinists off his doorstep these days. They have the same ideas and opinions on the war, “national defense” and strikes.
 
Suspend Brewers
In the midst of the “patriotic” fervor, aid to Russia hypocrisy and anti-racketeering fakery, the convention took time out to suspend the Brewery Workers Union, the only industrial union in the AFL. These workers had refused to give up their drivers to Tobin’s teamsters and were kicked out.
The disgraceful attitude of the convention and the AFL leadership to Randolph’s condemnation of Jim-Crow in the AFL will be dealt with in next week’s Labor Action.
All in all, one can say that this year’s AFL convention reached a pretty low point. It is difficult to point out any good reason why the convention was held except to go through the “democratic” formality of holding annual conventions. From this year’s gathering one can easily imagine what the next one will be like if the United States is at war with Germany by that time.
 



The Workers Security Federation is the organization of the unemployed formed in Washington a few weeks ago by the Socialist Party under the leadership of Art McDowell, National Labor Secretary of the S.P. While thousands of W.P.A. skilled workers are on strike against wage cuts and increase in hours, the S.P. leaders of the Workers Security Federation provide the capitalist press with a statement that they are instructing members of the organization to return to work.
J. Clark Waldron, S.P. national publicity chairman of the federation, said that their members were only being “advised” to return to work and “we are leaving final decision in the matter to them.” Waldron said that the federation is not giving up the fight but that the leadership does not want the members to lose their jobs.
 
True to Type
This scabbing action of the leadership of the Workers Security Federation is right in ine with their actions when ;hey set up the organization in Washington. There these leaders – McDowell, Leith, Waldron and Rourke made it clear and unmistakable that not only would they personally be opposed to the federation being a militant unemployed organization, but they would be against the admission of individuals with political beliefs that would drive the federation inevitably in a militant direction. This was the real meaning of the clause, inserted in the constitution, excluding workers from membership who held certain political beliefs, including the belief in a dictatorship of the working class.
 
Opposed Demonstration
This attitude on the part of Waldron, McDowell, Leith and Rourke was further demonstrated in their attitude toward the demonstration which was scheduled for the White House. Leith and Rourke were flatly against the demonstration, the others giving only luke-warm support. In the face of this opposition, the militants could only get through a vote to hold the demonstration on Sunday night with the White House empty and the streets deserted.
This policy now bears its thoroughly rotten fruit. The federation members are told to return to work, to scab oh their fellow-workers who are fighting the government for the right to eat and against long hours and reduction in pay. Waldron says that the leadership of the federation has not ceased to protest. That is, Waldron will continue to give out press releases, Rourke will interview congressmen and Leith will sit in his office in Baltimore. But the rank and file who have proven indisputably that they want to fight, have been told to surrender, to scab, to betray their fellow workers on the picket line.
The membership of the Workers Security Federation have a job to do. First they should refuse to carry out the instructions of the leaders of the federation. Support the strike by remaining away from work; participate in the picket lines, bombard the Security Federation leadership with protests, repudiate them. Maintain solidarity in action with the W.P.A. striking workers.
 



Mournfully yielding to the refusal of the rank and file to return to work on W.P.A. projects, Lloyd Leith, secretary of the Workers Security Federation, has announced that the leadership of the federation has “reconsidered” its decision ordering their members to scab on the W.P.A. strikers. While the leadership is still in favor of the return to work, Leith admits that they couldn’t get away with it. The previous position, to return to work, was reconsidered, says Leith “because of the pressure of the membership which is distinctly for continuance of the strike.”
While the Norman Thomas Socialist Party leadership of the new Workers Security Federation was attempting to escape from the wrath of its own membership, and the disgraceful sell-out which they had announced to the capitalist press, the Socialist Call appeared with a piece by Art McDowell. McDowell was writing about the formation of the Workers Security Federation and brazenly announced that he and the S.P. “are proud that Socialists could and did take almost as great a lead in this new move as in the once proud and promising Workers Alliance.” And what are McDowell and the S.P. proud of? He tells us in his article as follows: “the first in its declaration of principles (Workers Security Federation) was a section barring from membership or affiliation ‘any advocate or supporter of any brand of dictatorship domestic or foreign’.” “This was aimed,” says McDowell “not only at Stalinite Communists and Fascist Coughlinites and their ilk but also at all the petty Communist sects with their ‘one and only’ leaders’ solutions.”
 
Still Proud?
Now McDowell and the S.P. have something further to be proud of. They do not have to to stop at being proud that they have formed a mass organization that excludes workers from membership because of political belief. They can be proud of the scabbing and sellout roll of Waldron and Leith, S.P. members and leading officials of their Workers Security Federation. They can be “proud” of the fact that the capitalist press used the cowardice, the stupidity and the no-strike order of the leaders of the federation, to initiate an attempt at a national back-to-work movement among the W.P.A. strikers.
The members of the Workers Security Federation have made a good beginning. They refused to return to work. They will learn, however, that this does not complete their task. They will learn that they cannot develop into a militant unemployed organization with a leadership whose militancy is only in the direction of scabbing and running to cover when a fight is in progress.
 



The Twice-a-Week Appeal should be welcomed by every worker, by every reader, by every sympathizer of the Socialist Workers Party and all those who want to see a real revolutionary workers’ paper increase its influence and prestige in the United States.
The Twice-a-Week Socialist Appeal is an answer to the demands made on the revolutionary party – the Socialist Workers Party – for more frequent discussion and interpretation of the many significant national and world-wide events in which the working class of the United States is involved. Furthermore, the appearance of the Socialist Appeal twice a week means a doubling of the volume of news stories; especially, trade union news, the doings of Congress and Roosevelt’s war preparations.
Send in subscriptions and contributions now! Support the only real anti-war paper in the U.S.!
 

