


PHILADELPHIA – The fanfare and cordiality with which the Capitalist press has greeted the opening of the International Labor Organization conference, which began its sessions here April 20, should cast much suspicion upon it.
Aside from the method by which the votes are allotted to the delegates – two to government, one to the employers and one to labor – the very fact that the men who every day of their lives fight the unions suddenly come to map out plans for the benefit of all the people is like asking the workers to believe that the leopards have changed their spots.
 
The “Spotted Leopards”
For example, seated across from labor’s delegates, and seeking a common solution to problems that confront the world, we find a representative from the Bolivian tin mines. The latter and their owner, Simon Patino, have received quite a bit of bad publicity in recent months. The intolerable conditions of work, the low wages paid and the coolie existence of the mine workers have caused strike after strike in these mines.
The mines yield tremendous profits. They also yield disease and misery to the workers. Yet in far away Philadelphia the representative of Simon Patino has come to work out a better world for all the people! But it would seem that this were not ironical enough. A representative of the Bolivian government has come to aid in the good work – and he, as all the newspapers openly admit, is also a representative of Simon Patino.
Here in our own country the situation is quite similar. The owners of the mines, mills and factories of the United States are suddenly to become great philanthropists. And what of England, where the miners have been on strike for a raise in wages? Talk is cheap, and that is all that we shall get from the meetings of the ILO. More it cannot give. To give more it would have to dig into the pockets of the powers that be – and that, as we know from our day-to-day experience, takes more than talk.
 
Side-Show of the League
The ILO was first organized as a side-show of the League of Nations, and it was just about as ineffective as the League – if anything, a little more so. The ILO has confined itself, for most of its history, to folding conferences and issuing reports, some valuable, on the conditions of labor internationally. The concept on which the ILO was founded – collaboration between employer and employee – has long ago made its retreat to an ivory tower. All around it the struggles of the workers go on – AGAINST THE VERY BOSSES WITH WHOM THE ILO WOULD HAVE THE WORKERS COLLABORATE FOR THEIR “MUTUAL” BENEFIT. The ILO seeks to reconcile the irreconcilable: capital’s greed for more and more profits – labor’s desire for a decent standard of living.
The current conference is no exception to this. Whereas its functions in the past have been routine and not very breathtaking, this year the Allies in their need for an additional bolster to the tottering facade they have built up about a better world and four freedoms, have taken out the ILO, dusted it off and given it some functions.
The Philadelphia Evening Bulletin on the opening day of the conference editorialized that: “It is not possible immediately to write into the statute books many of the provisions which the ILO recommends for the prosperity and security of labor. But it is a step forward to have some of the aims for which the world is striving clearly stated.” EVEN BEFORE THE CONFERENCE BEGINS, ITS OBITUARY HAS BEEN WRITTEN.
No sooner has the sessions begun than a dispute broke out around the seating of the Argentine labor delegate on the ground that the Argentine government is fascist and hence the trade union representative could not be seated since he did not represent free unions. The irony of it all was that the issue was raised by Toledano of the Mexican unions, who is an active agent of Stalin. The latter never even asked the so-called trade unions of Russia whether they wanted to be present.
Of course, no one raised the embarrassing question of who had appointed the delegate from Brazil, or what kind of country it is. Vargas, the dictator of Brazil, is an ally and [line of text missing] The delegates to a truly international gathering of labor would be chosen not by what government is supporting what policy, but independently and according, to the importance of the labor organization involved. That this is not the case at the ILO conference is further illustrated by the fact that while there are delegates from every two-by-four government in exile, and despite the fact that there are numerous men and women in this country who represent the labor movement of Germany as it was before Hitler came to power, none of these German labor representatives was present.
Labor must indeed act internationally, but labor solidarity and internationalism cannot be part of a show that is determined by the power politics of the capitalists.
 




On that day of March 1933, when the newspapers declared to the world that Adolph Hitler had been appointed Chancellor, the whole labor movement felt it had been dealt a great blow. The year following the triumphant rise to power of the German fascists was a very gloomy one.
The great German socialist, communist and trade union movements had gone down before the greatest enemy of labor – without a struggle. The cowardice of the German Social-Democratic leaders and their fanatic adherence to only legal forms of struggle, while the labor movement was being persecuted in violation of the constitution every day, and the treachery of the German Communist Party in their ultra-radical phrases which led them to refuse a united front with the most conservative sections of the labor movement, gave the fascists a clear road to victory.
Yes, they were depressing days – the great German labor movement was smashed!
 
Lessons Not Learned
Almost immediately after, the Austrian fascists, emboldened by the victory of their German cohorts, began to attack the Austrian labor movement. But the lessons of the German events had not been learned by the Austrian socialist leadership. The Austrian socialist leaders, like their German leaders, gave the wrong answer to the provocations, the parades into workers’ districts by the Heimwehr (Austrian Storm Troopers), the fighting, the house arrests, the breaking up of meetings and attacking of workers’ headquarters, the beating up of workers. They merely pleaded with Dollfuss and Fey, heads of the government, not to violate the Constitution, and the Austrian Schutzbund (Workers’ Defense Guards) were told not to be “provoked” by the outrages against the working class.
Were we to see the German events repeated on a smaller scale?
 
Austrian Workers Fought Back
On February 12, 1934, the first shots were fired by the workers in defense of their homes and headquarters. Those first shots were shots of hope and courage. Workers all over the world lifted their heads with pride and hope. The Austrian workers would not take it lying down. They would fight to protect their lives, their homes, their hard-won gains.
If their leaders had not learned how to struggle against fascism, the workers of Austria knew it was fatal to continue to swallow the insults heaped upon them and their organizations by the fascists. The workers of the city of Linz could no longer carry out the desires of their leaders “not to be provoked.” They were fighting. When the news reached Vienna, the leaders had no choice but to call a general strike.
But they had waited too long. They had threatened to strike, but instead of preparing the workers for it by a period of struggles with the fascists and climaxing it with the strike, they had permitted the workers to be brow-beaten and pushed around for so long that the final step of the general strike was like a bolt out of the blue. Therefore, the struggle was carried out only by the most courageous, the most bold. It was carried out by those who understood that to permit the fascists to come to power without a struggle was to accept death without a fight.
 
A Heroic Defense
For seven brave days the workers defended themselves in the streets of Austria’s cities. For seven brave days they fought with their rifles and home-made hand grenades against the howitzers, mortars, machine guns and other weapons of modern warfare, mustered by the government.
In Vienna the workers barricaded themselves in the model apartment houses, the Karl Marx Hof, where they defended themselves with their primitive arms. The government replied by shelling them out.
The socialist headquarters in one of the working class sections destroyed by the fascist Heimwehr was described by a New York Times correspondent as follows:
“For a parallel to the picture that the ruins of this building and the movie theater next door presented one would have to turn to photographs of Chateau-Thierry or some other well-shelled town in the World War. The front was shot to pieces, all the windows were gone and the roof was damaged. Pieces of the building cumbered the road, together with masses of broken glass, thousands and thousands of cartridge cases and clips, both exploded and ‘bad,’ minnenwerfers, and every kind of debris.”
Despite their vacillation, many of the leaders of the Austrian Socialist Party fought side by side with the workers on the barricades. Some were caught by the fascists and shot. Some escaped to Czechoslovakia.
The fighting, which lasted a week, were shots of hope to the international working class. Many of the workers were hunted until they took refuge in sewers, from which they continued to fight. They were defeated – but they had shown the way. They had taught a lesson – a lesson in blood. ONLY THE WORKING CLASS CAN LEAD THE STRUGGLE AGAINST FASCISM – BECAUSE. FASCISM IS DIRECTED AGAINST THE WORKERS.
 
They Were the First
The memory of the struggle of the Austrian workers against fascism is for the working class a sad one – for the Austrian workers were defeated. But it is not mourning with bowed head and tears, but with anger and defiance that we commemorate their defeat. THEY WERE THE FIRST TO TAKE UP ARMS. All others – including the “democratic” governments of England, France and the United States – appeased the fascists and provided Dollfuss with money to support his dictatorship.
On this tenth anniversary of their gallant struggle we pay tribute to these socialist fighters – the first to raise the banner of the working class in struggle against fascism.
 




Franz Hoellering, in his novel, Furlough, has performed a courageous task. In the face of the propaganda campaign for a hard peace for Germany which followed the Roosevelt-Churchill-Stalin demand for unconditional surrender, the author of Furlough has written an eloquent story of the sufferings and resistance of the German people under Hitlerism.
“The German people must pay for the war,” and they don’t mean only in dollars and cents. Who are to surrender unconditionally? Who are to be made slaves (the Russian formula)? Who will be the victims of the dismembered and de-industrialized Germany? Who are to be made to suffer unto the seventh generation? Why, the people, of course! And who are these people? Hoellering shows us.
 
Strata of Nazi Society
Hans, a Nazi youth fighting on the Russian front, shoots a comrade who curses the war, steals his furlough papers and goes home. This act, a contradiction in this patriotic youth, who should desire to fight on, is sub-consciously motivated by a desire for security and human warmth and kindness. Leni, his girl, is the antithesis of the horror he is living through. Through Hans we get an insight into every strata in German society.
We see the Nazi Party officials with their doubts about the possibility of victory and desire to save their necks and their privileges and easy living. We see their fear of the more staunchly Nazi of their cohorts; the SS men, whose brutality and corruption are so apparent in their decrees against the black market, which continues to flourish because, undoubtedly, they are getting their cut.
There is Von Kraus, typical of the big industrialists living on their estates, privileged, building up their investments abroad in case they should have to flee; ready to compromise, because if the Russians conquered “he would become a commissar, his knowledge would be indispensable, but after his experiences with the Nazi Party, that was not to his taste. On the other hand, if the British and Americans came first and their system survived, the question would be now to link up with them, how to unite with them in the most profitable way, dividing the spoils with them, if necessary, but remaining the master on the bridge.”
The aristocrat puts it most clearly in her conversation with the big industrialist who has attained a high place in the Nazi state machine by virtue of his early support of their movement:
“Ten years ago we, and you, placed the criminals in power. Why? Because we felt ourselves too weak to suppress the people any longer. They reached for our privileges and we did not want to give them up, though we had no right any more – if we ever had – to keep them. We armed bandits and gave them prestige. They terrorized the people into war through which we hoped to save ourselves. It was a great plan; it seemed to work. But now we know – it has failed.”
And the workers, whom Hans sees intimately through his family. They have been turned into people whose sole function is production for the war machine. Work and sleep and eat, if you can get the food, is the level of existence. Leni has been turned into an old woman by the gruelling work and vicious speed-up. But the greatest change is that she has become an oppositionist while Hans has remained a Nazi.
While the brutality and efficiency of the Gestapo has created silence among the workers and precluded any resistance movement that can function in a coordinated manner, forcing opponents of the regime to isolated acts of heroism and sporadic outbursts here and there, a growing hatred has caused men and women to raise their eyes and seek for some sign in his neighbor’s. They help the war prisoners, the Jews, put sand in the machines as conditions become unbearable. But there is no mass action yet. Each effort to break through the wall of terror results in victims for the Gestapo.
 
Awakening Resistance
Even the staunch Nazi, Hans, is forced to continue the duplicity of action, occasioned by his first act of stealing the furlough paper. Once he is away from the front, where it is “kill or be killed,” he must proceed to live. In order to do so he must buy soap on the black market, lie to his Nazi Party SS leader about his thoughts; his most human emotions; about the fact that he was in the priest’s house the same time that the woman arranged for the dropping of anti-war leaflets on the crowd; and so on endlessly. His every act is in contradiction to his professed beliefs. But he cannot tear himself from his Nazi ideas which give him some hope and fight, to turn to nothingness.
Leni realizes that words will not convince him. Action will. She sacrifices her life so that Hans becomes a deserter and fighter against the war and fascism. In a crowded railway station she calls out to the soldiers not to go to the front. “Fight your real enemies, the Nazis. Down with war! Down with the Fuehrer!”
These are the people to whom the world must look to put an end to fascism. The Big Three offer them only continued horror.
 




The horror with which one reads about the destruction of Europe brings to mind H.G. Wells’ Shape of Things to Come.” The destruction portrayed in that fantastic story has become a reality. Just to read the reports; of correspondents, eye-witnesses and participants creates a feeling that man’s progress has made him a “civilized” barbarian.
The destruction of Warsaw, Rotterdam, Coventry, London and now of Aachen, Cologne, Dusseldorf, Berlin and Hamburg, not to speak of the cities and harbors of France and of Russia that lie in ruin from bombing, artillery fire and house-to-house fighting; the forty millions of dead; and those alive but dying, speaks very loudly of how the ruling classes have used science. If only the problem were the destruction of buildings it would deserve attention – but these ruins are visible and horrible spokesmen for even greater ravaging of the human mind, body and spirit that pose problems not just of reconstruction but of whether humankind shall build for future wars or a system that will insure peace.
The devastation wrought by this war makes the last one look like some kids were playing with toy pistols. If the last war made France a nation of people stunted in growth from malnutrition, on the basis of the recent statistics a race of pygmies is now coming into being.
The major cities of Europe, the centers of life and gaiety, where the cultures of the world flourished, lie in ruins and. the people who inhabited, them are either dead or are foraging to keep alive.
 
Predicting the Next War
A recent Kiplinger Letter, the confidential news analyst source for big business, tells us that the basis for World War III is being laid in the jockeying for position that is going on among the big powers now. They tell us further that the next generation will probably have to fight the war all over again. These cynics, knowing that the issue of “democracy” or “against fascism” or whatever other slogans may be coined, are traps for the sheep, speak very bluntly and clearly. The next generation is the one that is now being born in the ruins of Europe. They are the children of men who are dying so that their offspring may live. The war to end all wars – again.
What are the supporters of this system of the slow extinction of humanity holding out for the next generation? (Of course people may accuse us of being cynical, lacking faith, but only a fool can permit himself to be taken in twice – not to speak of three times.)
If you wanted to make peace with your neighbors you certainly wouldn’t put up an electrically charged fence and set a police dog out to guard it. Yet the lie of a future peaceful world under capitalism is clear in the day-to-day proposals they make to insure peace.
Roosevelt wants peacetime conscription. You certainly don’t raise an army not to go to war. Of course exercise for our next generation is important. But by good educational and recreational facilities in schools, assured vacations in some of America’s lovely camping spots should certainly give the average youth all the exercise he needs. What do they want a peacetime conscript army for?
 
The Atlantic Charter Hoax
The Atlantic Charter – we give this to you, the people of the world, to tell you our good intentions. The road to war obviously is paved with them. But why say more about it than the signators to it have? Roosevelt dismisses it; Churchill flouts it; Stalin will abide by it after he gets all the territory he wants and gets all the slaves he needs. Did the Atlantic Charter exist for the Greeks? The Indians? The Poles? The Italians? Roosevelt was right – and we believe in giving a man his due – “It has no official status,” or unofficial for that matter.
As for Dumbarton Oaks – the new League of Nations – it will prevent Denmark or Switzerland from going to war, but never the big powers.
As for the Malta-Yalta meetings, if all the nations are to be granted freedom such as that given Poland, we had better start rewriting the dictionary because we understood liberation in an entirely different sense.
It is as obvious as a wart on the nose that the capitalists aren’t planning and can’t plan for a peaceful world! War is in the bloodstream of capitalism. What meaning do the petty objections to socialism assume in the face of this? When faced with barbarism or socialism, there is no longer a choice. The rejection of socialism can be likened to the man who would rather drown than get into a lifeboat. The choice is ours. Sink or swim – socialism or barbarism.
 




Children, at the tender age of ten, unless they live in a Southern textile mill town, don’t generally go to work. For that matter, children at that age don’t generally have more money than you can count on the fingers of your hands – but the child of this story was not named Helen Smith, but Gloria Laura Morgan Vanderbilt, who was forced to begin life at that tender age with $3,806,762.
As a child, her custody was disputed by her mother and her aunt and the court granted her a mere $34,500 a year for her living expenses while the case was pending. This she spent in part as follows:



$175.79
125.00
30.75

415.00
153.00
1,000.00
125.00

30.00
1,391.00
11,515.39
1,995.00
2,000.00


for ginger ale and soda water
for medical treatment of a cat
for a movie projector (so that she would not
run the risk of catching cold in a theater)
for toys
for a single dress
for a month’s rent of a summer house
for a French teacher (as much as it took for
care of a sick cat)
for one hat
for dental and medical care
for servants’ hire
for detectives’ hire
for legal expenses



If you followed the newspaper stories that appeared in the next eleven years, or until the time when she was twenty-one, you were told of many facts about Gloria’s troubled existence – but never did any story so much as hint at the fact that she had to go to work.
It may be hard to believe, but Gloria didn’t even have to clip the coupons. When people are the inheritors of that much money they even hire coupon clippers. They are called “legal advisors” who watch the investments of these poor idle rich. They receive handsome fees for their labors. Gloria, as we know from the pictures of her at the various famous night spots, was even able to manage a good meal and a drink on her frugal budget. She was even able to get married. All that time, the bonds, which formed the major part of her investments, just stayed there as nice and calm as you please and collected dust.
At twenty-one she was able to handle her own money. They figured it all up, deducted expenses and found – $4,295,628. The original investment had grown by $488,866.
 
Oh, for a Rich Uncle!
In case anyone is mystified as to how this little girl was able to save this much money when almost everyone who isn’t in Gloria’s class has been spending the last eleven years either keeping the wolf from the door or keeping one step ahead of rising prices – let alone extensive saving – be assured it doesn’t take a Houdini to master this trick. It requires no rabbits; no mirrors, no sleight-of-hand. All it requires is a rich grandfather to start the ball rolling.
 




Modern Japan and Shinto Nationalism
by D.C. Holtom
University of Chicago Press
Dr. Holtom has written an interesting and well documented book on the relation between the Japanese state and the state religion, Shinto. But, like all studies dealing with a very specific phase of the life of a nation, while presenting a picture factually and theoretically correct, it does so only from the texts and documents of the religions involved, leaving the reader without a picture of the relationship between the life of the Japanese and his religion.
Today, when the Japanese is being pictured as a religious fanatic, a study of religion in Japan as a living force would be a very valuable contribution. In that sense, Helen Mears’ book, The Year of the Wild Boar, while not the scholarly, well-thought-out book that Dr. Holtom’s is, gives one a much clearer and realistic picture of the actual and living effect that Shinto has on the life of the people. It would be well for one interested in the question to read both books for a more rounded view.
Modern Shinto, regardless of the supernatural powers with which Dr. Holtom endows it in the first chapter of his book, is but another weapon of Japanese imperialism to keep a poverty-stricken nation duped, spread the infallibility of the Emperor and make the imperialism of the nation more palatable. While the origins of Japanese religion are fascinating, and read like a fairy tale, its purpose in our generation is very practical.
 
Capitalism, the State and Religion
It is interesting to note that directly after the restoration of the Emperor Meiji to power (1868) and the beginning of capitalist development, the emphasis of the state on religion was not great. As a matter of fact, in 1873 the official ban against Christianity was repealed. This was done to make it easier for Japan to deal with Western powers. But in 1890, reaction set in. In the twenty-odd years of its new life, Japan was constantly in fear of domination by the Western powers. In the early years of her capitalist existence, she was forced to toady to the Western powers. Coinciding with the rise of imperialism in the West, the Japanese embarked on a program of national consolidation to defend their independence through the newly-acquired knowledge and techniques from the West. In this manner, she would be better able to meet the Western powers on an equal footing. An offshoot of this anti-foreignism were the decrees on education, which called a halt to the cultural westernization of Japan and a return to the “old-fashioned virtues.”
Preceding this the government had withdrawn the right of unrestricted religious instruction in the schools and introduced instruction in state Shinto – “the meaning of its rites and ceremonies, the nature of its deities, the relation of all these to loyalty and patriotism and the subject’s duty of participation,” were all carefully established as foundation courses in the national instruction. This was a blow at all existing religions.
With the close of the Russo-Japanese War in 1905, the second period of foreign influence opened and with it “a wave of fascination for Marxism swept over the land, especially in university and higher school circles, and leftist social theories became popular among students and professors as well as in labor groups. Even communism dared to raise its head (in 1905?). All sorts of isms had vogue in groups here and there and the authorities looked on in growing alarm. Police measures were, of course, applied with characteristic thoroughness, but these did not touch the social and psychological roots of the malady. In searching about for means wherewith to check the infatuation with ‘dangerous thoughts,’ the directors of the national life now turned to the examination of the resources of religion as a thought-control agency. The record of Christian opposition to Soviet atheism (in 1905?) and the Roman Catholic position on Marxism were plain before them. Christianity now basked in official favor, so much so that representatives of Buddhism and Shinto complained to the government that they were being discriminated against in favor of a foreign religion. Christianity was presented with an opportunity for an impressive apologetic that it immediately seized upon. The gospel of Christ was portrayed as the faithful mongoose that killed the communist viper; it was the devoted watchdog that kept away the burglar of radicalism; it was the guardian angel that protected the citadel of the national life against the demons of unsocial license. It inspired a true religious faith that brought the blessings of Good upon the soldiers that faced ungodly forces across the Siberian border.”
 
Bureaucratized Religion as a Class Weapon
Christianity has made its peace with the regime. In 1918, the Bishop of Nagasaki declared that the Catholics could not accept the shrine worship. In 1936, Rome reversed the decision.
Christianity in Japan is very weak. There are only about 340,000 members of the Christian church in a total of 70,000,000 people for Japan proper. Under the circumstances, the church in Japan has two paths open to it: “persecution and martyrdom or compromise and accommodation. The Japanese Christian church has chosen the latter.”
Buddhism with its doctrine of pacifism, everlasting peace, compassion, etc., like Christianity, has made the necessary “practical adjustments.” Both Confucianism and Buddhism have been twisted and turned into conformity with state Shinto.
Whereas Christianity never played a dominant rôle in the life of the people. Buddhism has. It is the religion of the people and has the largest number of followers. It was therefore impossible for the government to treat it as it did Christianity.
Zen Buddhism has found great following among the military because of its closeness of Confucianism. “Zen stresses arduous physical and mental discipline, unyielding moral force, indomitable spirit, and courage that faces death with resignation. In all these ways Buddhism fosters the qualities of spirit that make for strong soldiers.”
Buddhism’s adherence to its pacifist philosophy under the stress of Japanese national needs and policy has become mere verbiage, which they explain in long-winded tracts that probably preoccupy the professors considerably.
Because of the cloistered character of Dr. Holtom’s book, it lends itself very easily to the picturization being propagated of the Japanese as religious fanatics. Needless to say, the fact that the government finds it expedient to foster state Shinto, gives shrine worship, government-sponsored pilgrimages and government-sponsored festivities a greater national prominence than we are accustomed to in the Western world. Religion under those circumstances becomes a matter for government bureaus and state policy. It ceases to be the “personal” affair it is supposed to be in the Western world. Without a doubt the average Japanese attends the religious festivals, and in the farming regions religion takes on a more primitive and necessary character, as the gods are associated with the needs of life, water, sun and rain. But it would be erroneous to assume that the average Japanese lives only for a chance to die for his Emperor.
The greatest preoccupation with dogma and doctrine takes place in petty bourgeois circles. Here not only religion, but such ancient customs as the Tea Ceremony and Flower Arrangement have become compensation for not being able to think or say anything on subjects more vital. Similarly in the Army, the officer caste and a whole layer of lower officers have without a doubt been filled with a messianic nationalism as keen as Hitler’s Elite Guard. This nationalism finds a perfect expression in state Shinto.
But for the mass of the people, workers and farmers, all evidence leads to the contention that in their lives religion plays much the same rôle as it would to any people with a low cultural level and weighed down by a bureaucratic police state. In the last analysis, religion can be as much an opiate to a people who pray to one kind of god as to a people who pray to another.
 




In the December issue of The New International you carried a review of a book entitled India Without Fable by Kate L. Mitchell. When I saw the head on the review, Stalinism With Fables, I was as mystified as the reviewer, Francis Taylor, seems to have been by the political line of the book.
So far as I could discern, K.L. Mitchell is not a Stalinist, and the book did not leave the impression that there are two fables being perpetrated on the reader, as the reviewer would have one believe.
First for the fables: The British improved fend irrigation and they “brought” political consciousness to the people. Now, I am not an Indian expert, but it seems to me that there is nothing erroneous in saying the British improved land irrigation, which without a doubt they did. It would be erroneous to say this without qualifying it and explaining that the British did this only with a view to developing India sufficiently to make her exploitation greater. And this I believe the author does in the book. She says that in order for Britain to develop an Indian market for British goods, the British had to construct
“an extensive network of railways, development of roads and ports, the establishment of postal and telegraph services, renewed attention to irrigation projects, the introduction of an English system of education to train the necessary clerks and subordinate members of the civil service ...”
In her description of the beginnings of the Nationalist Congress, she points out very dearly that the British were instrumental in its formation only to stem the tide they felt arising. The baby grew into a monster for British imperialism and they dropped it like a hot potato.
To extract these so-called fables from context is a spirit very alien to the Marxist movement.
Now for the “fraud” and “swindle” that the author of the book is supposedly putting over on the reader in her political views.
I wish the reviewer would re-read the book in a spirit of inquiry rather than rage. There certainly are enough bones of contention we have with the political line of the book to attack it for what it is – not for what the reviewer would read into it. A novice let alone a person with some political savvy, can see from the manner in which Mitchell “objectively” treats the views of the leaders of Indian nationalism that she believes that Nehru is the man to head the Indian government. This she believes because Nehru to her is a genuine anti-fascist and knows best how to compromise with the British and set up a government for defense of India against Japan. On the basis of this, to categorize her as a Stalinist is to use the Stalinist’s method of the third period – lumping everyone together. Thus Roosevelt became a fascist. In a similar manner Mitchell becomes a “liberal-Stalinist type.”
The Marxist movement has always used great care in labels. Labeling a bottle “Poison” without saying what kind can lead to theoretical errors of no mean proportion. Who would put Pearl Buck and Elizabeth Gurley Flynn in the same camp? No more can you put K.L. Mitchell in the camp of the Stalinists on the basis of this book. Can you put Henry Wallace in the camp of the Stalinists? Of course not. Objectively their lines coincide on a whole host of questions, but actually they are motivated by different phenomena. Gurley Flynn on what is best for Russia, Pearl Buck and Mitchell on a desire for Indian independence which can never be achieved by their methods, and Wallace by a desire to preserve democratic imperialist America – an equally ephemeral hope.
It is just as wrong to say that the author “really” is not on the side of the Indian people in their struggle against imperialism. If by “really” you mean the proletarian revolution, you must attack her from another angle altogether. The trouble with the liberals of the type of Mitchell and Pearl Buck is not that they don’t want Indian freedom, but they do not conceive of the working class playing a decisive role. To them Indian freedom is something maneuvered on top by the British and the Congress leaders. But unlike the Stalinists (whom they are not at all loathe to play ball with), they do not decide that up to June 21 they are for independence by whatever means necessary and on June 22 they are not. Also the liberals draw their strength from the petty bourgeoisie, the Stalinists do not.
It is interesting to note that in the closing pages of this book, which are appended on to an otherwise good layman’s guide to the history and background of India, no mention of Russia is made. A strange Stalinist indeed. And the Indian Stalinists, if mentioned at all (I do not have the book on hand) are certainly not glorified.
The program of the revolutionary socialists is certainly of such a character that it can take all comers and refute their arguments on the grounds on which they stand. It is not necessary to categorize them falsely in order to destroy their arguments or policies.
Sylvia Merrill
 




The planners are having a hey-day. Everyone has devised a means by which the world can be saved and social security assured the working class. It is not an accident that the air is so full of schemes to give the working class a few crumbs.
War stirs the social consciousness of all people. Men and women both at home and in the battlefield, are asked to, and do, make supreme sacrifices. They naturally ask themselves some questions like: What am I going to get out of all this misery? Will we have one war after the other? Isn’t there some way we can end all of this? After the war – what?
This is very dangerous for the capitalist system. A few crumbs must therefore be given to the workers. The capitalist gives the workers a little unemployment insurance – but he feels he is REALLY getting “cheap insurance against red revolution.” (PM). That was the sentiment of the British industrialists toward the Beveridge Plan – “cheap insurance against red revolution.”
While the plan caused much discussion in the ranks of the working class, and twice as much hurrahing among the liberals, the head of the British government, Churchill, made no comment on it. When Churchill finally did make a speech about his “plan,” he did not mention the Beveridge Plan, but submitted instead what can only be described as a stall.
Roosevelt’s “cradle to the grave” plan was heralded in huge headlines in December. But in March when it finally saw the light of day there was much consternation among the liberals. It didn’t even go as far the Beveridge Plan.
 
A Model for Future Insecurity?
Now what does the famous Beveridge Plan propose? Remember that it is the plan that has become the “model” for the future security of the working class.
It is extremely important that we read and re-read this statement of the Beveridge Plan: “It is, first and foremost, a plan of insurance – of giving in return for contributions benefits up to SUBSISTENCE LEVEL ...” In clear, simple language, this means that the worker insured under the plan will pay eighty-five cents a week to be insured, the state insurance fund will pay fifty-two cents a week and the boss sixty-five cents. In other words, the burden of insurance will be borne by those least able to pay, the persons to be insured. Beveridge himself says that “one of the fundamental things in my scheme is the large contribution from the insured persons.”
The plan, further insures you no more than a SUBSISTENCE LEVEL. We are asked to fight and die for a better world, and the better world they promise is only enough to keep body and soul together. We can all remember from relief days that subsistence level can mean a lot of different things to different people. We remember when “food experts” used to eat: lunches prepared at the cost of a few cents, proclaim them good and nourishing and proof that relief clients could live on thirty-two cents a day. I guess that was subsistence level if you had a good dinner to go home to. So the war will be over and instead of PLENTY we will once again have “subsistence levels.”
The Beveridge Plan is supposed to take care of you from the cradle to the grave. Upon examination of the concrete proposals one notes that there is a provision for a “childbirth grant” and a “burial grant.” The only fallacy is that between the time you are born and die, you are going to have a rather difficult time grubbing along on the Beveridge Plan.
You will get free medical and hospital treatment under the Beveridge Plant. But the fact that the conservative medical profession has declared itself against socialized .medicine, and all public hospitals have never had the necessary facilities to care for the sick, isn’t answered by any specific proposals in the plan. This is a typical example of capitalist planning.
 
Beveridge Himself Admits Plan Is No Good
It is impossible to discuss every phase of the Beveridge Plan here, as space does not permit it. Besides which, it would, in our opinion, be a useless task, since the whole plan is based on an economy of scarcity in a society where the basis for PLENTY exists. If once we understand that it is possible for society to provide health insurance commensurate with the needs of the patient, and in line with a standard of living that is based on how much is necessary to maintain good, healthful living, and not on how little you can get by on, it becomes meaningless to discuss an increase of $3.60 a week in unemployment insurance such as the Beveridge Plan provides. The problem is not how to provide unemployment insurance – but how to wipe out unemployment!
The impracticability of the whole plan is stated by Beveridge himself:
“If we have mass unemployment we may not be able to carry out the proposals in my report. We may give people money, but there won’t be goods for them, and thus there will be poverty. I don’t know how we shall continue productive employment after the war. When people say we cannot abolish unemployment, I say we have abolished it twice in my lifetime – during the last war and in this war. I simply won’t believe it is impossible to abolish mass unemployment, yet I do not know how it is to be done and do not even know whether anyone else does.”
Do we need a more lucid statement of the bankruptcy of capitalism? Do we need a clearer statement of the worthlessness of a plan than the opinion of its author? He declares that the fundamental premise upon which the plan is built – no mass unemployment – cannot be achieved, unless it is during war. And what is more, he admits neither he nor anyone else knows how to abolish unemployment.
 
We Socialists Have a Workable Plan
It is quite true. Capitalism does not know how to abolish unemployment – BUT WE SOCIALISTS DO! If capitalism, with its system of production for profit – its system of international rivalry for domination of foreign territories and trade, which produces one war after another – if capitalist, which keeps millions subjugated and exploited, whether it be by its wage system, or its outright suppression of colonial peoples. – if this system cannot give peace and plenty to its people, socialism will.
Socialism means production for use and not for profit. Socialism means internationalism. It means that one working class is not pitted against the others in wars, It means that one working man is not pitted against the other in the fight for a job. It means that one working class is not cutting the throat of the other by producing at lower wages than the other. The criteria for production under socialism would be – how much is needed? Some people will argue that it can’t work, it’s a utopia. We can only answer that capitalism has demonstrated that IT can’t work. A society organized on the basis of production for use would have more of a chance of working than our present economic system.
 
Capitalist Plan Runs Afoul of Capitalism
Not only Beveridge has condemned his own plan. Without understanding that they are giving away the basic fallacy of the Beveridge Plan, the liberal and conservative press writes that it “solves no fundamental economic problems, such as the cyclical mass unemployment that swept the industrial World in 1929 ...” (The newspaper PM)
Time magazine pointed out that “contrary to general pre-publication expectation, there was not a revolutionary idea in the whole report.”
And the conservative British weekly, The Economist, understood that the Beveridge Plan was going to change nothing essential when it said that this was “a plan for the security of incomes up to a minimum level ... based upon existing schemes and existing methods.”
Let us not be taken in by all of these plans now floating around. In actuality there is nothing new about them. If you go to a library and look on the shelves for books on post-war plans, you will find hundreds of them. If you open them you will see that they are not dated 1942 or 1943, but 1917, 1918, 1919 and so on up to the present war.
The thing to observe is that none of these people have been able to devise any kind of plan to solve the basic ills of capitalism. They all seek to do the impossible: make capitalism work. Two world wars in twenty-five years, untold misery, poverty and unemployment are the living facts that prove that capitalism doesn’t work – not for the working class, anyway.
 




(Concluded from last issue)
The period after the war saw the progress of liberalism. The fight for the extension of the franchise, was carried on not only by working class organizations but by the liberal capitalist groups.
In 1920 an attempt had been made to organize a socialist party that would include both the communists and socialists. This attempt was frustrated by the police, who raided the meeting. According to an article appearing in Proletarian Outlook, May–June 1940, in 1924 the Socialist League of Japan had 114,000 members!
With the granting of the franchise in 1925 another attempt was made to form a united party, but three hours after formation it was disbanded by the government on the grounds of communism. Nevertheless, a fusion did take place which, however, did not last long as the communists gained control of the organization and the reformist wing left the party. Within this reformist wing a left (centrist) wing grew up which split away.
In 1932 the reformists and centrists united to form the Social Mass Party. This is the Social Democratic Party of Japan.
It is interesting to note that the Stalinist movement in Japan has gone through all the twists and turns of the Stalinist parties in the rest of the world. Following the line promulgated in Moscow, they formed the Red Trade Unions. In 1928 the general round-up of communists led to their suppression. In 1931 they were again suppressed. In 1937 they dissolved their party and formed q new party in line with the popular front policy at the time. They were, however, suppressed. The police were not concerned with their attempts at class collaboration.
Despite our sharp political criticism of the Stalinists, one feels admiration for the heroism of its members who have carried on in the face of this police terrorism.
 
Depression Spurs Strike Action
In all the countries of the world one is able to say there were such and so many unemployed during the depression. But not so in Japan. Since there is practically no social legislation, hence no unemployment compensation, the worker returned to his village or his city home and became a burden on his family – no one was unemployed! But in 1929 and 1930 there were hunger marches all over Japan.
The depression saw a great many strikes. In 1929 there were 1,420 strikes; in 1931 2,456.
In one strike, which was given no publicity in the newspapers, and in which the boss refused to negotiate, the workers felt, that something had to be done lest they lose. One heroic worker, who felt he would rather die than see the strike lost, mounted the factory chimney and stayed there, refusing to take food. The police threatened and ranted; the population came out to see this phenomena. The newspapers could no longer ignore it. They came and took pictures and speculation was rampant as to how long he could last up there. The boss was put on the spot. The strike became a major issue and he was forced to negotiate. This form of strike action, the “chimney-man” was many times repeated in various strikes to the point where police would throw a guard around the chimney when a strike was called.
In 1931 Japan invaded Manchuria and with this came a rise in the nationalist feelings of the labor movement. The trade union movement buckled under to the government and strikes decreased until 1935.
Capitalizing on the nationalist sentiment of the workers, a fascist union movement arose based on collaboration between labor and capital.
 
Rising Prices and Labor Disputes
The reformist trade unions entirely support their government’s war policies and have consistently opposed every effort on the part of the workers to gain any wage increases. In many cases the workers disregard their union leadership and attempt to fight for their elementary right to live.
The war in China in 1937 brought with it the intensification of the building of heavy industry. In Japan Over Asia, William Chamberlain says that with the drift toward a wartime economy, beginning with the China War,
“Labor disputes in so far as they are not repressed by stern administrative measures, tend to occur more frequently because the wage which seems adequate today may fail to cover essential living costs within a few months in view of the rising prices.”
In 1936 there was an increase of 20 per cent in the number of labor disputes in the metal and machine industries. In the first six months of 1937 there was an increase of approximately 50 per cent in the number of disputes.
At the outbreak of the China War, in August 1937, a trade union conference meeting was in progress. They passed a resolution giving support to the government, pledging not to strike for the duration and asked their members to buy war bonds.
It is easy to understand the rise in the number of strikes in 1939, despite trade union pledges to the contrary, if one can visualize the cost of living going up 34.2 per cent from 1931 to 1937, and wages going “up” 2.5 per cent in that same period! By 1939, all things considered, it is difficult to figure out what the Japanese worker was eating.
Despite the many betrayals of the workers’ interests by the reformist trade union movement and its political counterpart, the Social Mass Party, the Japanese worker has, ever since 1932, voted for this party. In the first elections held by the SMP the returns were very poor and there were desertions on the part of leaders from the party to the ranks of the fascists. In 1936 they won eighteen seats and in 1937 doubled their vote. In addition they had fifty-eight members in prefecture assemblies and 151 in the municipal assemblies.
Despite our powerfully organized trade union movement, American workers have little reason to scoff at the backwardness of Japanese labor when we note the fact that the Japanese working class at least sent thirty-seven of its own representatives to represent them in the Diet. (How they represent them is another question!)
From the foregoing we can see that the popular concept of the Japanese as a peculiar race, immune to the effects of the class struggle which takes place wherever capitalist industry exists, is far from the truth. While in numbers and stability, Japanese labor has not achieved the status of the American labor movement, the effects of war weariness in Japan as elsewhere should prove a great spur to the Japanese working class.
 




(Continued from last issue)
The post-war movement had repercussions among the soldiers, risings among government employees, strikes in three military arsenals. Of 27,000 workers, employed in the munitions factories, 10,000 went on strike. Fifteen thousand workers in the Kawaski plant struck in 1919, occupying the factories. The strikes won an eight-hour day for 100,000 workers and a nine-hour day for many more.
In 1920 the Fuji Knitting Mills went on strike, involving 400 men and 1,700 women. But by this time the reaction had set in and repressive measures were taken against the trade unions and the socialist organizations. The strike was lost. But in 1925 they struck again. It is interesting to note the demands of these women workers:

The right to go home in event of death in the immediate family.
 
The right to receive visits from close relatives.
 
Wages of female workers not to be paid to their parents without the consent of the worker.
 
Meat or fish meal once a day.
 
Right to organize.
 
Reinstatement of sixteen dismissed workers.

In 1919, Japan was invited to send delegates to the International Labor Conference of the League of Nations. The government appointed a leading industrialist and the niece of a count to “represent” the workers. Demonstrations were held from one end of the country to the other in protest.
The niece of the count, having a little bit of a conscience, thought she ought to acquaint herself with the conditions of labor, so she toured the country. Everywhere she went she was met by demonstrations on the part of the workers, which evidently impressed her considerably. She appeared at the conference and shocked not only the Japanese delegates but all the other “labor representatives” of that body when she told them that Japanese women were both physically and psychologically victims of the capitalist system.
The significance of this remark becomes more apparent when coupled with the statement of the bosses, who frankly admitted that they feared to use male labor because they were sure strikes and general labor unrest would follow.
So we see that the Japanese labor and socialist movement, on a smaller scale than the European movements, went through the post-war upsurge. But while the labor movement of Europe had many, many years of experience behind it in strike strategy and labor tactics, the Japanese labor movement was but a child in swaddling clothes in 1918.
Then, too, unlike the labor movement of Europe, Japan had never gone through that period known as capitalist democracy. The police suppression in Japan is such that every time a political party is formed, two or three hours later it is declared illegal.
The Japanese ruling class never passed through that phase of being able to pass some of its crumbs on down to its laboring masses. Arriving late on the international scene, they have made the working class pay the price of underselling the world market. As an example: Japanese cotton goods in India sell for less than the Indians can produce it in their own country, and raw cotton is an import in Japan. Takahashi, a Japanese Finance Minister, in 1933 spoke of Japan making up for her lack of capital and for the poverty of her financial resources by cheap labor. “Japan can face England and France’s golden bullets with labor as her weapon.”
The scattered nature of Japanese production has made it very difficult to organize the workers. Unlike the U.S., a 1930 census shows that 53 per cent of the total workers industrially employed were in factories employing fewer than five workers. The difficulties in organizing a working class as scattered as this are self-evident. In additions there is the problem of the handicraft worker.
Paternalism is a conscious policy on the part of the employers and government. This is another factor making union organization difficult. In 1937, the official government year book gives the total number of industrial workers as 6,422,320. Of this number but 395,290 workers, or 6.2 per cent, were organized into unions, and these primarily represented the skilled workers.
Women in Japanese industry have contributed considerably to the backwardness of the labor movement. A Japanese ex-ambassador to the United States described the textile and pottery factories which employ primarily women as follows:
“To see hundreds of young girls, mostly 15 or 16 years old, silently at their work is pitiable, but at the same time inspiring. These girl operators are satisfied with low wages and never grumble. The fact that Japanese goods which are now conquering the world’s markets are made by these maidens makes one thankful to them, warriors of the peace.”
The fact, though, that when these women are reached they react militantly can be seen from the strike in 1925 at the Fuji mills.
A 1937 census showed that 29.9 per cent of the total working population were unmarried females and of these only 1.3 per cent were in unions. Women, tied by ancient tradition and enslaved by the machine, are indeed a problem for organization.
And, last but by no means least, is the problem of the poverty-stricken farmer who has supplied a source of cheap industrial labor in Japan.
(Continued in Next Issue)
 




The Socialist Appeal, organ of the Workers International League (Fourth International) and the New Leader, organ of the Independent Labor Party, report that 40,000 Tyneside shipbuilding workers went on strike in October and stayed out for eight days.
The strike received a stab in the back from the trade union officials who, in cahoots with the bosses, sprang a new agreement on the workers without consulting them. However, While it won no major concessions for the workers, the strike was a reflection of the growing militancy of the English workers and the importance of the shop stewards who ran the strike.
The workers refused to accept an agreement in| which two days’ pay would remain in the hands of the bosses by moving back the day on which they were paid from Tuesday to Sunday! When strikes took place after this announcement by the bosses, they agreed to make up the two days’ pay the workers would lose over a period of twenty weeks.
Although this was a concession, the shop stewards had not been consulted and the workers refused to accept it. The workers proposed that the old agreement stand until the shop stewards could investigate the proposal. They refused to report to work what the bosses would not have this, and 80 per cent of the workers in the yards stayed out.
The government, through the so-called labor representative, Bevins, told the workers that it did not intend to depart from the agreement made by the trade unions and the employers.
The strike dragged on and the shop stewards decided to recommend to the workers that they go back to work as a body. To show that this strike had not been an adventure and that the workers had confidence in their shop stewards, all the stewards resigned and a new election held.
At the election, every shop steward who had stood with the workers during the strike was re-elected. This meant that the Stalinists, who had acted as strike-breakers were thrown out of the workers’ committees.
Special mention must be made of the role of the Stalinists in the strike. Despite the fact that the overwhelming majority of workers supported the strike, the Stalinists issued leaflets, called meetings of their own people in order to keep them in line, and appealed to the workers to go back to work. A militant in the Stalinist ranks attacked the strike-breaking policy of the CP and received good support, indicating that all was not rosy among the followers of Kremlin Joe.
The workers at the Tyneside yards saw clearly on whose side the trade union bureaucrats were when their own union organization refused to support them despite the fact that the workers had democratically decided on their course.
 
Stewards Lead Belfast Strike of 10,000
Another manifestation of the militancy of the British workers was the strike at Belfast, where, on October 26, 10,000 workers went out.
Here again, the shop stewards took the lead because the regular trade onion officials disregarded the wishes of the membership.
When the workers went on strike, refusing to accept the bosses’ request to remain at work while the conferences dragged on, the district committee of the Engineers Union AEU (equivalent to our Machinists’ Union), called a meeting to order the workers back to work. The workers boycotted the meeting, which was attended by three persons. Several . hundreds of strikers stood on the opposite side of the road watching the unwanted officials arrive and depart. This was not just an ordinary boycott. The workers came out and impressed their union leaders with their seriousness while not attending the meeting.
The British New Leader reports that the strikers did no insist on the maintenance of the old earnings in full, but they declared that the substantial reductions imposed on top of the large deductions for income tax reduce their pay, in many instances, below a (decent) living standard.
The workers maintained that they would stay out until an official report by a court of inquiry was made. This they did. They were out for three weeks and by a vote of 1,254 to 175 on the part of the electricians, and 1,617 to 771 by the engineers they decided to go back.
The electricians’ strike started because a non-unionist had been employed by a company in an effort to introduce an open-shop. The engineers’ strike started over the demand that they be permitted to work on Sunday because of the higher rate of pay for Sunday work and in order to increase their earnings, which are not adequate to meet their needs. The bosses refused to allow Sunday work. A movement to come to work on Sundays was nevertheless organized by two shop stewards, who were promptly fired.
The spirit of the strikers was very good, especially in view of the fact that they held out for over three weeks against the opposition of the government, the trade union officials, the Labor Party and the Communist Party. And despite all of this opposition, one-third of the strikers voted against going back to work.
Here again we must note that the Stalinists campaigned against the strike. Harry Pollitt came to Belfast, and pleaded with the shop stewards to get the men to go back to work. The men paid about as much attention to his pleadings as he deserved.
 
From All Parts of England ...
From all parts of England come reports of strikes small and large. Four hundred shipwrights won a wage increase after striking when the company refused to grant concessions. Just a little militant action, and the company decided to talk turkey.
In Glasgow, 2,000 workers struck. They returned to work on the promise of the company to negotiate. The company is still stalling. Two thousand dock workers struck in London when wages for one week were held up for the who refused to go to Manchester to work under a compulsory order. The workers returned to work pending negotiations.
 




The past year has added to the considerable confusion that existed about Japan. For years the Japanese were described as some kind of doll-like people who wore kimonos, lived in bamboo houses, grew wonderful flowers in little gardens, lighted their houses with lanterns and grew lovely cherry trees. Of more recent origin has been the concept of the Japanese as wily, slant-eyed rogues, in shorts and sandals, ready to blow themselves to bits.
In actuality, neither of these concepts accurately describes the Japanese. There are fanatics among all peoples, and there are dainty, delightful habits and customs in all cultures.
To the Japanese farmer, that little bamboo house, which looks so delightful in a picture, is a flimsily built, one-room place, little different from that of our own Southern sharecropper, He has no land on which to grow anything but rice, since the cultivation of the soil is very intensive. Prior to the war, the thousands of yards of silk rayon and cotton that flooded the markets of the world from the looms of Japan rarely were seen on the backs of the Japanese workers and farmers. That goes for the gadgets and articles of one kind or another manufactured in Japan and shipped everywhere, but rarely sold in Japan proper. There is no mass market for these things – the workers and farmers are too poverty-stricken to do much more than buy their most needed commodity – food.
At the height of the depression, a leading Japanese industrialist, a Mr. Yatora, at one time president of the South Manchurian Railroad Co., made a speech extolling the poverty of the Japanese worker and farmer:
“If Japan were, a nation which ate a lot of meat and wheat, which wore woolen clothing and were dependent upon a great many international commodities, we should be on the verge of a revolution. But fortunately, or unfortunately, our people eat rice and fish, wear cheap clothing and are almost entirely divorced from the international markets in the essentials of living.”
Mr. Yatora has very eloquently described the poverty of the Japanese masses. He errs only in one point: he thinks they are satisfied with their lot. What is more, the whole world has been educated to believe that the Japanese workers and farmers are content, that they are modest creatures, having few wants, ready and willing to turn out more and more work for the good of country and boss. The actual story of Japanese labor dispels this myth.
 
As Capitalism Grew, Strikes Increased
Simultaneously with the development of capitalism in Japan began the history of strikes and conflicts in which the ruthlessness of the ruling class and the desperate plight of the workers became apparent.
The revolution which brought the Japanese capitalist class into power took place in 1867, when the Emperor Meiji was restored to the throne. Soon after, in the 1880s, there was a strike of stone masons. The masons had refused to accept a decrease in wages and struck for twelve days. During this same period, 200 knitting mill workers went on strike. During 1887 there were approximately forty strikes in which about 7,000 workers were involved. Miners, railroad workers, machinists and furnace stokers struck to secure higher wages in 1898.
So we see that, contrary to the much-advertised submission of the Japanese workers, peddled by its cynical government spokesmen and “labor leaders,” the workers set out to win their rights by actions not unlike those of their Western brothers. It is true that their actions were not as widespread as those of Western workers, but this was due to the peculiarities of the development of Japanese capitalism which in turn gave rise to a labor movement with problem unlike those of the European and American working class.
 
The Origins of Socialist Agitation
The revolutionary wave set in motion by the Russians in 1905 affected all Asia and had its reflection in Japan in many large strikes. Coal carriers, glass workers, dock workers, all won wage increases of from 10 to 25 per cent. The miners’ strike was particularly violent and it took four infantry companies to break it.
At about this time socialist agitation and propaganda began to take place, in Japan. In 1898, the Socialist Party of Japan was organized by Sen Katayama. Needless to say – it was outlawed. The Japanese police, long before Hitler’s now famous Gestapo, made careers for themselves as brutal suppressors of the socialist movements.
The trade union movement had less difficulty in carrying on its work than did the political movement, since the state found it necessary to be more tolerant of organizations along economic lines than political.
In 1904, the Russo-Japanese War broke out and while the armies were clashing in Manchuria, the Congress of the Second International was meeting in Amsterdam. There the delegates from the Russian and Japanese labor movement sat around the tables of the Congress, and Plekhanov for the Russian movement and Sen Katayama for the Japanese met and shook hands amid an ovation that expressed the solidarity of the two working classes despite the war then being carried on by their governments.
The Russian Revolution and the revolts in Europe in 1918 stirred the Japanese working class. The year 1918 saw a great spurt forward in the organization of the labor movement. In 1916 there were 108 strikes; in 1917, 398; in 1918, 417; and in 1919, 497.
The spark that set the whole movement going was the “rice riots” of 1918. The rise in the cost of rice, the main food staple in Japan, provoked rioting in several small fishing villages. It soon spread to the larger cities, where the sacking of stores and warehouses took place. In Tokyo, the workers stormed the Departments of Agriculture and Commerce. The price of rice dropped!
The relaxation of the law forbidding unions was a spur to unionization. After 1918 there was a series of strikes and actions which drew in the most backward sections of the working class: girls working in the textile mills. Here paternalism and a brutal slave method of employment prevailed The girls were sold into the factory, boarded at the mill and in most cases never saw their wages as they were paid back to their families.
(Continued in next issue)
 







(This is the second in a series of articles on American labor during the last war. The first article, published last week, described how the workers’ cost of living rose above their wages levels. This second article describes the series of strikes resulting from that situation. – Editor)




The working class in the last war did no take the disparity between wages and cost of living lying down. They couldn’t afford to, and the only way they could keep their heads above water was by striking.
In 1913–14 and the first half of 1915 the country was in one of its periodic depressions. By the middle of 1915 the country became one of the chief producers of munitions, foodstuffs and other war needs. As the war wheels began to turn, the labor movement entered a period of organization and strikes. Just as today, labor knew that if it did not get something out of all the profits being made, it would be out in the cold.
During 1915–16, there were 4,924 strikes involving 2,000,000 workers. Of these strikes, 1,386 were for wage increases and 129 against wage cuts. A great many were for union recognition.
The railroad workers were carrying on a struggle for the eight-hour day and time and a half for overtime. Over 35,000 railroad workers on 52 lines got together and in the midst of the war boom, August 1916, decided that it was now or never.
The Big Four announced that unless a settlement was reached the railroad workers would strike. They knew they were a vital cog in the machine, and so did the government. While the companies refused to come to an agreement with the unions, President Wilson asked Congress to enact an eight-hour-day law for the railroads. Congress did so two days before the strike deadline.
 
Machinists’ Strike
As a result of a strike of munitions workers led by the International Association of Machinists in Bridgeport, Conn., which spread to several munitions centers in other states, 60,000 machinists in the East won the eight-hour day and a forty-eight-hour week.
In 1916, the New York longshoremen struck for a signed contract and payment of double time for handling war munitions and explosives.
The garment workers in New York, Philadelphia and Boston struck and won union shop agreements.
Many of labor’s demands, like the eight-hour day and time and a half, seem rather modest to us today. But if labor isn’t on guard during this war we may have to fight for these demands all over again. It is well to remember that it is due to these pioneering efforts of the labor movement that we enjoy many advantages now.
And labor still has a struggle for one important demand that also caused many strikes in the last war – the fight for the closed shop. In order to understand labor during the last war, it is necessary to note the heroic struggles fought by the much maligned and persecuted International Workers of the World (IWW) [sic!]. Since the rise of the CIO we have come to accept the principle of industrial unionism as a necessity in the labor movement. But in the last war, the craft-conscious AFL won many demands for the highly skilled workers while the laborers in the steel mills, lumber camps, textile mills, etc. went unorganized and underpaid. The IWW fought valiantly and uncompromisingly for the interests of these workers, the most exploited sections of the American working class, most of whom today are organized by the CIO.
 
IWW Pressure
The pressure of the IWW on the AFL bureaucracy played a big role. In its tireless efforts to organize the American working class, the IWW was a thorn in the side of the AFL leaders who might otherwise have been all too ready to slide along. Testimony of the role played by the AFL bureaucracy is to be found in the American Labor Year Book of 1919–1920.
“Authority and responsibility within the American labor movement have to a very great degree passed over from the executive offices of the AFL to the meetings and local councils of the rank and file. We have international unions stronger in numbers and in financial showing than ever before, and we see the AFL gathering in hundreds of thousands of new members, with scarcely an effort as compared with the days before Europe went to war. But the initiative and the power of action on the industrial battlefield had slipped from the national leaders’ hands.”
Prior to the declaration of war, defense labor boards had been set up to deal with the numerous strikes. Many AFL officials sat on these boards. But they had less effect on the rank and file than the government hoped. The worker had to live and in the words of an old labor song he couldn’t say, “Please, Mr. Boss, a little raise; the cost of living is going up.” He had to say, “Strike, strike, strike, not please, Mr. Boss.” The National Industrial Conference Board, an employers’ research agency, found that in the first seven months of war (between April 6 and October 6, 1917) there were 3,000 strikes. In 1918 there were 3,353 strikes involving 240,000 workers.
This bosses’ agency stated that “... demands for higher wages were the most frequent cause for strikes. Increased cost of living ... readily accounted for this.”
However, while in the April to October 1917 period 455 strikes were for wage increases exclusively, 230 strikes were for higher wages plus closed shop conditions. Of the latter, 208 ended in compromise, the wage demand being granted, but not the closed shop.
While the government and industry were debating proposals for no more strikes for the duration of the war, open shop, compulsory arbitration boards whose “decisions must bind all parties to the dispute,” the workers were “debating” on the picket line.
There was the lumber workers’ strike in the Pacific Northwest. Copper miners struck in Arizona, marine workers in Puget Sound and the Chicago stockyards went out.
More boards were set up. But none of them stemmed the tide. The class struggle could be arbitrated no more in time of war than in time of peace. Labor felt its might and knew its importance.
 




If you are one of those who are earning more this year than you were last, and wondering why you have less left at the end of the week, a glance at what happened to real wages in the last war will clear up many things.
To begin with, the war affected certain trades much more than others. Shipyard workers, munition workers and others directly involved in war production received wage increases. But for the bulk of labor the increases they received meant little or nothing because the cost of living rose much more quickly than their wages.
John B. Andrews, a labor legislation expert, in his book Labor Problems and Labor Legislation, says:
“We are forced to conclude that all the wage increases of the war (World War I) hardly changed the situation, as wages in most cases little more than kept pace with the cost of living and only very rarely exceeded it.”
All through the war the great cry was, “Earning power has not kept pace with the rising cost of living.”
The cost of living had been steadily rising for 25 years up to 1914, and wages, i.e., wages measured by what they could buy, had been falling. John B. Andrews says:
“The decline amounted to about 10 or 15 per cent over the whole period and was more rapid from 1900 to 1914 than during the previous decade.”
So we see that before the last war was declared wages actually were worth far less than their dollar and cents figure (and that was low enough). But with the declaration of war there began a sky-rocketing that had no end. We already see that taking place in this war.
 
Cost of Living Jumps
In the History of Labor in the United States, the section on Working Conditions by Don D. Lescohier, we read that
“The rise (in the cost of living) in the five years 1915–20 was two and one half times that of 1894–1914, that is, the annual increase in wage earners’ cost of living during the price inflation of the war period was about ten times as rapid as during the previous 20 years.”
Let us try to get a picture of what happened to real wages in the period of the last war. In order to get a rounded picture we must not begin with 1917, the year the U.S. declared war on Germany, but rather 1915, when the effect of European war orders began to be felt by the American industrial machine. The first half of 1915 was still part of the era of the 1914–15 depression. There was unemployment and slack. But the second half of the year showed an upturn and so did the cost of living.
If John Doe was working after a period of “recession” and thought he would pay off some of the debts, or buy some badly needed clothes, he found, if he read the statistics (and he knew, even if he did read them) that the cost of living had jumped nearly 13 per cent from December 1915 to December 1918.
In Real Wages in U.S. Paul H. Douglas estimates that wages in all industries rose an average of $1.32 a week, or 9 per cent during 1916.
Cost of living rises 16 per cent – wages 9 per cent.
 
Worker in the Same Rut
From 1916 to 1917 the cost of living went up 20 per cent. It was then nearly 13 per cent higher than in December 1914. All the findings on wage increases show that workers were no better off because of the rise in wages. By and large they were in the same spot.
From December 1917 to December 1918, the cost of living rose 31 per cent. But in most industries wages did not equal the rise. They rose 23 per cent.
Of course, those with fixed incomes, like clerical workers and government employees, were very badly hit.
The rise in the cost of living and the lagging behind of wages caused much distress and many strikes.
The National War Labor Board was set up to handle labor disputes. Its policy was to maintain the pre-war standards of real wages. There was much commotion over this, since the wage disputes were to be settled on the basis of family budgets – BUT WHOSE? There were various strata of income within labor’s ranks.
Besides which, the unions contended that the rates of pay before the war were too low and should not be used as a measuring rod. The board in 1918 heard reports from various people and committees who had figured out substantial budgets and rates of wages necessary to maintain workers in “health and reasonable comport.”
In an executive session, held by the War Labor Board in Washington in July 1918, it was decided that
“... The resultant rates (found by the committees) were so much higher in amount per hour ... than those prevailing at the time, that the board feared the dislocating effect upon production of practically applying the principle during the war period.
“After prolonged discussion and consideration, it was finally decided, for reasons of expediency, not to apply this principle in a general or arbitrary way, but only to sanction it in specific cases where wages were abnormally low and where the physical maintenance of labor for war production was being impaired.”
In other words, the board decided that the principle of “health and reasonable comfort” would have to be abandoned.
This from the body set up to handle labor grievances. Not too much thought has to be used to imagine how they mediated them.
 
Rank and File Pressure
Unlike the labor leaders who sat on the war boards, the rank and filers were putting pressure on the local union for action. The workers were not silent about the disparity between wages and the cost of living for they knew what the wages actually could buy. AFL convention reports of this period are full of protests and resolutions.
The 1918 convention of the Massachusetts State Federation of Labor:
“... There is a steady increase in the number of children under the age of 16 who are leaving school to go to work as a result of the necessity to supplement the family income due to the rise in the cost of living ...”
The California State Federation convention:
“High cost of living has now become the high cost of half-living ...”
The Brewery Workers Union convention in 1917:
“... wage earner finds no difficulty to keep within the advice and appeal of Food Dictator Hoover for the conservation of food” because “his earning power has not kept pace with the ever-increasing cost of all necessities of life.”
 




When America entered the First World War, the government did not try to prohibit strikes, as the British did. It profited from the British experience, which showed that rather than stopping strikes, the anti-strike legislation gave added importance to those strikes that took place.
America’s policy was to recognize that unions did exist and to attempt to buy them off by including labor representatives in the war councils. But this step could not silence the rank and file, which felt the pressure of the-rising cost of living.
Even before the U.S. was officially at war, Samuel Gompers, president of the AFL, was appointed to the advisory commission of the Council of National Defense, when it was first organized in October 1916.
The appointment was viewed openly as a bridle on labor. All the dollar-a-year men were open in their contempt of the labor representatives and cynically termed Gompers’ appointment as a “sagacious example.” Similarly, when the War Industries Board was organized in July 1917 and Hugh Frayne, organizer for the AFL, was appointed to a post on that board, G.B. Clarkson, who was associated with the Council of National Defense, said that, “strictly speaking, Frayne was not on the board to represent labor, hut to manage it ...” This was particularly meaningful with reference to that board, on which sat the best representatives of American industry, like Rockefeller, Guggenheim, etc.
 
Critical of Gompers
Despite this attitude on the part of industry, Gompers sought to rally American labor for the impending war. For this purpose he called a conference of the executive council of the AFL which claimed to speak for millions of Americans. But the conference declaration which supported the war did not go unchallenged. Criticism of the resolution was widespread. This critical response on the part of the ranks of labor corroborated a conviction on the part of the government and industrial circles that labor was not enthusiastically behind the war.
The Council for National Defense, in April 1917, immediately upon the declaration of war, called upon labor and employers to maintain the status quo. This was asking the impossible, since prices were soaring and wages had to be brought up to meet them. It became evident that labor intended to try to make wages meet the rise in the cost of living regardless of the positions held by their “representatives,” which buckled under as each crucial issue arose.
The first contest came over the closed shop. Gompers and Secretary of War Baker had reached an agreement in June 1917 for the supply of skilled labor to the building of cantonments. The legal expert of the Council for National Defense discovered that the contract contained the possibility of a closed shop interpretation. This was an impossible situation! And of course, Gompers, whose consent was sought for the inclusion of an open shop clause, swallowed hard, registered his protest and then gave in.
The governmental departments soon discovered that, “Gompers, having had his say, which had been written into the record, became amenable to the appeals of reasonable men.”
The War Labor Board was created, remained the chief mediation body by proclamation in April 1918 and to the end of the war.
 
Causes of Strikes
The original commission appointed by President Wilson to investigate the causes for the strikes had recommended “the elimination to the utmost practical extent of all profiteering during the period of the war as a prerequisite to the best morale in industry.” But the War Conference Board in its report did not mention this profit-elimination phase of the report. It did, however, recommend the adoption of a fixed minimum wage. The WCB made several other proposals: (1) give workers right, to organize in trade unions and bargain collectively; (2) give employers the right to organize and bargain collectively (as if they needed permission!); (3) employers were not to discharge workers for membership in trade unions or for LEGITIMATE trade union activity. (Who was to define “legitimate” they did not say.) But the fourth point virtually nullified points one and three. The board in one breath (points one and three) granted labor the right to organize for collective bargaining and then in point four prohibited workers from urging other workers to join their union.
On the basis of these findings the permanent war board was born. It was a foregone conclusion that on the basis of such a policy it would conduct itself as it did.
All of the boards, no matter what their “front,” and some of them had liberals and labor people on them to make them more palatable to labor, had one purpose: to keep labor in its place. This meant no strikes, no organizing of labor during the war, maintenance of the status quo – or freezing of wages, compulsory arbitration or the “cooling off” period, and all the reactionary measures we hear spoken of today.
In the next article we will deal with the employers’ open shop offensive after the peace of 1918, which sought to take advantage of Gompers’ attitude of “going along” with the government during the war. We will see that labor erred in not fighting harder and in not understanding that the repressive measures of the war would be turned into open warfare against labor in an effort to break the backbone of the trade union and socialist movements that arose from the slaughter of 1914–18.
 




The frenzied crowds that surged through the streets on November 11, 1918, were less moved by the thrill of victory than the immense feeling of relief that “it was all over at last.” Ever since the summer of 1914 they had lived under the black shadow, which touched every phase of life. Now the pall had been lifted and all the pent-up hopes, hates, ambitions, broke loose like a flood-tide.
Labor had found itself more and more ham-strung by the War Labor Boards and the whole war-making machinery of the government. It was forced to accept an occasional hand-out in the form of a wage increase while prices sky-rocketed. Labor had only one desire. To make up for its, sacrifices, to win something for itself out of the victory for which it had paid so dearly. Walk into any labor hall during those hectic post-war months. The air was filled with talk of strikes, closed shop, the Plumb Plan, government ownership, general strike, syndicalism, Russia, and a new day for the working man.
The hard-boiled employers who formed the policy making bodies of the National Association of Manufacturers, the Iron and Steel Institute and the National Chamber of Commerce had likewise chafed under the restraints made necessary by the war. To avoid “trouble” with labor they had been forced to handle it with silk gloves. Here and there they had to make concessions. Worst of all was the fact that the AFL had greatly increased its membership.
With the war over, the employers were impatient to do away with all the clap-trap about collective bargaining, mediation, etc.
Walk into any rich men’s club at the time and the air was heavy with denunciations of Bolshevism, unionism, IWWism, Wilson liberalism and the need of “putting labor, Negroes and Jews in their place.” In the smaller towns their views were put into action by the growing legions of the Ku Klux Klan.
 
Attempt to Salvage
The American workers attempted to salvage something from the war, but the attitude of the “brass hats” and industrialists was hostile. The hostility with which they fought labor can only be present in a group of people who fear something. They feared a labor movement that might seek to emulate the specter of Europe, Bolshevism.
The workers struck. They wanted a 48-hour-week, eight-hour-day and collective bargaining. But the great open shop offensive was on. The employers were out to smash the unions.
In January 1919, New York harbor workers, 17,000 strong, struck for the eight-hour day. Wilson was at the Versailles Peace Conference and he asked the War Labor Board to intervene. Union officials told the workers to go back to work. Once at work the board offered them even less than the bosses had been ready to give. They struck a second time but again the union officials forgot that “united we stand, divided we fall.” One section was urged to make a separate agreement. They did, and in actuality returned to work as scabs. That was the end of waterfront organization for quite a time.
Lawrence, Mass., was the scene of a bloody battle. The workers asked for a 48-hour week. The American Woolen Co. said sure, but six hours less pay. The slogan of a 48-hour week with 54 hours pay was adapted and 32,000 went out on strike.
The American Labor Year Book said:
“The strikers, the general strike committee (which we will deal with later) and the leaders who came to help, suffered from every form of vilification and persecution. Newspaper hostility, citizen committees, police brutalities, denial of open air meetings even on private property, paid spies in the strike committee and among the people, attempts to frame up the leaders and finally the use of lynch law by masked vigilantes upon two of the strike leaders.”
The whole labor movement, however, backed up the strikers, and after sixteen weeks they won.
How many workers must have remembered the war for democracy in those years of the Palmer raids and the brutal policy of the capitalists out to break labor?
 
The Great Steel Strike
Then came the great strike in steel – that citadel of the open shop. “The failure of this strike,” boasted G.B. Clarkson, spokesman for employers, in his Industrial America in the World War, “was the death blow to Bolshevism in America and stimulated chauvinism among employees.”
The steel workers asked only the most elementary human rights achieved by other unions. Their strike vote was almost unanimous and the organizing committee requested a conference with U.S. Steel. Judge Gary, who sat on Baruch’s War Industries Board, and who had no great love for labor, was the head of U.S. Steel. He openly stated, that “our corporations and subsidiaries decline to discuss business with them (the unions).”
Gompers asked Wilson to call a conference of both sides. But Wilson did nothing and the steel companies began to discharge people. The unions had to do something. They told Wilson this, but he said he couldn’t get a joint conference and that they must hold off the strike. They struck after several delays and a bloody battle ensued.
One of America’s most powerful industries was out to teach the labor movement a “lesson.” By relying on its treasury, swollen with war profits, steel used every known device to break this strike. It was a decisive defeat for the labor movement and called forth a renewed offensive against labor by the open shoppers.
 
Miners Pitch In, Too
The United Mine Workers struck during the course of the steel strike. This strike was smashed by a most vicious injunction. On the eve of the strike the courts issued a temporary restraining order against all officers of the UMW. The injunction restricted the UMW officials from in any way counseling, aiding or being in any way connected with the strike. The labor fakers were no longer needed by the government and they were slightly bewildered by what was happening. Gompers issued a statement saying:
“It is almost inconceivable that a government which is proud of its participation in a great war to liberate suppressed people should now undertake to suppress the legitimate aims, hopes and aspirations of a group of its own people.”
Despite the injunction, nearly half a million workers went on strike. This was answered by a permanent injunction. It gave the union officers 72 hours to rescind the strike order. The strike was lost. The forces against the strike were great and included the union officialdom, who declared: “You can’t strike against the government.”
The big strikes in coal and steel found their repercussions in numerous industries and crafts, among them the railway shopmen’s strike, which was broken by one of the most vicious injunctions in labor history.
We see from, the foregoing that labor, during the war, was exhorted to stay on the job, not to fight for higher wages, not to worry about union recognition and the closed shop. When the war was over, reaction ruled and the worker now felt the brute force of the American ruling class which was determined that the unions should not gain a foothold. One can echo Gompers on this score by asking why is it that whenever this capitalist nation sets out to “save democracy” somewhere, it begins and ends by suppressing the rights of the workers at home?
 




The vital interest in the question of Palestine shown by eighty-five members and friends of the Workers Party made for an enthusiastic and successful opening of the Labor Action School’s Sunday Evening Forum on November 17. The opening featured a symposium in which Albert Gates, an editor of Labor Action, and Ed Findley reported on their views.
Albert Gates, speaking on behalf of the resolution of the National Committee of the Workers Party, and Findley for his counter-resolution, made opening statements that gave rise to many questions bearing on problems of assimilation, immigration, partition, self-determination, the role of Zionism, and many other problems involved in the intricate question before the audience.
The discussion from the floor reflected a lively probing of the introductory remarks made by the speakers, and was immediately resumed after the summaries had been made and the meeting officially adjourned. Much interest was shown in the current issue of the New International which features material on the question discussed.
If this opening of the forum series is any indication of what may be expected from the other forums devoted to very pertinent questions on the schedule, we may be assured of having established a series destined to become a necessary part of the life of our friends and sympathizers.
 
Reimann Lecture Next
The inability of the Big Three to come to grips with the problem of what is to happen to Germany should in itself point to the enormity of the problem which Gunther Reimann, author of The Vampire Economy and other works on Germany, will discuss in his lecture on The Fate of Germany. It involves the possibility of grappling with an economic and political question that may spell chaos or survival for European affairs,
The exchange between I.L. Leder and Henry Judd in the current issue of the New International on Why the Germans Failed to Revolt, should furnish an introduction to the lecture.
The next forum meets on Sunday evening, November 24, at 8 o’clock, at 114, West 14th Street. A complete listing of all the forums scheduled for this semester of the Labor Action School may be obtained by writing to the above address.
 

