

It really needs to be said that the first things to be forgotten are just the first points, the most elementary things ... The first point is that there do in fact exist rulers and ruled, leaders and led ... In the formation of leaders the premise is fundamental: does one wish there always to be rulers and ruled, or does one wish to create the conditions where the necessity for the existence of this division disappears? ... Nevertheless, it needs to be understood that the division of rulers and ruled, though in the last analysis it goes back to divisions between social groups, does in fact exist, given things as they are, even inside the bosom of each separate group, even a socially homogeneous one ... and it is mainly on this question that the most serious “errors” come about ... It is believed that when the principle of the group is laid down obedience ought to be automatic ... or even that it is beyond discussion ... So it is difficult to rid the leaders of dictatorial habits, that is, the conviction that something will be done because the leader thinks it is correct and rational that it should be done: if it is not done, the “blame” is put on those who “ought to have” etc. [1]
This article examines the much disputed issue of internal party democracy in the light of the Marxist tradition and past and recent experience. It considers the challenge offered to the Marxist theory of the party by the German sociologist Robert Michels, in the belief that facing and attempting to answer this challenge yields insights into the real nature of the problem. On this basis it seeks to reformulate the issue of party democracy in a way different from that in which it is usually posed on the left, namely as a goal continuously to be striven for rather than a norm simply to be observed.
 
The tradition
When, in 1847, Karl Marx and Frederick Engels joined the League of the Just, an international secret society composed mainly of German artisans, which duly became the Communist League and for which they composed the Communist Manifesto, it was on condition that, among other things, “the organisation itself was thoroughly democratic, with elective and removable authorities”. [2]
This condition was central to the new worldview and political practice that they had persuaded the League to adopt, namely the doctrine of class struggle outlined in the Manifesto, in which the transformation of society – the revolution – was to be accomplished by the working class itself. Prior to Marx and Engels, and prior to the emergence of the modern working class, the dominant form of revolutionary organisation was the secret club or conspiracy – a model inherited from the French Revolution of 1789 – which envisaged the transformation of society from above following a coup d’etat by a dedicated and enlightened few. Marx and Engels considered party democracy a crucial means for combating this, essentially bourgeois, concept of revolution. “This alone [a democratic party structure] barred all hankering after conspiracy, which requires dictatorship”. [3]
The commitment to party democracy was inscribed in our tradition from its inception and has been reinscribed many times since.
“Unity of action, freedom of discussion and criticism. Only such discipline is worthy of the democratic party of the advanced class ... the proletariat does not recognise unity of action without freedom to discuss and criticise,” wrote Lenin. [4] Leon Trotsky wrote of the Bolshevik Party:
The party took watchful care not only that its boundaries should always be strictly defined, but also that all those who entered these boundaries should enjoy the actual right to define the direction of the party policy. Freedom of criticism and intellectual struggle was an irrevocable content of the party democracy. The present doctrine that Bolshevism does not tolerate factions is a myth of the epoch of decline. In reality the history of Bolshevism is a history of the struggle of factions. And, indeed, how could a genuinely revolutionary organisation, setting itself the task of overthrowing the world and uniting under its banner the most audacious iconoclasts, fighters and insurgents, live and develop without intellectual conflicts, without groupings and temporary factional formations? [5]
Similarly, Duncan Hallas in 1971:
[A revolutionary socialist party] cannot possibly be created except on a thoroughly democratic basis; unless, in its internal life, vigorous controversy is the rule and various tendencies and shades of opinion are represented, a socialist party cannot rise above the level of a sect. Internal democracy is not an optional extra. It is fundamental to the relationship between party members and those amongst whom they work. [6]
It should be added that this is not just a question for Marxist revolutionary parties. The overwhelming majority of working class organisations – trade unions, parties, campaigns, cooperatives, tenants associations, etc – are at least established with democratic constitutions and aspirations. The working class is the socialist class because, among other things, it is the democratic class. The economic role and position of the working class, making and operating the decisive means of production, producing the bulk of its wealth, concentrated in large workplaces and towns and integrated into a global division of labour, gives it (a) the power to defeat the capitalist class; (b) the ability to inaugurate the transition to a fully classless society because it can be both the producing and the ruling class at the same time. In other words, it can create structures (the Paris Commune, soviets, factory councils, etc) that enable it to control production and govern society democratically.
 
The experience
And yet ... And yet everyone who knows something of the history of the socialist movement and anyone who has had any experience of it over the last 30 or 40 years knows that the question of inner party democracy has been an ever-recurring issue.
The Stalinist parties provide the most obvious example. In the Communist Party of the Soviet Union every shred and semblance of democracy was extinguished by Stalinist counter-revolution. Communist parties in Eastern Europe, China, North Korea, Vietnam, etc. more or less followed suit, and if the Communist parties of Western Europe had a less draconian character, not having a secret police to hand, they nevertheless were not remotely democratic.
However, for us now, the undemocratic nature of the Stalinist parties poses the least theoretical problems. It is clear that in the Stalinist states the Communist parties had become instruments of rule, not of the working class, but of new bureaucratic ruling classes and therefore had to be undemocratic in the extreme. This was the only way of overcoming the contradiction between their actual function and their declared aims. [7]
Something similar applies to the traditional social democratic parties with their dual character as bourgeois workers’ parties (as Lenin put it) – i.e. as parties with working class membership, and bourgeois leadership and policy. In these cases their mass working class bases obliged these parties to retain some elements of democracy (conferences with some real debate, elected leaders, etc.) but also to develop mechanisms capable of preventing the worker majority from asserting itself. In the case of old Labour (New Labour became even less democratic) the two most important of these mechanisms were the block vote in the hands of the trade union bureaucrats and the ability of the parliamentary leadership to ignore decisions of party conference. [8]
More theoretically challenging is the recurrence of the democracy issue in avowedly non-Stalinist, non social democratic or libertarian organisations. Let us take a few examples drawn from throughout the history of the socialist movement. First there was the conflict between Marx and the anarchist Mikhail Bakunin in the First International. Bakunin denounced Marx’s authoritarianism and called him a “dictator over the proletariat”. Marx replied by accusing Bakunin of operating a secret society inside the International (the International Brotherhood, also known as the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy) in which there was no democracy of any kind but rather an unelected “collective and invisible dictatorship” of Bakunin. [9] During debates over the split between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks in 1903 Trotsky attacked Lenin, saying, “In the internal politics of the party these methods lead ... to the party organisation ‘substituting’ itself for the party, then the central committee substituting itself for the party organisation; and finally the dictator substituting himself for the central committee”. [10] At the same time Rosa Luxemburg upbraided Lenin for his “overanxious desire to establish the guardianship of an omniscient omnipotent central committee”. [11]
The international Trotskyist movement in the 1930s was plagued with complaints, disputes and splits over real or alleged violations of inner party democracy, and Trotsky was frequently led wearily to lament petty bourgeois elements who wanted to debate and discuss forever. In the most important of these splits, that in the American Socialist Workers Party in 1939–40, the question of the “party regime” presided over by James P. Cannon played a considerable role. [12]
After the Second World War the pattern on the Trotskyist left remained broadly the same. In virtually every faction fight or split, and they were far too numerous to document here, the issue of inner party democracy would raise its none too beautiful head. At one end of this particular spectrum lay the Socialist Labour League/Workers Revolutionary Party, which, from reasonably promising beginnings around 1956, degenerated into the ever more erratic personal dictatorship of its “philosopher” thug leader Gerry Healy. Healy deployed a combination of an idealist version of the dialectic and highly materialist fists to terrorise intellectuals and worker militants alike until it all fell apart in 1986, amid accusations of the systematic sexual abuse of female comrades. At the other end was the “ultra-democratic” International Marxist Group (IMG), British section on the Unified Secretariat of the Fourth International, and followers of Ernest Mandel. The IMG went so far in the opposite direction that by the 1970s there were institutionalised permanent factions (at least three at any one time), none of which had a working majority. At this point ultra-democracy seems to have turned into its opposite in that the majority of the members were unable to assert any kind of stable strategy or line.
Between these extremes lay a multitude of small Trotskyist or semi-Trotskyist groups with a wide variety of organisational practices and internal regimes. However, the general isolation of such groups from the mass of the working class meant that the tendency to become a sect, dominated in practice by a few individuals, was pretty strong.
The most promising development in these years (in my opinion, of course) in terms of its politics, growth and democratic openness was the International Socialists (IS), which later became the Socialist Workers Party (SWP), in Britain. I had joined the Socialist Labour League Young Socialists in January 1968, only to leave shortly thereafter, repelled by its terrifying authoritarianism. I joined the IS in about June of that year and at my first conference found the organisation divided into at least five (!) short-lived tendencies or factions. Despite some serious splits in the leadership in 1975–6 and 1979 (basically over coming to terms with the downturn in industrial struggle) the overall tendency was for the central committee steadily to increase its hegemony within the organisation. But there were always concerns being raised, rightly or wrongly, about the issue of internal democracy – at one point there was actually a Faction for Revolutionary Democracy (known as FRED).
The purpose of this brief and superficial survey is not to engage in retrospective “democratic” judgment (for Marx against Bakunin, with Lenin against Trotsky and Luxemburg, or 0/10 for Healy, 6/10 for Mandel, or whatever) but simply to demonstrate that the problem of inner party democracy is a recurring one and it is therefore necessary to consider its social basis.
 
The problem
For Marxists, as historical materialists, this ought to be the obvious starting point but this aspect of the problem has received relatively little attention. On the one hand, it has frequently been asserted that the leadership of small revolutionary group X do not constitute a materially privileged bureaucratic stratum – in the sense that the trade union and Labour leaders, or the Communist Party leaders in Stalinist states, clearly do – and that therefore it is unmaterialist to think there can be a serious problem over democracy in such a group. On the other hand, Trotsky provided a sociological explanation as to why “petty bourgeois elements” would be prone to make unreasonable demands for excessive democracy:
A worker spends his day at the factory. He has comparatively few hours left for the party. At the meetings he is interested in learning the most important things: the correct evaluation of the situation and the political conclusions. He values those leaders who do this in the clearest and the most precise form and who keep in step with events. Petty bourgeois, and especially declassed elements, divorced from the proletariat, vegetate in an artificial and shut-in environment. They have ample time to dabble in politics or its substitute. They pick out faults, exchange all sorts of tidbits and gossip concerning happenings among the party “tops”. They always locate a leader who initiates them into all the “secrets”. Discussion is their native element. No amount of democracy is ever enough for them. [13]
In contrast Duncan Hallas provided an illuminating account of how the degeneration of inner party democracy can result from a false perspective. He showed how the aforementioned Socialist Labour League ruined itself through its continued adherence to a perspective of imminent economic catastrophe (drawn directly from Trotsky’s 1938 writings) throughout the prolonged boom of the 1950s and 1960s:
Discussion, which is dangerous to the leadership, can be checked by hyperactivity; and this, in turn, is justified by the nearness of crash. The membership, driven at a frenzied pace, has a high casualty rate. A large proportion is always new – and therefore does not remember the non-fulfilment of past prophecies. A vicious circle is set up which makes the correction of the line more and more difficult. “Building the leadership” – which is, of course, identified with the organisation – becomes a substitute for serious political and industrial work. Serious militants are repelled and the “revolutionary youth” come to make up an ever-larger proportion of the activists. The leadership, which alone has much continuity, becomes unchallengeable and finds it less and less necessary to check its policies and practice. [14]
The tendency that manifested itself in grotesque form in the case described by Hallas could also manifest itself in more moderate forms in much saner organisations. The argument, however, can be reversed and used to defend complacency. Since the perspective is “correct” it can be said that there is no need to worry about democracy. If the function of party democracy is to achieve a correct perspective, the claimed existence of a correct perspective could either render democracy superfluous or constitute proof of its good health.
But this line of argument is flawed. The causal relation may flow, not from false perspective to lack of democracy, but from lack of democracy to false perspective. Also it is mistaken to base the case for party democracy solely on its providing the necessary inputs and checks to control the perspective. Democracy is also necessary to educate and train the members to argue for socialism in the class [15] and to retain “ownership” of the party by its members and, ultimately, the working class.
 
The challenge from Michels
A different but interesting light is thrown on this whole question by Robert Michels in his book Political Parties, first published in 1911. Michels was a pupil of Max Weber and a member of German Social Democracy prior to the First World War who, after the war, became a supporter of fascism. In Political Parties Michels propounded his so-called “iron law of oligarchy” according to which any large-scale political party or organisation will inevitably be ruled by a small self-perpetuating elite at its centre: “It is organisation that leads to the domination of the elected over the electors ... Who says organisation says oligarchy”. [16]
Hallas comments:
The equation “centralised organisation equals bureaucracy equals degeneration” ... leads to profoundly reactionary conclusions. For what is really being implied is that working people are incapable of collective democratic control of their own organisations. [This] is to argue that socialism is impossible because democracy, in the literal sense, is impossible. This is precisely the conclusion that was drawn by the “neo-Machiavellian” social theorists of the early 20th century [e.g. Michels] and which is deeply embedded in modern academic sociology. [17]
Hallas is absolutely right (and in becoming a fascist Michels was, in a sense, following his own logic) but pointing out the reactionary conclusions of an argument is not the same as refuting it, and the fact is that Michels makes a powerful case, based precisely on his knowledge of the socialist movement, particularly in Germany.
Michels argues that there exists a “mechanical and technical impossibility of direct government by the masses” and observes:
It is easier to dominate a large crowd than a small audience ... enormous public meetings commonly carry resolutions by acclamation or by general assent, whilst these same assemblies, if divided into small sections, say, of 50 persons each, would be much more guarded in their assent ... The impotence of direct democracy, like the power of indirect democracy, is a direct outcome of the influence of number ... in the great industrial centres where the labour party sometimes numbers its adherents by tens of thousands, it is impossible to carry on the affairs of this gigantic body without a system of representation. The great socialist organisation of Berlin ... has a member roll of more than 90,000. [18]
He then describes the tendency of the representatives to establish their independence from and hegemony over the represented. He notes “the establishment of a customary right to the office of delegate” and the need for leadership felt by the masses including “the cult of veneration among the masses”. [19] Michels cites especially Ferdinand Lassalle, but also Giuseppe Garibaldi, Jules Guesde and Marx; today, of course the list could be much longer and more grotesque.
Michels notes the general cultural and educational superiority of the professional leaders over the rank and file, and he comments, “No one who studies the history of the socialist movement in Germany can fail to be greatly struck by the stability of the group of persons leading the party”.  [20]
Moreover, he argues, the leaders actively strive to maintain their position:
As the chiefs become detached from the mass they show themselves more and more inclined, when gaps in their own ranks appear, to effect this not by popular election, but by co-optation, and also to increase their own effectiveness wherever possible by creating new posts upon their own initiative. There arises in leaders a tendency to isolate themselves, to form a sort of cartel, and to surround themselves, as it were, with a wall, within which they will admit those only who are of their own way of thinking. [21]
Michels analyses the role of “bourgeois elements in the socialist leadership” and “labour leaders of proletarian origin” [22], while noting the “psychological metamorphosis of the leaders”:
The average leader of the working class parties is morally not lower, but on the whole higher, in quality than the average leaders of the other parties ... Yet it cannot be denied that the permanent exercise of leadership exerts upon the moral character of the leaders an influence which is essentially pernicious. [23]
Michels also explains why neither syndicalism nor anarchism, for all their rhetoric, are able to overcome these oligarchic tendencies, citing, among others, the familiar example of Bakunin and his secret unelected dictatorship inside the First International. [24] However, underpinning all Michels’ observations, acute as many of them are, and running like a thread throughout Political Parties is what he calls “the formal and real incompetence of the mass”. [25] The “iron law of oligarchy” is, for him, an iron law because the masses are inherently incapable of running their own organisations or democratically controlling their leaders:
The incompetence of the masses is almost universal throughout the domains of political life, and this constitutes the most solid foundation of the power of leaders. The incompetence furnishes the leaders with a practical and to some extent a moral justification. [26]
And we should be clear, for Michels this incompetence is innate and general, as is the drive of leaders to dominate. It is a question of human nature. Almost certainly, we see here the influence of Friedrich Nietzsche’s “will to power”:
The apathy of the masses and their need for guidance has as its counterpart in the leaders a natural greed for power. Thus the development of the democratic oligarchy is accelerated by the general characteristics of human nature ... The desire to dominate for good or evil, is universal ... every human power seeks to enlarge its prerogatives. [27]
 
The Marxist response
This, of course, is where a Marxist response to, and critique of, Michels must begin. The various facts, tendencies and patterns of behaviour observed by Michels are not universal or general characteristics of human nature but products of class society in general and capitalist society in particular. And it is precisely on this point that the Bolshevik Nikolai Bukharin took issue with him:
What constitutes an eternal category in Michels’ presentation, namely, the “incompetence of the masses”, will disappear, for this incompetence is by no means a necessary attribute of every system; it likewise is a product of the economic and technical conditions, expressing themselves in the general cultural being and in the educational conditions. We may state that in the society of the future there will be a colossal overproduction of organisers, which will nullify the stability of the ruling groups. [28]
But here Bukharin is treating Michels’ book, which he describes as “very interesting”, primarily as an objection to the possibility of a future classless society. However, in relation to the transition to full socialism Bukharin accepts that Michels points to real problems, though he remains confident they can be overcome.
But the question of the transition period from capitalism to socialism, ie the period of the proletarian dictatorship, is far more difficult. The working class achieves victory, although it is not and cannot be a unified mass. It attains victory while the productive forces are going down and the great masses are materially insecure. There will inevitably result a tendency to “degeneration”, ie the excretion of a leading stratum in the form of a class-germ. This tendency will be retarded by two opposing tendencies: first, by the growth of the productive forces; second, by the abolition of the educational monopoly. The increasing production of technologists and of organisers in general, out of the working class itself, will undermine this possible new class alignment. The outcome of the struggle will depend on which tendencies turn out to be the stronger. [29]
Clearly, writing in 1921, the question of the transition to socialism was uppermost in Bukharin’s mind, but for our purposes he is not addressing the key point. To argue that the oligarchic pressures derive from capitalism, not human nature, and will therefore be overcome post-capitalism, in the transition to socialism, is all well and good, but the revolutionary socialist party has to be built under capitalism.
Of course, it would be possible to claim that Michels’ analysis was based on the parties of the Second International – mass reformist parties built in a period of relative social peace in which a bureaucratic hierarchy of paid officials developed. In that case it would be of no relevance to small revolutionary groups, where no substantial materially privileged bureaucracy exists. However, although the anti-democratic pressures are less powerful in small revolutionary groups than in mass reformist parties, they still exist. The workers who join such groups are still products of the profoundly anti-democratic socialisation received in capitalist society, which is reinforced by every defeat we suffer at the hands of the bosses or the government.
The pressures generated by bourgeois society are also a factor in the cult-like features exhibited by some small groups. In order to maintain the loyalty and discipline of a tiny number of adherents in more or less total opposition to wider society they develop the sort of characteristics typical of small religious sects such as the veneration of “the leader” and the establishment of shibboleths. A shibboleth was originally a code word or phrase whose use distinguished the member of a group from an enemy or spy. In our context a shibboleth is a belief or doctrine whose principal function is to separate the true believer from the common herd and reinforce their loyalty. This is, for example, the function of the ban on blood transfusions for Jehovah’s Witnesses or support for Israel for the Alliance for Workers’ Liberty. With the Socialist Labour League it was the perennial call for a general strike. These sect practices are highly anti-democratic because they strongly inhibit free and rational debate of policies and perspectives.
The adoption of a false perspective, especially an exaggerated ultra-left perspective, greatly intensifies the need for a leadership cult and shibboleths, but this does not make the false perspective the sole source of undemocratic tendencies. Rather we need to understand that the social origin of real democracy in the socialist movement is the struggle of the working class. Party democracy is likely to suffer in so far as the party is cut off from that source – whether because it has set itself above the class (labour and trade union bureaucrats), because it has been driven to the margins of the class (Trotskyism in the 1930s), because it has cut itself off from the class or because the level of class struggle is low.
When I first considered the challenge posed by Michels (while researching for Marxism and the Party in the early 1970s) I concluded that, while the iron law of oligarchy was generally valid for social democratic type parties, trade unions and similar organisations, it did not apply to Bolshevik-type parties. This was because central to the Bolshevik model was the restriction of party membership to (a) those who placed the overall interests of the working class above any sectional interest (ie were internationalist, anti-racist, anti-sexist and non-sectionalist), (b) militant activists working under the discipline of party organisations. Such a membership, though necessarily a minority of the class, would not be “incompetent” and would be able to democratically control its leadership. This seemed to me sound in theory and confirmed in practice by the example of the Bolshevik Party, which was highly democratic, especially in 1917.
In making this judgement I was much influenced by Tony Cliff who argued that the trade union bureaucracy, with its conservative and undemocratic practices, rested on the passive majority of the union membership as opposed to the active minority. Chris Harman also argued in his 1969 article Party and Class that there was a fundamental difference between the Leninist and social democratic models of organisation. And, he argued:
Within Lenin’s conception those elements that he himself is careful to regard as historically limited and those of general application must be distinguished. The former concern the stress on closed conspiratorial organisations and the need for careful direction from the top down of party officials, etc: “Under conditions of political freedom our party will be built entirely on the elective principle. Under the autocracy this is impracticable for the collective thousands of workers that make up the party.”
Of much more general application is the stress on the need to limit the party to those who are going to accept its discipline. It is important to stress that for Lenin (as opposed to many of his would-be followers) this is not a blind acceptance of authoritarianism. The revolutionary party exists so as to make it possible for the most conscious and militant workers and intellectuals to engage in scientific discussion as a prelude to concerted and cohesive action. This is not possible without general participation in party activities ...
Centralism for Lenin is far from being the opposite of developing the initiative and independence of party members; it is the precondition of this ... “Discipline” means acceptance of the need to relate individual experience to the total theory and practice of the party. As such it is not opposed to, but a necessary prerequisite of the ability to make independent evaluations of concrete situations. That is also why “discipline” for Lenin does not mean hiding differences that exist within the party, but rather exposing them to the full light of day so as to argue them out. [30]
At that time Harman’s perspective, and mine, was to build Leninist parties of this kind in Britain and internationally, in the belief that the objective conditions had developed which made this possible. Unfortunately experience, nearly 40 years of it, has shown this to be a rather complicated business, and this in turn has implications for the question of party democracy. Between Bolshevism’s birth as a faction of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party in 1903 and its conquest of power as a mass party in October 1917 lay only 14 years. Those years included a revolution in 1905, a catastrophic world war and the revolutionary overthrow of Tsarism in February 1917. In contrast the IS/SWP tradition has endured almost 60 years, 40 since our emergence as a mini-party in 1968, without any comparable experiences. In Russia the period of reaction (which was intense and nearly destroyed the Bolsheviks) began in 1907 and lasted five years before being swept aside by mass strikes from 1912. In Britain class struggle entered a downturn in the mid to late 1970s and, with some fluctuations and partial recovery, has remained at a low level to this day. Moreover, while the level of struggle has generally been low, there has not been any sustained or generalised repression. And, of course, similar conditions have applied for all left organisations in Western Europe and North America over this period.
Lenin devotes the early chapters of Left Wing Communism – An Infantile Disorder to expounding the relationship between Russian conditions and experience and Bolshevik organisational principles (Lenin focuses on “discipline” but, as we have seen, discipline and democracy are intimately connected):
As a current of political thought and as a political party, Bolshevism has existed since 1903. Only the history of Bolshevism during the entire period of its existence can satisfactorily explain why it has been able to build up and maintain, under most difficult conditions, the iron discipline needed for the victory of the proletariat ... Bolshevism ... went through 15 years of practical history (1903–17) unequalled anywhere in the world in its wealth of experience. During those 15 years, no other country knew anything even approximating to that revolutionary experience, that rapid and varied succession of different forms of the movement – legal and illegal, peaceful and stormy, underground and open, local circles and mass movements, and parliamentary and terrorist forms. [31]
And Georg Lukács comments:
The Bolshevik concept of party organisation involved the selection of a group of single-minded revolutionaries, prepared to make any sacrifice, from the more or less chaotic mass of the class as a whole ... Lenin’s concept of party organisation presupposes the fact – the actuality – of the revolution ... Had the historical predictions of the Mensheviks been correct, had a relatively quiet period of prosperity and of the slow spread of democracy ensued, in which – at least in backward countries – the feudal vestiges of “the people” had been swept aside by the “progressive” classes, the professional revolutionaries would have necessarily remained stranded in sectarianism or become mere propaganda clubs. The party, as the strictly centralised organisation of the proletariat’s most conscious elements – and only as such – is conceived as an instrument of class struggle in a revolutionary period. “Political questions cannot be mechanically separated from organisation questions,” said Lenin, “and anybody who accepts or rejects the Bolshevik party organisation independently of whether or not we live at a time of proletarian revolution has completely misunderstood it”. [32]
Unfortunately the times we have lived through have not, a few exceptional moments apart, been a revolutionary period and the revolution has been “actual” only in the most abstract sense. It has therefore not been possible to restrict party membership to “a group of single-minded revolutionaries, prepared to make any sacrifice”, or even to people prepared to be consistently active in party organisations. When Harman wrote, “The party is not to be made up of just anybody who wishes to identify himself as belonging to it, but only those willing to accept the discipline of its organisations. In normal times the numbers of these will be only a relatively small percentage of the working class; but in periods of upsurge they will grow immeasurably”, [33] he and the rest of us envisaged a party of many thousands, perhaps tens of thousands, growing in time of revolution to hundreds of thousands (the Bolsheviks were about 26,000-strong in February 1917 and between 200,000 and 400,000 by October), not a group of tens or a few hundred. To have restricted the membership of the SWP to the criteria of commitment required by the Bolsheviks would, in our non-Bolshevik conditions, have reduced the party to the low hundreds at best and would anyway have been false “toy bolshevism”, since such fanatical “revolutionaries” would have lost the other key pillar of Leninism: the ability to “maintain the closest contact, and – if you wish – merge, in certain measure, with the broadest masses of the working people”. [34] Consequently circumstances obliged us to operate with a substantial proportion of members who were not sufficiently engaged to exercise democratic control over the party.
The question of repression and illegality plays an interesting and contradictory role here. On the one hand, conditions of illegality create huge obstacles to the proper formal functioning of party democracy, to the convening of regular meetings and conferences, to the holding of regular elections, to the provision of accurate party statistics and so on. Moreover, illegality may strengthen the claims of discipline over democracy, insofar as sometimes they can conflict. On the other hand, repression resolves the problem of an engaged membership: if the penalty for party membership is possible exile to Siberia, or imprisonment, torture and death, the passive armchair member is taken care of and members have a massive, perhaps life or death, stake in the determination of party policy. Of course, this in itself offers no guarantee of democracy, as the example of many Stalinist parties shows, but it does help with one aspect of the problem.
Another factor that has to be considered here is the long timescale involved. Gramsci commented in his Prison Notebooks that a prolonged siege is always debilitating, and many people capable of intense resistance and extreme sacrifice for a short time are unable to sustain the same commitment over a long period. To this must be added the crucial role played by the level of the class struggle. A major element in Michels’ “incompetence of the masses” is not lack of technical competence but lack of confidence, which the capitalist socialisation process breeds in working class children as surely as it breeds confidence in the children of the bourgeoisie. The principal antidote to this lack of confidence, and therefore vital for internal party democracy, is the experience of collective resistance and struggle, of organising and leading strikes, picket lines, occupations, demonstrations, workplace branches and the like (in the case of students, speaking at mass union meetings, leading college occupations, etc.). Not only does participation in such activity raise members’ confidence as individuals but it also means that when they take up an issue inside the party they often do as a representative of a collective in their workplace or college. In conditions of downturn, when party members’ typical experience at work is of defeat or isolation, their confidence to challenge the party’s leadership is undermined. Even if they remain active revolutionary socialists, the feeling may develop that in addition to fighting the bosses, the government, the system, the media and probably their own union leaders, all as a small minority, arguing in their own party is just too much.
In these conditions the counterpart to a passive rank and file, a leadership that becomes accustomed to leading unchallenged, is virtually certain to develop or at least begin to develop.
Having so strongly stressed the anti-democratic pressures at work on and in any would-be revolutionary party, it is necessary also to note that there is a major countervailing tendency. In opposition to Michels’ “iron law of oligarchy” there exists, in any party or organisation whose leadership does not wield the combined sticks and carrots of state power, an almost universal “law of democracy”. In any voluntary organisation where membership does not itself confer material privilege (even the British Tory party or the Nazi BNP) there is an element of democracy in that the leadership requires the consent of the rank and file in the form of its continuing membership and support. So even right wing union leaders, such as Joe Gormley of the National Union of Mineworkers in 1972–4 or Derek Simpson of Unite today, are obliged to defend their members’ interests and respond to their demands to some degree, on pain of losing members (and with them the dues that pay the leaders’ salaries).
This democratic pressure from below is all the stronger in a small far-left socialist party, even if it remains overtly passive, because (a) the leaders are plainly not motivated by desire for material privilege, there being none on offer (though sometimes the desire to maintain material security may be a factor); (b) the rank and file are motivated overwhelmingly by conviction; and it is not difficult for them to vote with their feet and leave. To give an example from the organisation I know best, namely the SWP, it is well known that the party’s leadership remained pretty stable through the 1990s and early part of this decade, and was seldom subject to serious challenge. But this was on condition that it ran the party within the narrowly prescribed limits of Trotskyist revolutionary socialism. If the SWP leadership had, as opposed to making strategic or tactical errors, ever clearly crossed class lines or contravened basic socialist principles or made moves to renounce Marxism, there would undoubtedly have been an outcry and, if the outcry was not rapidly successful, a mass exodus. This is not to suggest that the SWP leadership ever wanted to do any of these things. I know of no evidence of this whatsoever. Nevertheless, the objective pressure was there and it was a democratic pressure – a pressure to lead the organisation in conformity with the wishes of its members. Moreover it is clear that in general this inherent democratic pressure will, given favourable conditions, be capable of considerable expansion.
 
Some conclusions
What conclusions follow from this analysis? First and foremost that the case for party democracy made by all the classical Marxists and cited at the start of this article retains all its validity, but it must be understood that the achievement of this democracy in a capitalist society is far from easy.
From a Marxist perspective it is possible not only to integrate the anti-democratic pressures cited by Michels but also to elaborate on them. Capitalist socialisation, through the family and school, instills obedience and subservience in working class children, practically from birth. A “good” baby is one who sleeps and feeds to order; a “good” child is “no trouble” and does what its parents tell it. A successful pupil is one who accepts the agenda of the school and its teachers. [35] A “deviant” teenager has “a problem with authority”. Ruling class children are likewise trained to obey the rules but, especially via the public schools, their education also contains a significant stress on developing leadership qualities.
The world of work is invariably hierarchical and undemocratic. Working class occupations consist overwhelmingly of following orders, ruling class ones of giving them and middle class ones of enforcing decisions from above on those below. What is completely lacking from most people’s lives is any experience of democracy other than the extremely limited business of voting every so often in parliamentary or local elections. By far the most important exception is trade unionism, which does provide some working people with the experience of saying “no” to those in authority over them, but, as we know only too well, this is a highly uneven and fluctuating process and offers an ongoing regular democratic engagement to only a minority.
The act of joining a revolutionary organisation constitutes a major rebellion against society’s conditioning but it does not eliminate it. The anti-democratic pressures continue to operate on and within the party. This is why party democracy is not something that can be guaranteed by any constitution or set of institutional arrangements (which is not to gainsay the necessity of democratic constitutions and institutional arrangements) but also requires the development and maintenance of a democratic culture based on frank and open debate in which party members are encouraged to speak their mind. Such a culture has to be embodied in institutions and practices, of course, the most important and permanent of which is the principle of the party conference or congress as the party’s sovereign body. But the precise nature of these institutions and practices must necessarily be adapted to specific circumstances and change over time.
Nor is party democracy a political or moral norm that can be established simply by the will or good behaviour of its leaders (or members). For every would-be revolutionary party internal democracy is a goal, a relationship between members and leaders, that has to be continually striven for in the same sense that the correct relationship of party to class has to be continually striven for – indeed the two relationships are intimately connected. Deficiencies in democracy, like errors in perspective and tactics, are inevitable, but not reasons for despair. The point is to correct them.
In this ongoing struggle there are no grounds whatsoever for renouncing either the Leninist concept of the vanguard party or democratic centralism. On the contrary, the Leninist democratic centralist party is both necessary for the success of the revolution and the most democratic form of political organisation.
The case for the Leninist party rests on arguments in no way limited in their validity to Russia or to the historical period of the Russian Revolution. Rather these arguments refer to features of capitalist society and the working class struggle which are pretty much universal and permanent: (a) the centralised nature of the capitalist class and its state which demands centralisation on the part of its adversary; (b) the bourgeoisie’s ideological hegemony which requires the waging of an ideological struggle in society and within the working class, a struggle that can only be conducted by a party based on ideological and political clarity; (c) the unevenness in the levels of working class consciousness, confidence, organisation and struggle which require the welding together of the most advanced elements in the class to defeat the reactionary, scab elements and increase their influence over the vacillating majority; (d) the existence, on the basis of this unevenness, of mass reformist (or Stalinist or nationalist) parties which will hold back or betray the revolution, and which must be combated by a revolutionary party which retains its political and organisational independence. Moreover, these theoretical arguments, powerful in themselves, have been confirmed in practice positively, by the role of the Bolshevik Party in the victory of the Russian Revolution and, negatively, by the defeats in Italy, Germany, Spain and elsewhere precisely for the want of such a party.
As far as democracy is concerned, all other forms of political organisation – the social democratic party, the trade union, the “loose” anarchist or autonomist federation or clique, the single-issue campaign – are subject to exactly the same anti-democratic “oligarchic” pressures from capitalist society without the same resources to resist them. No other form of organisation compares with the Leninist party in terms of its ability to equip its members with the political education that enables them to assess the overall political situation and their own party’s work. No other form of organisation practises a comparable level of intervention in such a variety of issues, campaigns and struggles, thus potentially training its members as political generalists able to hold its leaders to account. I do not doubt that SWP branches have many defects but one would only have to compare the topics discussed at a typical SWP weekly branch meeting with those at an average Labour Party ward (do they still meet?) to get the point. At the former you might get the economic crisis one week, Palestine the next, followed by fascism and the BNP the week after; at the latter it would be more likely to be the jumble sale, the local pavements and who contests which seat in the local elections, if that.
Furthermore the element of party discipline inherent in democratic centralism – the notion of unity in action in implementing party policy – far from undermining or infringing democracy, is an essential democratic provision. Without it the party could engage in the most democratic process of debate and decision making only to see those decisions come to nothing when they were ignored or flouted by the party leadership, as was routinely the case with old Labour. This element in a revolutionary party is particularly important at decisive moments in the class struggle, especially that of insurrection, when the political and psychological pressures on party leaders are most intense. [36]
If the case for the Leninist party remains compelling, it would, however, be wrong to identify Leninism with one narrowly defined organisational model or set of practices. Lenin himself, in his last speech to the Comintern in 1922, while insisting on the international importance of the Bolshevik experience, warned against the mechanical imitation of Russian organisational methods. [37] For example, on the question of factions there have been at least two views taken in recent years by avowed Leninist Parties – namely the British SWP and the French Ligue Communiste Révolutionnaire (LCR). Both would accept Trotsky’s statement, quoted earlier, that “the present doctrine that Bolshevism does not tolerate factions is a myth of the epoch of decline”.
But whereas the SWP has permitted only temporary factional organisation, partly to try to avoid the ingrained tendency of Trotskyist groups to split, the LCR has taken the opposite view and sought to maintain unity by allowing permanent tendencies to coexist in the party. I have alluded above to the fact that this policy did not work well for the LCR’s co-thinkers in Britain, the IMG, but the LCR, with their recent electoral success and launch of the New Anticapitalist Party, have fared much better. One important objection to their model is that it might lead to paralysis of the party leadership in crucial situations where speedy and decisive action is required. Nevertheless this is a debate which can be had between Leninists and which depends on concrete circumstances.
This last proviso applies to much of this debate. The principle of the need to struggle to realise and improve democracy in the revolutionary party is permanent but the precise means of achieving it vary over time. In general what is needed is, in Gramsci’s words, organic centralism, not bureaucratic centralism: “democratic centralism that is ‘centralism’ in movement, so to speak, that is, a continuous adjustment of the organisation to the real movement”. [38] This means working, at each stage in the class struggle, to establish a political culture and set of political practices that facilitate democratic debate and decision making, and develop the political knowledge and confidence of the rank and file.
This is a problem that has to be solved and re-solved not on paper but in practice – and it will never be fully resolved this side of the overthrow of capitalism. Nevertheless a clear statement of the problem and an awareness of the challenge involved may help. That has been the aim of this article.
* * *
Notes
1. Gramsci, 1970, pp. 143–144.
2. Engels, 1970, p. 195.
3. Engels, 1970, p. 196.
4. Lenin, 1965a, pp. 230–231.
5. Trotsky, 1936, chapter five.
6. Hallas, 1971.
7. Clearly I am here taking for granted the analysis of the Stalinist states and the Comintern by Trotskyists and, later, Tony Cliff in his theory of state capitalism.
8. The best analysis of how such parties work is provided by Cliff and Gluckstein, 1988.
9. See Molyneux, 1978, p. 28.
10. Trotsky, 1979, p. 77.
11. Luxemburg, cited in Molyneux, 1978, pp. 98–99.
12. For Trotsky’s side of this dispute see Trotsky, 1975. For Cannon’s see Cannon, 2001. Commentators from this journal’s tradition have tended to side with Trotsky and Cannon, but to have some sympathy with the opposition on the “regime” question – see Cliff, 1993; Bambery, 1987.
13. Trotsky, 1975.
14. Hallas, 1969.
15. This point was powerfully made by Isaac Deutscher: “When the European Communist went out to argue his case before a working class audience, he usually met there a social democratic opponent whose arguments he had to refute ... Most frequently he was unable to do this, because he lacked the habits of political debate, which were not cultivated within the party, and because his schooling deprived him of the ability to preach to the unconverted” – cited in Hallas, 1971, p. 21.
16. Michels, 1968, p. 15.
17. Hallas, 1971.
18. Michels, 1968, pp. 63–65.
19. Michels, 1968, pp. 81, 93.
20. Michels, 1968, pp. 107, 117.
21. Michels, 1968, p. 126.
22. Michels, 1968, pp. 238, 277.
23. Michels, 1968, p. 205.
24. Michels, 1968, p. 327.
25. Michels, 1968, p. 107.
26. Michels, 1968, p. 111.
27. Michels, 1968, pp. 205–206.
28. Bukharin, 1925, chapter 8. As far as I know Bukharin is the only major Marxist to have attempted a rebuttal of Michels, though there is also a brief response in Sidney Hook, 1933, p. 312.
29. Bukharin, 1925, chapter 8.
30. Harman, 1971, pp. 59–61.
31. Lenin, 1964, chapter 2.
32. Lukács, 1970, chapter 3.
33. Harman, 1971.
34. Lenin, 1964, chapter 2.
35. Willis, 1977; Bowles and Gintis, 1976.
36. Trotsky, 1937, for an analysis of how such pressures affected even the Bolshevik leadership in October 1917. This work was also an oblique commentary on the failure of the German party to seize the revolutionary opportunity in autumn 1923.
37. Lenin, 1965b, p. 430.
38. Gramsci, 1970, p. 178.
* * *
References
Bambery, Chris, 1987, The Politics of James P. Cannon, International Socialism 36 (autumn 1987).
Bowles, Samuel, and Herbert Gintis, 1976, Schooling in Capitalist America (Routledge).
Bukharin, Nikolai, 1925 [1921], Historical Materialism: A System of Sociology (International Publishers), www.marxists.org/archive/bukharin/works/1921/histmat/.
Cannon, James P., 2001 [1940], The Struggle for a Proletarian Party (Pathfinder), www.marxists.org/archive/cannon/works/1940/party/.
Cliff, Tony, 1993, Trotsky: volume four – The Darker the Night the Brighter the Star (Bookmarks), www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1993/trotsky4/.
Cliff, Tony, and Donny Gluckstein, 1988, The Labour Party: A Marxist History (Bookmarks).
Engels, Frederick, 1970 [1847], On the History of the Communist League, in Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works, volume three (Progress), www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1847/communist-league/1885hist.htm.
Gramsci, Antonio, 1970, The Modern Prince and Other Writings (International Publishers).
Hallas, Duncan, 1969, Building the Leadership, International Socialism 40, first series (October–November 1969), www.marxists.org/archive/hallas/works/1969/xx/building.htm.
Hallas, Duncan, 1971, Towards a Revolutionary Socialist Party, in Tony Cliff and others, Party And Class (Pluto), www.marxists.org/archive/hallas/works/1971/xx/party.htm.
Harman, Chris, 1971, Party and Class, in Tony Cliff and others, Party and Class (Pluto), www.marxists.de/party/harman/partyclass.htm.
Hook, Sidney, 1933, Towards the Understanding of Karl Marx (John Day).
Lenin, Vladimir, 1964 [1920], Left Wing Communism – An Infantile Disorder, Collected Works, volume 31 (Progress), www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1920/lwc/.
Lenin, Vladimir, 1965a [1906], Party Discipline and the Fight Against the Pro-Cadet Social Democrats, Collected Works, volume 11 (Progress), www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1906/nov/23d.htm.
Lenin, Vladimir, 1965b [1922], Five Years of the Russian Revolution, Collected Works, volume 33 (Progress), www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1922/nov/04b.htm.
Lukács, Georg, 1970 [1924], Lenin: A Study of the Unity of his Thought (New Left Books), www.marxists.org/archive/lukacs/works/1924/lenin/.
Michels, Robert, 1968 [1911], Political Parties (Free Press). An alternative version of the book is available online: http://socserv2.socsci.mcmaster.ca/~econ/ugcm/3ll3/michels/polipart.pdf.
Molyneux, John, 1978, Marxism and the Party (Pluto).
Trotsky, Leon, 1936, The Revolution Betrayed, www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/1936/revbet/.
Trotsky, Leon, 1937 [1924], Lessons of October (Pioneer), www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/1924/lessons/.
Trotsky, Leon, 1975 [1942], In Defence of Marxism (New Park), www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/idom/dm/.
Trotsky, Leon, 1979 [1904], Our Political Tasks (New Park), www.marxists.org/archive/trotsky/1904/tasks/.
Willis, Paul, 1977, Learning to Labour (Ashgate).
 

n Molyneux: The Future Socialist Society (6. The transformation of work)



John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Future Socialist Society

John Molyneux
The Future Socialist Society

6. The transformation of work

Work is central to human life, to the life of the individual and the life of society. It was through work, through productive labour, that the human species first differentiated itself from other animals. It is the experience of work that is the main factor in shaping the personality of each individual. The way in which a society works to produce goods is the foundation of all its social and political relations.
Yet under capitalism work is overwhelmingly a negative experience for the vast majority of people – that is for the working class. It is destructive of health and destructive of spirit. Work is fragmented to the point where people are required to specialise all their lives in the endless repetition of narrow mechanical tasks. It is exhausting, humiliating and, above all, boring. It produces luxury, leisure and culture for the capitalists, but stunted personalities and stunted lives for workers.
The transformation of work is therefore a central task of the socialist revolution. In the long run it is the most important task of all.
The first steps of the revolution – the nationalisation of industry under workers’ control – will lay the basis for this transformation by ending the exploitation and the pursuit of profits that make work the way it is at present. From the start, the experience of work will be changed by workers’ control.
It will put a stop to the daily humiliations that workers suffer at the hands of bosses, managers and supervisors of all kinds. It will make safety at work the first, rather than last, priority, and add enormously to the interest of the job.
But at the outset the actual labour performed – the minding of machines, the digging of coal, the typing of letters, etc. – will, of necessity, be roughly as it is under capitalism. As the productive forces develop, however, all this will change completely – a change which will involve three interlinked processes.
Firstly, the working week will be systematically reduced. Under capitalism advances in technology are used to displace workers. We see the combination of millions of workers on overtime and millions on the dole. With socialist planning, the total work required will be shared equally and every technological advance will lessen the amount of physical work that is needed.
This is crucial – not only because it will reduce physical hardship, but also because it will free workers to develop educationally and culturally and to take an active part in the general running of society in all its aspects.
Secondly, automation will be used to eliminate the most unpleasant and menial jobs. Given that under capitalism it is already possible to put rockets on the moon or Mars, it takes little imagination to see how refuse disposal, street and office cleaning, much of housework, mining and production line work could be automated.
Thirdly, the division of labour will be progressively overcome. The division of labour has two main aspects. On the one hand, there is the all pervasive division between mental and manual labour – between planners and planned, controllers and controlled – which arose with, and coincides with, the division of society into classes of exploiters and exploited. On the other hand, there is the breaking up of the productive process into smaller and smaller tasks totally lacking in skill, interest, or creativity, which is particularly the product of capitalist industrialisation.
It is the combination of the factors outlined above – workers’ control, reduced compulsory labour time, and automation – that will eradicate both aspects of the division of labour.
Everyone will become both a producer and a planner of production. Everyone will have the time, the energy and the education to participate in the collective shaping of the environment – work which will require the fusion of artistic, scientific, technical and social knowledge, and which will be a collective, creative process.
In these conditions work will become – in Marx’s words – ‘not only a means of life, but life’s prime want’. It will cease to be a wearisome necessity and become a positive pleasure – a means of individual and collective human expression.
Human beings are not naturally lazy. Observe the closest we can get to that mythical being, a ‘natural’ person – a baby or young child – and you will see they overflow with curiosity, energy and enthusiasm for learning, for activity and for life. It is capitalism, oppression and alienated labour that wear people down, demoralise and break them, destroy their energy and convince them that life is best spent with their feet up in front of the television.
Look at the immense effort many working class people put into their hobbies, or into the labour and trade union movement. It is not difficult to see how – when work is for themselves and not for a class of exploiters, and when it is varied and interesting – the time will come when no physical or direct economic compulsion will be necessary to ensure that socially necessary labour is performed.
Socialism will bring together, in its higher stages, the habit of performing stimulating and creative work, the planning of production to meet human need, the development of science and technology, and the free distribution of an abundant supply of goods.
Once it does, there will be no obstacle to society inscribing on its banners the ultimate socialist principle: ‘From each according to their ability, to each according to their needs.’
 

n Molyneux: The Future Socialist Society (4. Spreading the revolution: the international dimension)



John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Future Socialist Society

John Molyneux
The Future Socialist Society

4. Spreading the revolution: the international dimension

It would be enormously to the advantage of socialism and the working class for the socialist revolution to occur more or less simultaneously in a number of countries. Nevertheless so far in this pamphlet I have assumed a revolution occurring first of all only in one country.
This is realistic. The experience of revolutions up to the present suggests that, despite the drawing together of all nations in the modern world, the differences in the national patterns of class struggle are such that the revolutionary breakthrough will probably at first be confined to a single country.
This being the case, the spreading of the revolution beyond these boundaries will be a task of paramount importance for the young workers’ state. This task is not just a matter of internationalist duty, but also absolutely vital for the self preservation of the revolution.
Socialism cannot be built in one country. Indeed a workers’ state cannot survive indefinitely in one country. Of course, it is possible to hold out for a period against the weight of international capitalism, just as workers can maintain a factory occupation or an uprising in an individual city for a time. But sooner or later, unless the revolution spreads, it will go down to defeat. Either world capitalism, which as long as it exists remains stronger than the isolated workers’ state, will crush the revolution by military intervention, or the threat of such intervention, combined with intense economic pressure, will eventually oblige the revolutionary state to compete with capitalism on capitalism’s terms. This will mean a competitive struggle to accumulate capital.
If the latter variant occurs, as it did in Russia at the end of the 1920s, then a new exploitative class will emerge as the agency of capital accumulation, and capitalism will be restored by internal counter-revolution.
Overthrowing the whole of capitalism, however, may seem a daunting task. So the question we must ask is whether it is possible.
In this, as in all other areas of the class struggle, it is naturally impossible to give any guarantees. But there are a number of factors which permit us to say confidently that it can be done.
The international nature of the capitalist economy makes its crises international too. So the crisis lying behind the revolution in one country will already be affecting other countries. The first revolutionary breakthrough, provided it is in one of the larger economies, will greatly deepen this crisis.
A socialist revolution in South Africa, for example, will not only have a devastating effect on world gold and diamond markets but also completely transform the situation throughout southern Africa. All the economic power that has been used to keep the working class in South Africa, Zimbabwe, Mozambique and Botswana in subjection will become a factor for revolutionary progress. A Brazilian revolution would have a similar effect on the whole of Latin America.
The political impact of the revolution will be even more important-as shown by the shock waves that circled the world after 1917, sparking strikes and uprisings as far apart as Glasgow and Seattle. The very existence of an example of real workers’ power and workers’ democracy will cause an ideological crisis in the ruling classes both East and West. In the West it will dramatically challenge our rulers’ all too successful identification of socialism with tyranny, and in the East it will fatally undermine the belief that the former Stalinist bureaucracies represented genuine socialism.
At the same time the revolution will give inspiration to workers’ movements everywhere. It will show that the working class can take power into its own hands and thus make the case for revolutionary socialism infinitely easier to argue. Also many of the divisions and splits in the ranks of the socialist and revolutionary movement will be healed, because there will be concrete proof of the strategy and tactics necessary to achieve victory.
All of this will be greatly aided by modern communications. After the Russian Revolution (the last time there was a real chance of international revolution) it was months before even the most involved revolutionaries in other countries had a clear picture of what had happened. After a future revolution the reality of workers’ power will be flashed around the world on television screens.
But of course the victorious revolution will not just sit back and wait for all this to happen. It will bend every effort to speed the process.
This is not a matter of trying to impose revolution by invading other countries (though the new workers’ state will certainly be prepared to give military assistance to other revolutionary struggles). It means that the workers’ state will use its authority to appeal to workers worldwide to overthrow their own rulers. It means organising a revolutionary movement internationally.
The new workers’ state will form – if one does not exist already – a workers’ international to build, coordinate and unite revolutionary workers’ parties in every country.
Moreover, once workers’ power spreads to several countries all the factors outlined above will be greatly magnified. An irresistible momentum will build up. In the 1960s the strategists of US imperialism feared the ‘domino’ effect of Vietnam and other national liberation struggles. The domino effect of workers’ revolutions, with an internationalist outlook, will be far, far greater.
At this point let us make a leap and assume the victory of the socialist revolution worldwide. It is a huge assumption – but not, as I have tried to show, a utopian one. It is worth considering some of its implications.
It will mean that the threat of capitalist counter-revolution will be ended once and for all and that the threat of nuclear annihilation is lifted from the human race.
It will mean that national wars, which have claimed well over 100 million lives this century, will cease.
It will mean that the problems of world poverty and underdevelopment can be tackled and overcome in a coordinated way, that people will move freely over the face of the globe and that the roots of racism will be destroyed.
It will mean that international socialism, the harnessing of all the world’s resources for the benefit of united humanity, will become a reality.
 

n Molyneux: The Future Socialist Society (10. From necessity to freedom)



John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Future Socialist Society

John Molyneux
The Future Socialist Society

10. From necessity to freedom

The ultimate goal of Marxism, of socialism, and of the struggle of the working class is freedom. The bourgeoisie are, of course, keen to proclaim their commitment to freedom: freedom of speech, of the press, of the individual to do what they please with their money and so on. They know full well that as long as they control the means of production and therefore the wealth, the media, and the state, these freedoms remain enormously restricted and almost meaningless for the vast majority. They know also that they have the power to limit or indeed trample on such freedoms whenever they find it necessary.
In contrast Marxists recognise that in a society divided into antagonistic classes, founded on exploitation and ruled by capital, there are and can be no ‘absolute’ freedoms. We expose the sham abstract freedom offered by the bourgeoisie because what we want is real concrete freedom.
Freedom from hunger and poverty (without which all other freedoms mean nothing), freedom from war, from endless toil, from exploitation, from racial and sexual oppressions – these are the real freedoms we fight for. They can be made a reality only by establishing the positive freedom of the working class to run society.
However, in the course of achieving this the working class also paves the way for a freedom of which the bourgeoisie has never dreamt, namely freedom to live without the supervision of the state.
It is commonly alleged that Marxists believe in the state. The opposite is the case. We are opponents of the state.
The state by its very nature is an instrument of domination and oppression – a means by which one section of the population forcibly holds down another. States cannot be other than institutions of violence. Essentially, as Engels put it, they consist of ‘bodies of armed men’. People bear arms either to kill other people or to force them to do things against their will, that is to deprive them of their freedom.
All this applies to the new workers’ state emerging out of the successful revolution just as it does to the capitalist state. There is a difference of course. The capitalist state is an instrument for maintaining the exploitation of the many by the few. The workers’ state will be an instrument of the majority for suppressing the minority of exploiters.
Nevertheless, even at its most democratic the workers’ state remains an institution which limits human freedom in various ways. Indeed, even though the workers’ state represents and involves the majority of the working class, it not only suppresses the old ruling class but also places certain restrictions on the freedom of the working class itself.
The workers’ state is a weapon of class war and waging war means not only attacking the enemy but disciplining your own forces, just as a picket line is a weapon of struggle against the employers which operates by disciplining backward workers.
This is why there can be no talk of complete freedom – of freedom for all – until even the workers’ state has been dismantled. And this has always been the ultimate objective of Marxists, repeatedly reaffirmed by Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky.
However, there is no Marxist proposition that has been so consistently dismissed as utopian as that of the withering away of the state. So let us examine the arguments.
First let us be clear that Marxists do not suggest that the state can be dispensed with immediately (that is the anarchist view), but only on the basis of certain preconditions. These have been dealt with earlier in this pamphlet: the international victory of the socialist revolution and the total defeat of the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie; the abolition of the root of all exploitation and class divisions; the achievement of material abundance in which goods are distributed according to need.
In these circumstances the state will have lost its essential functions. There will be no oppressor class to defend and no oppressed class to hold down. Nor with world socialism will there be national (or imperialist) interests to assert or foreign interests to combat.
What about crime and managing the economy, the sceptic will ask.
In a fully socialist society crime will, to all intents and purposes, disappear, not because under socialism everyone will become ‘good’ or morally perfect, but because the motives and opportunity for crime will be removed.
Let us illustrate the general case with the example of one of the most common forms of crime, car theft. An advanced socialist society will probably resolve the problem of transport in one of two ways. Either every individual will be supplied with adequate and equal means of transport, or public transport will be raised to the level where personal transport is unnecessary. In either case the market for stolen cars and the motive for stealing them will both have gone, and what applies to cars will eventually apply to all goods.
This leaves the question of crimes against the person – assaults, murders, sexual crimes and such like. These are already a small proportion of crime and a non-competitive socialist society which cares equally for all its members will undoubtedly reduce them greatly. What anti-social behaviour remains will best be dealt with by collective organisations of local communities. It will not require the state.
As for running the economy, it should be said that in the last analysis it is economies that run states, not vice versa. In so far as state management of the economy has greatly increased in the modern world this is for two reasons: to try (unsuccessfully) to mitigate the internal contradictions of capitalism; and to organise the forces of national capitalisms in competition with others.
With socialism both these requirements will cease.
Thus in the socialist society of the future the state will wither away and this will mark the disappearance of the last vestige of the terrible legacy of class society, and the final completion of humanity’s leap from the realm of necessity into the realm of freedom – which is the essence of socialism.
 

n Molyneux: The Future Socialist Society (5. Producing for need: towards abundance)



John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Future Socialist Society

John Molyneux
The Future Socialist Society

5. Producing for need: towards abundance

The establishment of a planned socialist economy on an international scale will put an end to the recurring crises of capitalism which result in the destruction and waste of productive resources through bankruptcies, under-investment, overproduction and mass unemployment. It will mean the truly immense scientific, technological, economic and human resources currently devoted to the preparation and waging of war will be redirected to socially useful purposes.
When you consider that one British Challenger tank costs around £2 million, that the Trident missile system will cost an estimated £42 billion over its lifetime, that Reagan’s Star Wars cost upward of $100 billion, you get some idea of the economic potential that will be released.
Socialism will also remove the enormous waste inherent in capitalist production with its duplication of effort-the manufacture of numerous but essentially similar washing powders, cars, radios and so on. It will put an end to the massive sums spent on advertising and production of superfluous luxuries for the rich. The quality and productivity of labour will greatly increase because the producers will – for the first time – have a direct vested interest in production and be healthier and vastly better educated.
In short, international socialism will bring about a phenomenal development of the productive forces which will rapidly eclipse all that has been achieved in this sphere in the whole of past history. It is this economic advance which will lay the material basis for the transition to a completely classless society.
In the first place it will make it possible to provide adequate food, clothing and shelter – the necessities of life – for everyone on the face of the planet. Never again will any child die of malnutrition or of easily preventable disease. This alone would be more than enough to justify socialism. But in fact it is only the beginning of what socialism will offer. Beyond the achievement of a decent standard of living for all lies the road to abundance and free distribution according to need.
This point is fundamental to the Marxist conception of the higher stage of socialism, or communism as Marx called it, and requires further explanation.
From the start the socialist revolution will produce a great equalisation in the distribution of goods compared with the massive inequalities built into capitalism. The enormous accumulations of wealth deriving from exploitation and property ownership will be expropriated and the inflated salaries paid by the ruling class to itself and to a section of the middle class will disappear. The wages of the working class, and especially the low paid, will be rapidly increased.
Nevertheless, at first – because socialism begins with the resources it inherits from capitalism – the supply of goods will remain limited and workers will still work for money wages which in turn they will use to purchase these goods. Progressively, however, socialism will increase the production of an ever wider range of goods to the point where supply exceeds demand. It will then become possible to cease selling these goods and begin distributing them on the basis of need.
To illustrate how this can be done let us take the example of water. In many parts of the world today water – especially clean water – remains in desperately short supply. But in all the advanced industrialised countries the problem of water has been overcome – even under capitalism. There is more than enough water to go round, so it is simply available to everybody ‘on tap’. This does not result in people madly consuming water. Apart from a certain amount of waste which is easily accommodated, people just consume what they need.
What capitalism has been able to do for water, socialism – with the growth of the productive forces outlined above – will be able to do across the board.
Housing will be an obvious area to start. We will simply build more houses than there are people to house and allocate them according to need. In order to move, people will either transfer to vacant accommodation or exchange houses instead of buying and selling them. Such an arrangement would not only solve the problem of homelessness but also be infinitely simpler to operate than the present tedious and complex house buying system.
It goes without saying that education and health services will be completely free. So too will public transport, which will be massively expanded (probably to the point where the private car becomes redundant).
As each service becomes free, so the labour of all the various money collectors – from estate agents to bus conductors – will be put to better use.
In time the free distribution principle will spread from water, housing, health, education and transport to food, clothing, communications, entertainment and so on, until it becomes all embracing. Buying and selling will fade away. Money – seemingly the all powerful god of capitalist society, but in reality only the means by which the products of human labour are exchanged – will steadily lose its usefulness to the point where it can be dispensed with altogether.
Thanks to the capitalist indoctrination we all receive from birth, this may seem outlandish. But given the premise that international socialism will unleash the productive forces hitherto confined and restricted by capitalism, there is nothing unrealistic about it.
In fact there is only one serious counter-argument – namely that if everything is free, nobody will bother to work.
 

n Molyneux: The Future Socialist Society (1. The conquest of political power)



John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Future Socialist Society

John Molyneux
The Future Socialist Society

1. The conquest of political power

The first and most immediate task confronting a successful workers’ revolution is that of consolidating its own rule and defending itself against capitalist counter-revolution. This is crucial – indeed a matter of life or death – for the experience of every revolution from the Paris Commune onwards shows that the bourgeoisie is prepared to resort to the most ruthless violence to retain its power or to regain power it has lost.
In order to break the fierce resistance of the dispossessed ruling class, which will be backed by the rest of international capitalism, the working class will have to create its own state. This state, like any other, will be a centralised organisation exercising ultimate authority in society and having at its disposal decisive armed force.
But here the resemblance between the new workers’ state and the preceding capitalist state ends. The old capitalist armed forces and police will be disbanded – in essence they will already have been in a state of collapse for the revolution to have succeeded. They will be replaced with organisations of armed workers – workers’ militias.
The foundation of these militias will probably have been laid in the course of the revolution and it is likely that they will be drawn from, and remain linked to, the major factories and workplaces. Unless the revolution has to fight an all out civil war or invasion, service in the militia will be on a rota basis so as to train and involve the maximum number of workers in the armed defence of their power, and to ensure that the militia do not separate themselves off from the working class as a whole.
The militia will also be in charge of everyday law and order-a task which, because of their roots in the community, they will perform far more effectively than the capitalist police.
All officers in the militia will be elected, be subject to regular re-election, and be paid average workers’ wages – principles which will apply to all the officials of the new state.
However, the core institutions of the new state will be not the workers’ militia but the network of workers’ councils. Workers’ councils are regional bodies of delegates elected from workplaces which in turn will send delegates to a national workers’ council. It is this latter body that will be the highest power in the land. The government, the militia and all other state institutions will be responsible and accountable to the national workers’ council.
Different political parties, providing they accept the basic framework of the revolution, will operate freely within the councils, with the party which has the majority support from the workers forming the government. In all likelihood this will be the party which has led the revolution.
The reason that we can predict this role for workers’ councils is not that it has been laid down in tablets of stone by Marx (indeed Marx never mentioned workers’ councils), but that every workers’ revolution and every attempted workers’ revolution in this century has created such bodies or the embryos of such bodies.
The first workers’ council or soviet, as it was called, arose in St Petersburg in Russia during the 1905 revolution. Later examples are the Russian soviets of 1917, the workers’ councils of Germany in 1918–19, and the Central Workers’ Council of Budapest in 1956. Examples of embryonic councils are the factory councils in Italy in 1919–20 and the cordones in Chile in 1972.
For the same reason it would be pointless to attempt to go into further detail about the organisation of workers’ councils. Such councils arise not after the revolution in accordance with some preset plan but in the course of the revolution in order to enable the working class to coordinate its forces. As organs of struggle their initial structure will necessarily be improvised to meet the requirements of the day and will thus vary enormously depending on circumstances.
At this point a vital question arises. How democratic will workers’ power be?
It is true the rule of workers’ councils will not be, in formal terms, an absolute democracy. There will not be complete universal suffrage because the nature of the system will exclude the old bourgeoisie and its main associates from the electoral process. But what is lacking in formal terms will be more than made up for in terms of real democratic participation by the mass of people.
The democracy of workers’ councils will be based on collective debate and discussion and on the ability of the electors, because they are a collective, to control their representatives. The mechanism of this control will be very simple. If delegates do not represent the will of their electors they will simply be recalled and replaced by mass meetings in the workplaces.
Naturally this kind of control is impossible with area based constituencies in a parliamentary system. Instead of one day’s democracy every five years for everyone, in a socialist society there will be ongoing involvement in actually running the state for the vast majority.
Sometimes people worry that a system based on workplaces would exclude sections of the working class, such as housewives, pensioners, the unemployed, etc, who are not in workplaces.
Yet one of the great virtues of workers’ councils is their flexibility and adaptability to the changing structure of the working class.
In the Spanish Revolution of 1936, for instance, among the key organs of workers’ power were the neighbourhood committees set up in each working class district of the major cities. These bodies, representing the whole population of the district, organised and controlled workers’ militias, food distribution, education and many other areas of everyday life.
Providing the core of the structure is rooted in the workplaces, there will be no reason why other groups should not form collectives and their delegates be incorporated in the councils.
The fundamental feature of the workers’ state will be that it relies upon and mobilises the self activity, organising ability and creativity of the mass of the working class to build the new society from the bottom upwards. In this way it will be a thousand times more democratic than the most liberal of bourgeois democracies which, without exception, depend on the passivity of working people.
All this sounds marvellous and rightly so – it will be marvellous, as the brief periods when workers have taken control have shown. Read, for instance, John Reed’s account of Russia in 1917 in Ten Days that Shook the World or George Orwell on Barcelona in 1936 in Homage to Catalonia. But how much repression will there have to be? What freedom will there be for those who think differently?
 

n Molyneux: The Future Socialist Society (3. The conquest of economic power)



John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Future Socialist Society

John Molyneux
The Future Socialist Society

3. The conquest of economic power

The foundation of socialism, like that of every other form of society, lies in the economy. Consequently, the working class will immediately set about using its political power to achieve the conquest of economic power – that is to take into its hands all the major means of production in society. Unless this is done fairly rapidly, the workers will be unable to maintain their political rule.
The formal mechanism through which economic power will be established is a familiar one, namely nationalisation.
The process is likely to begin as it did in the Russian Revolution, with the nationalisation of all land. Because land is immovable, this is an extremely simple measure and can be carried out by decree on day one of the revolution. Also urgent are the nationalisation of the banks and the imposition of strict exchange controls, backed by other revolutionary measures to prevent the inevitable attempt at a flight of capital abroad.
From there the workers’ state will move to the progressive takeover of the main firms and industries. Small businesses employing only one or two workers can mostly be left to later. The immediate task is to gain control of the decisive levers of economic power, of the ‘commanding heights’ as numerous unimplemented Labour manifestos have called them.
However, here it is necessary to distinguish sharply between this revolutionary nationalisation and the kind practised in the past by Labour (and Tory) governments. Both are forms of state ownership. But in this case the state in question is an organisation of the collective working class, as opposed to the nationalisations of the past under a capitalist state – an organisation of the capitalist class.
So, firstly, nationalisation will not simply be an action taken from above by the central state power. It will combine legal takeover at the top with workers’ action at the base, in many cases through factory occupations.
Secondly, nationalisation will be without compensation, since the object of the exercise is precisely to break the economic power of the bourgeoisie.
Thirdly, and most importantly, nationalisation will be under workers’ control. It is impossible to predict precise forms, but probably each factory or workplace will be run by an elected council which will be accountable to periodic mass meetings of the workforce. A similar arrangement would apply to the management of whole industries, but with representatives from the trade unions and the workers’ government.
Workers’ control of industry is essential. A working class that is unable to control its own workplaces will not be able to control its own state. If control of the new state industries is transferred to a privileged bureaucracy, as happened in Russia, then sooner or later this will come to exert a decisive influence in the society and class divisions will re-establish themselves.
Of course, the ability of workers to run industry is often doubted. ‘There will have to be experts’, is the cry, ‘and it is the experts who will really control things.’
This underestimates the abilities of the working class and misunderstands the role of technical experts. Even under capitalism it is generally the workers, not management, who have the best grasp of the immediate production process. Many of the skills of management are concerned not with production but with marketing and maintaining the rate of exploitation – skills which will be redundant in the new society.
As for the layer of technical experts, they will be necessary for a period until the education of workers is dramatically improved. But they will simply work for and under the direction of the factory or industrial council just as today they work for the bosses. If they obstruct and sabotage, they will be disciplined and dealt with, just as they are if they obstruct and sabotage a capitalist firm.
If absolutely necessary they will have to perform with workers’ guns at their heads, but in fact it is reasonable to suppose a victorious socialist revolution will win over a majority of such people.
Once workers’ ownership and control of industry are established it will be possible to proceed to the introduction of a planned economy. Again it is necessary to distinguish between socialist planning and the capitalist, and state capitalist, planning we are used to. The plan will not be a rigid scheme imposed from above. The working class must be the subject, not the object, of the plan.
The planning process will begin at the base in workplace meetings, factory councils and workers’ councils, with a determination of people’s needs and priorities and an assessment of the productive capacities of each workplace. On the basis of this input from below the government will have to draw up a coherent plan matching capacity to requirement. The whole plan will then have to be submitted to the working class for debate, and to its representatives in the workers’ councils for amendment and approval.
It will be an intensely democratic process and it is only on a democratic basis that it can hope to succeed. For, as the experience of Stalinist Russia has shown, bureaucratic, authoritarian planning leads to false information being fed in from below and formal rather than real plan fulfilment.
The achievement of a workers’ planned economy will not only solve the worst economic problems of capitalism (unemployment, inflation, etc.) but will open immense possibilities for the future.
At this point it is impossible to postpone further the question of spreading the revolution to other countries. For, unless this problem is tackled, all the hopes and plans for socialism will come to nothing.
 

n Molyneux: The Future Socialist Society (7. Women's liberation)



John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Future Socialist Society

John Molyneux
The Future Socialist Society

7. Women’s liberation

It has become a commonplace among feminists that a socialist revolution will not automatically liberate women. They are right of course. For even after the revolution nothing happens automatically. History is made by human beings, and the struggle to overcome the oppression of women will have to be fought for and won.
Nevertheless the socialist revolution will initiate the process of ending the age old oppression of women and the transition to socialism will complete it. The reason for this is simple. Socialism is before all else the self-emancipation of the working class and the majority of the working class are women. Thus without the complete emancipation of women it is impossible to speak of the complete emancipation of the working class, and therefore impossible to speak of socialism.
This doesn’t make the liberation of women automatic. But it makes the fight for women’s liberation a central task in the transition to socialism. Moreover, just as miners’ wives who fought in the great strike of 1984–5 were transformed by the experience, so working class women who have made a revolution will never be willing to accept the role of second class citizens.
So how will women’s liberation be achieved?
First will come a number of legal measures which are very straightforward and can, and will, be taken immediately by the workers’ state. These include: the abolition of every vestige of legal inequality between men and women and the outlawing of every form of discrimination against women; the establishment of the right to free contraception and free abortion on demand; the right to immediate divorce on demand and the right to equal pay and job opportunities.
It might be objected that many (though not all) of these provisions are already in force in capitalist Britain and are ineffectual-the equal pay law being the most obvious example. Here we must remember the changing context. The fact that the workers’ state will immediately become the main employer, and eventually the only employer, and that all major institutions in society will be under democratic workers’ control will ensure that these laws are translated into practice.
Many other social changes will also contribute to and facilitate the liberation of women. There will be anti-sexist teaching in schools and where sexist teachers remain they will doubtless be firmly corrected by their students. The transformation in ownership and control of the media will mean that these too become a force for anti-sexism rather than for sexism as at present.
Since with the abolition of capitalist competition advertising in its present form will disappear, so too will the use of exploitative images of women to promote goods. All forms of violence against women will be seriously combatted.
However, as important and necessary as all these measures will be, none of them goes to the heart of the matter. They deal with the symptoms and effects of women’s oppression rather than its source. That source lies in the position of women within the family and the role that the family has played in class divided society as a whole and in capitalist society in particular.
In capitalism today the raising of children and the care of the present generation (in economic terms, the reproduction of labour power) is primarily the responsibility of the privatised nuclear family. Within the family the burden of this work falls mainly on women. The advantages of this arrangement for capitalism are obvious – it gets its labour power produced and refreshed at minimal cost and it divides and fragments the working class.
The disadvantages for women are equally clear. Their access to paid employment is interrupted and restricted; their career prospects are damaged; they tend to be isolated in the home and to a greater or lesser extent they are economically dependent upon their husbands.
This is the root problem that will have to be solved to achieve the permanent and complete liberation of women as part of the transition to socialism.
But the family is not an institution which can be abolished overnight by decree. It has to be replaced. What is more, the institutions that replace it have to be better at meeting the real human needs at present served by the family, so that people will adopt them voluntarily.
The key task is the efficient and caring socialisation of housework and child care. This means creating a comprehensive network of community restaurants serving a variety of cheap (eventually free) good food. It means providing communal laundry and house cleaning services. It means, above all, providing good nursery and creche facilities for every young child and properly organised baby-sitting services for every parent.
In so far as patterns of communal living are developed, which seems likely, this will considerably assist with all of these problems. It is when this is achieved that child rearing will cease to be a socially disadvantageous burden in any way and become an overwhelmingly positive experience willingly shared equally by men and women.
Likewise, who people live with and for how long will be a matter of purely personal choice, unconstricted by economic pressures or by the old religious codes and social conventions which reflect those pressures.
Women will at last be free from the subordination they have suffered since the beginning of class society 6,000 to 7,000 years ago.
Clearly the implementation of such a programme will require large economic resources, strong political will and mass involvement. No capitalist government would attempt it or could achieve it. But that is why it is only through socialism that women will win their liberation.
And hand in hand with women’s liberation will come gay and lesbian liberation. Naturally the legal and educational measures undertaken to combat the oppression of women will be applied in this sphere too.
But ultimately it will be the transcendence of the bourgeois family and the achievement of real equality for women that will remove the basis of homophobia. A world where the family no longer needs to be defended, and where being ‘a man’ no longer means being superior to women, will be a world where the gay man and the lesbian woman are no longer perceived by anyone as a threat.
 

n Molyneux: The Future Socialist Society (8. The end of racism)



John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Future Socialist Society

John Molyneux
The Future Socialist Society

8. The end of racism

Racism is one of the most ugly and pernicious features of capitalist society. Future generations who live under socialism will need to make a considerable leap of imagination to be able to understand not just the great crimes of racism – like the Nazi Holocaust and apartheid – but also its relatively ‘minor’ manifestations like the sickening hysteria over refugees seeking asylum in Britain.
Undoubtedly they will regard such episodes as clear evidence that the society which produced them was fundamentally rotten. For socialism will eradicate racism.
By this I do not just mean that socialism will combat racism. It should go without saying that the socialist revolution will wage the most determined war on every form of racism. The workers’ state will treat as a most serious offence all racial discrimination, racial harassment, and all expressions of racist ideology. Its schools and media will combine to educate the population in a spirit of militant anti-racism.
But I mean much more than this. I mean that the socialist revolution will tear up the very roots of racism so that in time it will become a historical relic as anachronistic, absurd and irrelevant as the persecution of witches.
To see how this will happen it is necessary first to understand what these roots are.
Racism, contrary to the theories put forward by people who are in fact apologists for racism, is not a ‘natural’ or ‘instinctive’ reaction to ‘outsiders’.
Nor is it a hangover from primitive superstition based on ignorance. Unlike the oppression of women, it is not even a product of class divided society in general.
Racism is the quite specific product of the rise and development of the capitalist economic system. It was not a feature of pre-capitalist societies, not even of the ancient slave societies of Greece and Rome. In those societies slaves (and slave owners) were both black and white. Although anti-slave ideas (‘slaves are by nature inferior’ and so on) were rife, they did not have a racial or skin colour connotation.
The origin of racism lies in the slave trade, in the practice of forcibly seizing and shipping millions of black Africans to the Americas to work as slaves on the plantations.
(This statement has caused some controversy. It has been argued that the existence of anti-Semitism in the Middle Ages seems to contradict the idea that racism is a product of capitalism. However, as Abram Leon showed in his book The Jewish Question, the anti-Semitism of the period was essentially a religious and not a racial persecution – Jews who converted to Christianity could avoid it. This is not in any way to excuse the horrors that were committed – but to insist that it has to be seen in the same light as the equally horrific persecution of minority Christian sects in the same period.)
This trade and the slavery that followed it were undertaken for economic reasons. They were immensely profitable and played a major role in the rise of capitalism. But like all forms of exploitation, they required ideological justification, and this was supplied by racism. The inhuman treatment of millions of people was legitimated by the theory that these people were subhuman.
The racism that grew from the slave trade was then further reinforced and boosted by imperialism as a whole. Capitalism, arising first in western Europe (and developing particularly in Britain), was driven by its competitive nature to scour the world for markets for its goods, for raw materials, and then for colonies as outlets for investment and sources of cheap labour. This inevitably brought the merchants, missionaries, businessmen, politicians and soldiers of European capitalism into conflict with the indigenous peoples of the Americas, Asia and Africa – that is, with the black and coloured peoples of the world.
Once again justification was needed. What better than the notion that these people were childlike, primitive and incapable, and that the whole process of robbery and plunder was really for their own good-that it was the ‘white man’s burden’ to lead them slowly to ‘civilisation’.
Racism is not just a legacy of imperialism, however. It is also continually regenerated by contemporary capitalism. For capitalism rests not only on competition between capitalists but also on competition between workers.
The structure of the capitalist economy encourages workers to see other workers as rivals for jobs, houses and so on. It is only through overcoming this competition amongst themselves that workers are able to fight back against the system.
Consequently, any ideas such as sexism, nationalism and above all racism, which set workers against each other and disrupt that unity are of great advantage to the bosses. Racism also provides the system and its ruling class with an extremely convenient scapegoat for unemployment and all the other social ills capitalism produces.
For these reasons capitalism, openly or discreetly but nonetheless persistently, stokes the fires of racism so that the racist card is always there to be played when needed.
None of this is meant to suggest that the problems of racism will be easily solved, still less that it will disappear overnight with the revolution. On the contrary, the roots of racism are very deep. The point is that they are capitalist roots and the moment capitalism is destroyed they will be deprived of further nourishment and begin to wither.
Moreover, the process of revolution will itself deal racism many powerful blows. First, because it is certain that black workers will themselves play a powerful and leading role in the revolution. Second, because unless unity is achieved between the decisive sections of the black and white working class (on the basis of total opposition to racism) the revolution cannot hope to achieve victory. Third, because a victorious, confident working class that has been through the enlightening experience of revolutionary struggle will feel no need for scapegoats.
Building on this firm basis, a socialist society which unites workers as collective owners and controllers of production rather than dividing them, which is able to solve the problems of unemployment, homelessness and poverty, and which spreads itself through international solidarity rather than imperialist conquest, will steadily eliminate the last vestiges of racism.
 

n Molyneux: The Future Socialist Society (2. Repression and freedom under workers’ power)



John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Future Socialist Society

John Molyneux
The Future Socialist Society

2. Repression and freedom under workers’ power

Thanks to ruling class propaganda revolution is linked in many people’s minds with the guillotine and firing squads. As a result of Stalinism the post-revolutionary regime is often thought of as one of grey, repressive uniformity in which anyone who doesn’t toe the party line gets a visit at four o’clock in the morning.
Both these images are linked with specific historical circumstances – above all, the defeat of the Russian Revolution. As the previous section made clear, Marxists conceive of workers’ power as a vibrant workers’ democracy which would vastly increase the power, rights and freedoms of working people.
Nevertheless, it has to be frankly stated that some repression, some use of direct force, will be necessary not only to overthrow the capitalist state but also after the revolution to maintain workers’ power. The class struggle does not come to an end with the victory of the revolution, especially when we are as yet talking only about victory in one country.
Moreover, the very newness of the workers’ state will make its rule fragile.
 

n Molyneux: The Future Socialist Society (Introduction)



John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Future Socialist Society

John Molyneux
The Future Socialist Society

Introduction

What will things be like after the revolution? How will we deal with such and such a problem under socialism? How will X, Y or Z be organised? These sorts of questions are often put to Marxists. It has to be said that the answers given are frequently vague. Certainly the writings of Marx in this area are slight compared with his monumental analysis of capitalism and his works on history and contemporary politics. Although what Marx did have to say on the subject possessed all his customary brilliance and formed the basis for all subsequent Marxist thinking about socialism, it remains the case that he dealt with the major problems only in the broadest outline.
There were good reasons for this.
Before Marx the dominant school of socialism was that of the ‘Utopians’, such as Saint-Simon and Fourier of France and Robert Owen of England. The Utopians specialised in drawing up grandiose schemes for the future organisation of society but lacked any strategy for bringing them about, apart from appealing to the goodwill of the ruling class.
Marx was determined to differentiate his scientific socialism from this middle class daydreaming. He stressed that socialism could arise only from the actual contradictions in capitalism – the anarchy in capitalist production, and the antagonism between the working class and the bourgeoisie. This set very strict limits to predictions about the organisation of socialist society, limits which excluded any attempt at a detailed blueprint. In the main these limits remain in force today.
Since socialism emerges out of capitalism as a result of a successful struggle against it by the working class, the specific measures introduced by the revolutionary socialist government will obviously depend on the particular economic, social and political conditions at the time.
We cannot know in advance what those will be any more than we can now forecast the date of the revolution. Also, since the whole point of the socialist revolution is to place society under the conscious control of the working class, there are many questions which it is quite futile to try to answer in advance and which must simply be left to workers of the future to decide. There is, for example, no point in trying to draw up plans now for the design of housing in a socialist society. It will all depend on the kind of houses people in the future choose to live in.
Nevertheless questions remain. If people are to take up the struggle for socialism, they want to know what they are fighting for. This is especially true when the matter has been so clouded by the phenomenon of Stalinism in Russia and Eastern Europe, and by the numerous other regimes around the world which claimed the title ‘socialist’.
There is a need in socialist propaganda for angry denunciation of capitalism.
There is a need for hard headed analysis of the strategy and tactics of the workers’ movement. But there is also a need for inspiration, for a vision of the goal which makes the struggle worthwhile.
Moreover, in certain respects we are better placed than Marx to answer some of these questions. A further century of capitalist development has involuntarily prepared the ground for socialism in many ways and made it easier to envisage how certain goals set down in principle by Marx – such as the achievement of material abundance or the overcoming of the division of labour – can actually be realised.
Also we have the advantage of a century of workers’ struggle. We do not as yet have experience of full socialism in the Marxist sense. But we do have the experience of a few years of socialist revolution in Russia, and of numerous near misses – the workers’ revolutions that failed like those in Spain 1936 or Hungary 1956 – which contained the seeds of socialism.
It is for these reasons that this pamphlet will attempt to set out in some detail a Marxist view of the future socialist society. I stress the word attempt because, quite apart from the personal errors and idiosyncrasies that may creep into my account, one thing is certain: the reality of socialism will differ markedly from any possible anticipation of it. This does not, however, invalidate the enterprise to try to show concretely how it is possible for humanity, through socialism, to eradicate the fundamental problems that plague it under capitalism and win real freedom.
One further preliminary point needs to be made. Socialism – or communism, to use Marx’s original term – is not a ready-made state of society that can simply be introduced the day after the revolution. Rather it is a historical process.
This process begins with the destruction of the capitalist state by workers’ revolution. It is completed only when a fully classless society is achieved on a world scale – that is, when the whole human race collectively manages its affairs without class antagonism or class struggle.
Between the overthrow of capitalism and the classless society lies a period of transition. Called by Marx ‘the dictatorship of the proletariat’, it is more simply referred to as ‘workers’ power’.
When discussing the socialist future, it is always essential to bear this in mind. For what can and will be done in the initial stage when the working class, although in power, is still locked in struggle with the dispossessed bourgeoisie, is not at all the same as the possibilities that open up when humanity is at last fully united.
 

n Molyneux: The Future Socialist Society (9. Learning for the future)



John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Future Socialist Society

John Molyneux
The Future Socialist Society

9. Learning for the future

The socialist revolution will awaken in the working class and in all the oppressed an enormous thirst for knowledge and education. We know this from past experience: from the Russian Revolution where workers crowded into great stadiums to hear lectures on Greek drama, from the Portuguese Revolution of 1974 when, for a period, Lenin’s book The State and Revolution topped the bestsellers list, and from many other examples.
Millions of people, over generations, have become convinced that sophisticated knowledge about the world is pointless because ‘there is nothing you can do’ and ‘things will never change’. But suddenly, in a revolution, they find themselves in the saddle. Workers are called upon to control and direct everything in society. Everything seems possible and they want to know everything.
The task of the workers’ state will be to create an education system that will foster and develop this desire to learn. That system will be the opposite of the present capitalist education system which absorbs eager and curious five-year-olds and spews them out 11 years later, bitter and cynical.
What really devastates and distorts education at present is not just the lack of funding, serious though that is, but the state of war ‘now hidden, now open’ that exists between teachers and pupils. This in turn derives from the role of schools under capitalism which is to reproduce the class structure of society. Schools progressively sift out those destined for middle class and ruling class positions (this is the real function of examinations) and prepare the rest for exploitation and alienated labour. A system whose structure inevitably condemns the majority to failure cannot possibly retain the enthusiasm and cooperation of its victims-no matter how well-meaning individual teachers may be. The only way it can operate is by authoritarian imposition.
In contrast socialist education will be equipping everyone, not just the select few, to take an active, planning and administrative role. Its goal will be the all round development of the human personality.
Schools will be collaborative, not competitive. It will no longer be ‘cheating’ for one student to help another. And they will be democratic and not autocratic. The dictatorial rule of the head will give way to the elected school council made up of representatives of the students, staff and the workers’ councils. Teachers will be the helpers, in a sense the servants, of their students. Discipline will be collective rather than imposed.
Those who imagine this will lead to a breakdown of all order are ignorant of what goes on in most contemporary classrooms and totally underestimate the power of peer group pressure which wins out over detention and the cane any day.
As the working week is steadily reduced and the more arduous jobs are increasingly automated, so education will become something that does not cease at 16, 18 or 21.
It will continue as a lifelong process, ever more closely linked to the solution of practical tasks and problems thrown up by the new society.
What is true of education will also be true of culture generally.
Post-revolutionary society will produce a great flowering of the arts by providing artists with a multitude of new and inspiring themes. It will also throw up a new audience for art as a part of the overall awakening of personality that will occur when the working class moves from the wings of society to the centre of the stage.
Undoubtedly music, painting, poetry, drama, cinema and the rest will all have a role to play both in the revolutionary struggle itself and in the building of socialism. But neither the workers’ state nor the revolutionary party will attempt to dictate to or control the creative arts. There will be no repetition of the disastrous Stalinist policy of proscribing particular artistic forms or claiming that only one style of art – either so called ‘socialist realism’ or any other – has validity. Apart from reserving the right to prohibit direct counter-revolutionary propaganda, the revolutionary government will promote the maximum freedom in this area. Without vigorous criticism, debate, experiment and the rivalry of different schools, artistic development is impossible.
Obviously it is impossible to predict or lay down in advance the precise nature of the art of the future. However, I think it is possible to forecast in general terms a fundamental change in the relationship between art and society.
Capitalist society, with its division of mental and manual labour, its fragmentation and alienation, gives rise to a separation of art and the artist from the mass of people on the one hand, and from productive work on the other. Moreover, both these separations reinforce each other. Art becomes a privileged arena in which the minority express themselves creatively while the majority are condemned to mechanical, non-expressive, non-creative labour. Art, reflecting society’s division into classes, divides into ‘high art’ and low art’. The ‘high’ artist becomes a member of an elite, administering to an elite.
Socialism will overcome these separations, not by forcing artists to be ‘popular’, or even simply by raising the cultural level of the majority – though this will happen of course. Rather socialism will make all work a creative activity, so that every producer becomes in a sense an artist. Likewise the skills of painting, design, architecture, writing – of all the art forms – will become integral elements in the collective work of shaping the human environment.
Just as the producer becomes an artist, so the artist will become a producer.
 

n Molyneux: Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism (6. The shape of the world)



John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

John Molyneux
Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

Chapter Six:
The shape of the world


Surely we must defend the national interest?
FROM THE cradle to the grave we’re encouraged to think of ourselves as members of a nation. Whether it is the World Cup or a royal wedding, the school history lesson or the latest export figures, the pressure is the same – identify with Britain, back Britain, believe Britain is best. And of course the same thing is going on in every other country. Every good little American, Japanese or Russian is meant to grow up identifying with and believing in the superiority of America, Japan, Russia or wherever. It’s all rather absurd when you stop to think about it.
But for our rulers it’s also very necessary. They want it to be so all-pervasive, so obvious, that we never stop to think about it. Patriotism reinforces the idea that there is an overriding common interest uniting boss and worker, exploiter and exploited, in this little patch of the world against bosses and workers elsewhere. And secondly it strengthens the power and authority of the state, which is the main force maintaining the rule of the exploiter over the exploited. That’s why Marxists are not nationalists, but internationalists. We see the world in class terms, not national terms.
This issue marks one of the clear dividing lines between reformists and revolutionaries, between those who accept the framework of the nation state and those who want to overthrow it. Listen to any speech by any reformist politician, left or right. You will find it full of phrases such as ‘saving our industry’ or ‘getting our country going again’. But it’s not ‘our’ industry or ‘our’ country: both are owned lock, stock and barrel by the ruling class. Every time the reformists talk this way they show themselves to be prisoners of ruling-class ideology. At the same time they strengthen such ideas within the working class.
Just as the bourgeoisie needs nationalism to bind the working class to itself, so the working class needs internationalism to establish its political independence as a class. Internationalism is also a necessity for the working class because, as the example of Russia shows, the revolution can succeed in one country for a time but if it remains isolated it cannot survive indefinitely. Either international capitalism will overthrow it directly or, as in Russia, military and economic pressure will compel the revolutionary country to compete with capitalism on the latter’s terms, that means the restoration of exploitation, class divisions and the subordination of labour to capital.
Internationalism is increasingly a necessity even in everyday trade union struggles. Faced with multinational companies playing off workers in different countries against each other, the best defence is international links between rank-and-file trade unionists. ‘Workers of the World Unite’ isn’t just a fine sounding phrase.
Marxist internationalism means rejecting the policy of import controls. Apart from the fact that they would be an economic disaster because of retaliation from other countries, they replace a struggle to defend jobs against the attacks of the British ruling class with an attempt to solve unemployment by lining up with ‘our’ bosses against the workers of Japan, Hong Kong, Germany, France or wherever.
Genuine internationalism involves much more than abandoning the cruder forms of national and racial prejudice and adopting a benevolent attitude to the peoples of the world. Nor is it a matter of an idealistic belief in ‘the brotherhood of man’ (or ‘the sisterhood of women’). Indeed it is a fundamental element of Marxist internationalism that not all men are brothers and not all women are sisters because society is divided into classes with antagonistic interests.
Instead of viewing the world from the standpoint of one national state competing with other nation states, Marxist internationalism takes as its starting point the struggle of the world working class against world capitalism. In this struggle we regard the interests of the class as a whole, internationally, as taking precedence over the temporary, short-term interests of any local or national section of the class. This kind of internationalism constitutes a very sharp break with policies declared to be ‘in the national interest’ by the media and labour movement leaders alike.
 

What about immigration?
The leaders of all the main political parties are agreed that there needs to be strict control of immigration. So, probably, are most ‘members of the general public’. Marxists, however, are opposed to all immigration controls. Why?
The first and most important reason is that immigration controls are racist. For a long time now ‘immigrant’ has served as a code word for ‘black’ (despite the fact that the majority of immigrants coming into Britain each year are not black, but from Europe, Australia and the USA). All the various laws introduced to limit immigration, from the original Commonwealth Immigration Act of 1962 to the Tory Nationality Act of 1980, have had as their main purpose stopping black people coming to Britain. Whenever a politician starts talking about ‘the immigration problem’ you can be sure that they are trying to mobilise, and cash in on, the racism that is so deeply rooted in British capitalist society.
The argument that always comes up in this context (usually from ‘moderates’) is that immigration must be controlled to ensure good ‘race relations’. This is both hypocritical and covertly racist. It involves saying to people ‘we don’t want you to be racist because it’s not very nice and causes a lot of trouble’, and at the same time saying ‘but we recognise that black people are a problem and we’ll do our best to keep them out’. Immigration controls increase rather than hinder the growth of racism. They concede to the outright racists of the National Front and the Tory Monday Club the main point, namely that black people are a problem.
Marxists, of course, make no concessions at all to this rubbish. It is not blacks but racism that is the problem, the legacy of Britain’s long history of imperialism (and, before that, the slave trade). It remains a powerful mechanism for dividing the working class and for diverting its anger on to vulnerable scapegoats. We must fight it tooth and nail.
This alone is more than sufficient grounds to oppose immigration controls. But even if there was no element of racism involved, if for example all the potential immigrants were white, Marxists would still be against immigration controls. It has been a consistent theme of ruling-class propaganda that social problems such as poverty, unemployment and the housing shortage are caused by there being too many people. This is a convenient excuse for the system. Every additional person entering the country is simultaneously an extra mouth to feed, person to be housed etc. and an extra worker to produce the food, build the houses and so on. If capitalism doesn’t employ them to do this necessary work it is not because there are too many people, but because the capitalist economy is in crisis and because it is concerned with profit, not human need.
When capitalism is in boom and capitalists are falling over themselves to expand their operations there is usually a labour shortage. This is overcome by drawing people into the labour force from wherever there is a cheap and convenient supply: women from the home, peasants from the countryside, immigrants from poorer countries. When the boom turns to slump nothing suits the system better than to be able to treat these workers as ‘surplus to requirements’ and to suggest they are responsible for the crisis.
Marxists reject this logic. We approach this question, as all others, not from the standpoint of a particular capitalist state, but I from the standpoint of the interests of the international working class. These are best served by the free movement of workers around the globe. Not only does this enable workers as a whole to get the best price for the sale of their labour power, it also increases the international experience of the class and aids its ultimate international unification. We therefore reject completely all attempts by the ruling class to restrict or control the international migration of labour.
 

So do socialists oppose national liberation movements?
The fact that Marxists are internationalists who work for the world-wide unity of the working class does not mean we are indifferent to national oppression. On the contrary we are its fiercest opponents. Marx, for example, was a lifelong supporter of independence for Poland, which then, as now, was oppressed by Russia, and independence for Ireland, then, as now, oppressed by Britain.
It may seem there is a contradiction here: internationalists supporting national liberation. However the real question is how international unity is to be achieved.
Firstly Marxists are for voluntary, not forced, international unity, and voluntary unity implies the right of separation. National oppression creates a division between the working class of the oppressor nation and the working class of the oppressed nation. This division can only be healed if the working class in the oppressor nation fights for the self-determination of the oppressed nation.
At the same time national oppression creates a certain ideological bond between the ruling class and the working class in both the oppressor nation and the oppressed. Both these bonds can only be broken if the working class opposes national oppression, especially when perpetrated by its own state. Opposition to all national oppression is therefore an essential part of real internationalism.
The rise of imperialism made this question central to socialist strategy. By the end of the 19th century a handful of advanced capitalist countries had turned most of Africa, Asia and Latin America into their colonies or semi-colonies. At the time much of the European socialist movement either openly supported or, at best, passively accepted this development. It was Lenin who saw that imperialism would inevitably generate struggles for national liberation and who argued that the working class of the advanced countries must establish an alliance with the national liberation movements against the imperialist ruling classes.
Today the nature of imperialism has somewhat changed and in most cases these colonies have been granted formal independence while the pressure of the world market ensures that their economic exploitation continues. But national liberation struggles are by no means a thing of the past. In El Salvador and Nicaragua, in Poland and Eritrea, in Ireland, in Israel and the Lebanon the fight against national oppression continues, whether that oppression is perpetrated by the United States, or Stalinist Russia, or Zionism. In all these cases Marxists give their unconditional support to the freedom fighters.
However, unconditional is not the same as uncritical. Nor does support for national liberation mean overestimating its significance. The achievement of national independence is a bourgeois democratic not a socialist task, and national revolution is not a socialist revolution unless it is led by die working class. Even then it can’t be sustained unless it becomes part of a process of international revolution.
This is particularly important because the period since 1945 has seen a succession of national revolutions led by bourgeois or petty bourgeois forces calling themselves communist or socialist. China, Cuba, Vietnam, Angola, Mozambique, Zimbabwe are some of the main examples.
In none of these cases has the working class actually come to power, yet many on the left have sought to substitute these anti-imperialist movements for the struggle of the working class in both the advanced countries and in the third world itself. Their attitude has led to repeated disillusionment as each of these regimes has failed in its apparent promise.
Marxists therefore oppose all forms of national oppression and support the struggle for national liberation, but do so as internationalists not nationalists. We do not merge with bourgeois nationalism or drop our criticism of its limitations. Instead we work to bring to the fore the working class both as the leader of the national revolution and at the same time as a part of the international working class – the only force that can bring real liberation from capitalism and imperialism and unite the human race.
 

What do you mean by ‘unconditional but critical’ support?
Let’s take a current and important example. What should the attitude of Marxists be to the African National Congress, one of the leading forces in the black struggle against apartheid?
The answer is clear. First of all we support the ANC unreservedly and unconditionally against the racist South African regime. We defend its right to take up arms against the repressive state; we call for the release of its political prisoners and we applaud its courage and its victories.
At the same time we are critical of the ANC’s political line and practice. We criticise its belief in a cross-class alliance of all blacks and ‘progressive’ whites, and its relative neglect of the role of the black industrial working class. We also disagree with its ‘stages’ theory, by which it separates the struggle against apartheid – the struggle for democratic political rights – from the struggle for socialism itself. For this leads to a willingness to negotiate and compromise with the representatives of white capital. Experience in other parts of the world has shown that this gives political rights to the middle class while leaving workers little better off.
However, our attitude to the ANC is only one example of a general stance – unconditional but critical support – which Marxists take towards numerous movements round the world today. For example we support the Sandinistas in Nicaragua against US intervention and the Contras but criticise their alliance with the Nicaraguan bourgeoisie and their maintenance of capitalism. Another example is the IRA, who we support against British imperialism and the Orange reactionaries but criticise for their reliance on terrorism and failure to mobilise the working class.
This is a position which people often find difficult to grasp. It seems to them a contradiction. Surely, they think, if you support a movement you shouldn’t criticise it. Or, conversely, if you criticise it you can’t really support it. Consequently, the position of critical support comes under fire from a number of directions.
From the right it is argued that if a movement pursues tactics or undertakes actions (say planting bombs) which we regard as wrong then that movement should be condemned. From the ultra-left it is sometimes argued that since Marxists have important differences with national liberation movements we should give them no support whatever. From other sections of the left (particularly the romantic left) comes the emotive argument that since these movements and their leaders display immense courage we have therefore no right to criticise them at all. All these arguments are wrong.
The right-wing argument is wrong because movements and struggles should be judged primarily not by particular actions and tactics but by the social forces they represent. To condemn a movement of the oppressed on the grounds of its tactics, even where those tactics are clearly mistaken (as with the IRA Birmingham pub bombing in 1974), is to give tacit or open support to the oppressor.
The ultra-left argument is wrong because, albeit from different motives, in refusing to support national liberation struggles it arrives at the same objective position as the right wing, and is therefore self-defeating. There is no neutrality in the class struggle. Marxists are part of the working class, part of the oppressed and part of the left. Its victories are our victories, its defeats our defeats, no matter who the leaders or what the tactics may be.
The argument for supporting liberation movements without criticism is also wrong. Courage and heroism should always be given their due but they are no guarantee of tactics that can win or of a political line that represents the interests of the working class. The IRA fights bravely, but its military strategy cannot defeat the British army; the Iranian masses braved the hideous repression of the Shah only to install the Ayatollah Khomeini’s Islamic republic. To abandon criticism is to abandon Marxist principles and therefore to abandon our defence of the interests of the working class.
‘Unconditional but critical support’ is thus an essential position for Marxists. It is crucial for all our political work not only in relation to national liberation movements but also in the British class struggle. We supported wholeheartedly the struggle of the Liverpool Labour councillors against the Tory government, but we criticise their inadequate strategy. If tomorrow the general secretary of the TGWU finds himself before the courts for breaking Tory anti-union laws we will mobilise in his support, but we won’t drop our criticisms of him as a trade union bureaucrat.
Without the combination of both support and criticism, Marxists are condemned to either sterile sectarianism or crude opportunism.
 

What happened in Russia?
The Russian Revolution of 1917 proved that revolution can succeed, that the working class can overthrow capitalism, and take control of society – but it also confirmed the Marxist view that a socialist revolution could survive only if it were part of an international revolution. On this Marx, Engels, Lenin, Trotsky – indeed all Marxists before Stalin – had insisted.
Russia today is a result, not of the revolution of 1917, but of the defeat of that revolution by the Stalinist counter-revolution of the 1920s. How this defeat came about is extremely important for all socialists to understand. The essence of the 1917 revolution was the establishment of workers’ power through the rule of Soviets or workers’ councils. Both the revolution and the functioning of the Soviets depended on a working class with a high level of political consciousness, activity and enthusiasm. In 1917 the Russian working class possessed these qualities in abundance, but in the years following the revolution it lost them.
This was not because of some ‘natural law’ that revolution must fail, but because of the material conditions prevailing in Russia at the time. Above all it was because of the hideous civil war of 1918–21, backed by Britain, France and other imperialist powers. The civil war claimed the lives of a huge proportion of the most politically advanced workers who formed the core of the revolutionary Red Army. It also utterly devastated the Russian economy. Industry and transport ground to a halt. Factories stood idle, famine and epidemics raged. Many workers fled to the countryside in search of food. By 1921 the total number of industrial workers had fallen from three million to one and a quarter million, and those that remained were politically exhausted. They were simply unable to maintain the control over society they had won in October 1917.
In the absence of an active working class the Bolsheviks were forced to rely more and more on the old Tsarist officials to administer the country. In die process they themselves tended to become a bureaucracy divorced from popular control. The individual who personified and led this development was Joseph Stalin. The rise of Stalinism did not go unresisted. Lenin himself devoted the last months of his life, when he was incapacitated by illness, to a desperate struggle against bureaucracy in general and Stalin in particular. Subsequently almost all the leading Bolsheviks made some attempt to block the path of the Stalinist counterrevolution, and Trotsky remained its uncompromising opponent until his death. But all the social conditions favoured the bureaucracy, and step by step Stalin and his supporters were able to defeat their opponents until by the end of the 1920s, all effective opposition was eliminated and all workers’ rights were removed.
The only thing that could have prevented the rise of the bureaucracy was international revolution. If the revolution had spread rapidly to other European countries (as it nearly did in 1918-19) the civil war would have been won before the working class was decimated. Even as late as 1923, revolution in Germany (a real possibility) would have transformed the situation. It would have brought aid to poverty-stricken Russia and so strengthened the workers. It would have removed the threat of intervention and with it the need to compete militarily and economically with Western capitalism.
After 1923 the bureaucracy turned its back on the international revolution. It was concerned with developing its own power, not spreading workers’ power. Hence Stalin’s policy of ‘socialism in one country’. In practice this meant strengthening the Russian state in competition with the West, by exploiting the workers and peasants. The system was, and is, state capitalism.
From Stalin to Gorbachev the basic structure of power has remained unchanged. Russia today is nothing to do with socialism.
It is the opposite of socialism. But the real lesson of the Russian Revolution is not that socialist revolution can’t work. It is that revolution must spread internationally.
 

Was China any different?
China, with its billion-strong population and its vast land area, was in 1949 the scene of the twentieth century’s second great revolution. Yet nowadays China is hardly mentioned on the left.
It wasn’t always so. In the sixties China was a major influence on what was then known as the New Left. Generally speaking China was seen as offering an attractive alternative model of socialist construction far more dynamic and revolutionary than Russia. The decade of the 1970s was ruthless with these hopes and illusions. It saw China enter into open alliance with US imperialism, make war on Vietnam, support the murderous Pol Pot regime in Kampuchea and the South African-backed ‘Unita’ in Angola, and generally pursue a foreign policy worthy of Franco’s Spain. Internally it saw the public renunciation of the cultural revolution and much of the legacy of Mao, the opening of China to foreign capital, and even flirtation with such evidently bourgeois values as fashion and consumerism.
Small wonder then that Chinese sympathisers were disillusioned. China became a bad dream best forgotten. But the current silence about China on the left represents more than just disappointment. It also marks a failure of understanding and analysis. For events in China could be understood (and indeed predicted) only with the aid of the Marxist theory of state capitalism, first developed in relation to Russia.
The Chinese Revolution of 1949, for all its scale and grandeur, was never a workers’ revolution. The working class played no active role in it whatsoever. Rather it was a military victory in which a peasant-based army led by a middle-class political elite conquered the cities from the outside. The result was not workers’ control or workers’ power, still less socialism, but the establishment of the political elite as a new ruling class. The aim of this new ruling class, despite its radical rhetoric, was not world revolution but the independent, national development of China in competition with the rest of world capitalism.
The very low level of economic development in China necessitated the extraction of a high level of exploitation of its workers and peasants. The numerous power struggles within Chinese Communism were about how to achieve the aim of national development, not about the goal itself – which was shared by all factions.
Once this basic dynamic of the regime is understood, recent events in China are cause for neither surprise nor despondency. China broke from Russia in the late 1950s because it did not wish to become a Russian client state like Poland or Hungary. For a while it attempted to develop its economy alone in opposition to both the superpowers. The failure of this attempt has forced it to establish links with more developed economies.
The importance of all this for Marxists is that it was the decisive test for the kind of third world nationalist ‘socialism’ many on the left still worship from afar. In terms of traditions and language Mao stood far closer to Marxism than Castro or the Sandinistas. In terms of size and resources it was far better placed than Nicaragua or Tanzania to achieve independent economic development. But China has neither achieved socialism nor even sustained its economic independence from international capital.
The fate of the Chinese Revolution provides crucial confirmation of two basic Marxist propositions: firstly that there is no substitute for the working class as the agent of socialism, and secondly that capitalism has created an integrated world economy from which there is no ultimate escape except through world revolution.
 

But isn’t a simultaneous world revolution impossible?
Yes, a world revolution that takes place everywhere at once is impossible or extremely unlikely. But this isn’t what Marxists are talking about. What we are proposing is that successfully carrying out a revolution in one country can become the starting point for spreading the revolution internationally. This was the strategy proposed by Lenin and Trotsky, and it is one that is entirely realistic.
Socialism in one country is impossible because sooner or later world capitalism will either overthrow an isolated revolution by military force or it will do what it did to Russia. The isolated Russian economy was forced to compete in a world market on terms laid down by capitalism. The result was the restoration of capitalist economic relations. Russian workers suffered super-exploitation as Stalin built new industries to compete with the West.
But the return of exploitation was not inevitable. There was an alternative road, presented by Leon Trotsky, who began from the perspective of spreading the revolution. There are a number of reasons why this was possible – and why it would be possible in any truly revolutionary upheaval.
Firstly, the crisis of capitalism which creates the conditions for revolutionary upheavals would be an international not a national crisis. This is bound to be the case because the capitalist economy is fully international: every national economy is integrated into that world economy. As a result the conditions creating the revolution in one country would exist in many other countries at the same time.
Secondly, the victory of the working class in one country would inspire workers in other countries to follow their example. It would show workers could take power and raise workers’ confidence enormously. An outline would exist of the basic strategy and tactics to be used.
Thirdly, the existence of workers’ power in one country would provide a focus from which a worldwide revolutionary movement could be supported and organised. This doesn’t mean imposing revolution by force. It means drawing together the most advanced workers of all countries to discuss how the fight for workers’ power could be carried on and how the maximum international solidarity for the revolutionary struggle could be mobilised.
All these factors were at work in the years following the Russian Revolution. The First World War, which helped cause the revolution, also plunged all of Europe into a revolutionary storm. The German Emperor was overthrown and the Austrian Empire collapsed. In Bavaria and Hungary there were short-lived Soviet Republics. In Germany the revolution seemed set to succeed in both 1919 and 1923 while Italy saw a massive wave of factory occupations in 1920.
The Russian Revolution was a tremendous encouragement to those workers involved. The idea of Soviets – or workers’ councils – as the basis for workers’ power, was taken up by the workers of many countries during the course of the struggle. And in 1919 the Bolsheviks were able to found the Communist International – organising revolutionary workers worldwide.
But the revolutionary wave was defeated – and capitalism survived – though it was a close thing. Today the possibility of such an international wave of revolution is even greater than in 1917 to 1923. The development of capitalism has strengthened its international nature. The working class in every country is larger and has greater economic power than in Russia in 1917. The development of international communications and transport has made international contact far easier. Such developments will increase the impact of any revolutionary breakthrough and help spread the ideas of workers’ power.
 

n Molyneux: Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism (Suggested reading)




John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

John Molyneux
Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

Suggested reading

THIS READING list is intended to help those who would like to explore the arguments put forward here in greater depth. It is by no means exhaustive, however, and those who would like to go further should consult the ‘Books for Socialists’ booklist produced by Bookmarks, from which most of the titles that follow have been culled. Copies are available from branch bookstalls of the Socialist Workers Party, or by post from Bookmarks.
 
Chapter 1:
On socialism:

The Communist Manifesto, by Marx and Engels
 
The Future Socialist Society, by John Molyneux

On human nature:

Chapter two of How Marxism Works, by Chris Harman

On workers’ power:

Chapter four of The Revolutionary Road to Socialism, by Alex Callinicos
 

Chapter 2:
On Marxist economics:

Wage Labour and Capital, by Marx himself
 
Wages, Price and Profit, by Marx himself
 
Man’s Worldly Goods, by Leo Huberman

On economic crisis:

Why the world economy is in crisis, by Peter Green

On fascism:

Fascism: What it is and how to fight it, by Leon Trotsky

On revolutionary change:

Chapter nine of How Marxism Works, by Chris Harman

On workers’ power:

Chapter seven of The Revolutionary Ideas of Karl Marx, by Alex Callinicos
 

Chapter 3:
On historical materialism:

Chapter five of The Revolutionary Ideas of Karl Marx, by Alex Callinicos
 

Chapter 4:
On bourgeois democracy:

Chapter two of The Revolutionary Road to Socialism, by Alex Callinicos
 
Parliamentary Socialism, by Ralph Miliband
 

On the state:

State and Revolution, by Lenin
 
Marxists and the State (Education for Socialists no. 3)
 

Chapter 5:
On war:

Socialism and War, by Lenin
 
Chapter thirteen of How Marxism Works, by Chris Harman

On terrorism:

Against Individual Terrorism, by Leon Trotsky

On the family:

Women and the struggle for socialism, by Norah Carlin
 
Chapters thirteen and fourteen of Class struggle and women’s liberation, by Tony Cliff
 

Chapter 6:
On internationalism:

Chapter seven of The Revolutionary Ideas of Karl Marx, by Alex Callinicos

On racism:

Racism and Anti-racism, by Peter Alexander

On liberation movements:

Deflected Permanent Revolution, by Tony Cliff
 
South Africa: The Road to Revolution, by Alex Callinicos

On Ireland:

Ireland’s Permanent Revolution, by Chris Bambery
 
Labour in Irish History, by James Connolly

On Russia and Eastern Europe:

Russia: How the revolution was lost, by Alan Gibbons
 
Russia: From workers’ state to state capitalism, by Peter Binns, Tony Cliff and Chris Harman

On Stalin:

Chapter seven of What is the real Marxist tradition, by John Molyneux
 

Chapter 7:
On reformism:

Chapter two of The Revolutionary Road to Socialism, by Alex Callinicos
 
The Labour Party: Myth and Reality, by Duncan Hallas
 
Bailing out the System, by Ian Birchall

On trade unions:

Chapter three of The Revolutionary Road to Socialism by Alex Callinicos
 
Marxism and Trade Union Struggle – The General Strike of 1926, by Tony Cliff and Donny Gluckstein
 
The Mass Strike, by Rosa Luxemburg

On the revolutionary party:

Party and Class, by Chris Harman
 
Russia: The making of the Revolution, by Steve Wright
 
Lenin 1893–1914: Building the Party, by Tony Cliff

 

n Molyneux: Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism (1. What do you mean by socialism?)



John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

John Molyneux
Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

Chapter One:
What do you mean by socialism?

MOST PEOPLE’S ideas of what socialism would be like are dominated by the Stalinist tyranny in Russia or the experiences of Labour or other ‘left-wing’ governments. That is, they view socialism as either the control of all social life by a bureaucratic and oppressive state or as die status quo modified by a few reforms and somewhat more state intervention.
In the face of these uninspiring alternatives it is tempting to embark on a detailed account of how life would be organised in a genuinely socialist society. In fact Marxists, beginning with Marx himself, have resisted the temptation to draw up a blueprint for socialism as pointless and misleading. If the future society is to be truly socialist, then its details can be decided only by the workers who build it.
Consequently, Marxists have limited themselves to the statement of certain general principles which could be scientifically derived from the study of trends and forces at work under capitalism. These principles clearly differentiate the Marxist conception of socialism from its Stalinist and reformist corruptions.
For Marxists, the fundamental aim of socialism is the creation of a classless society. This is not a single act but a lengthy social process which begins under capitalism. Its starting point is the tendency of capitalism to develop the forces of production (i.e. to raise the productivity of labour and to concentrate the means of production in larger units).
Secondly, capitalism produces its own grave digger, the working class, which grows with the growth of capital. The first step, the decisive breakthrough to socialism, comes with the conquest of political power by the working class; that is, with the destruction of the capitalist state apparatus and the establishment of a workers’ state – what Marx called the dictatorship of the proletariat. By this he meant not a dictatorship over the working class but the direction of society by the working class itself. Looking at the Paris Commune of 1871, Marx specified mechanisms through which this could be achieved: the replacement of the parliamentary talk shop by a working body; the election and recallability of all state officials; no official to earn more than a skilled worker’s wage; abolition of the standing army and formation of a workers’ militia. The Russian revolution showed us the organisational form of workers’ power – the soviet or workers’ council – which arises directly from working-class struggle.
Following the consolidation of its state power and the defeat of the inevitable capitalist attempts at counter-revolution, the working class has to secure the transition to a fully socialist, classless society.
The working class will use its power to take all important industries and businesses into social ownership and place them under workers’ control. All the working population will be drawn into administering the new society. This will make democratic planning of the economy possible, ensuring an enormous growth in the wealth of society and that this growth serves people’s needs.
It will liberate women by establishing their complete legal equality and by socialising the burden of housework and child care so that this formal equality becomes reality. It will free society from the stains of racial, sexual and national bigotry.
It will use the enormous advances of modern science and technology to eliminate the dangers and drudgery of work. It will systematically reduce the working week and simultaneously raise the educational and cultural level of the people. This will pave the way for the disappearance of any group of privileged experts and for overcoming the divisions between mental and manual labour.
It will steadily widen the range of goods and services available free of charge – a process leading to the disappearance of money and to distribution on the principle, ‘each according to their needs’.
All this must be done in conjunction with spreading the revolution internationally. We know from the Russian experience that the transition to socialism cannot be completed in one country.
Once this has been achieved and capitalism has been destroyed worldwide, the immense resources of our planet will be harnessed for the peoples’ needs. The state will wither away for lack of anyone to repress or privilege to protect. A new epoch of human history will open – the epoch of real freedom for a united humanity.
 

But you can’t change human nature ...
So what is the most common objection to this vision of socialism?
‘Socialism will never work, you can’t change human nature.’
Before answering this point directly, it’s worth noting just how this argument is used. Whenever conservatives are confronted with protests against exploitation and oppression, they always turn to the human nature argument. War? Well it’s human nature to fight. Racism? It’s human nature to fear ‘outsiders’ and people who are ‘different’. The oppression of women? Human nature again: men and women are ‘naturally different’.
Slavery, too, was once supposed to be a product of human nature. It was the nature of blacks, it was said, to be slaves. The same with feudalism, and usually God was brought into back up the argument. Remember the words of the hymn:



The rich man in his castle
The poor man at his gate
God made them high and lowly
And ordered their estate.



It was the God-given nature of some people to be lords and others to be serfs. ‘Human nature’, God-given or otherwise, has always been the favourite alibi of the oppressors.
But what is this unchanging human nature supposed to be? Clearly human beings do have certain more or less fixed and permanent needs. To survive at all they need air, food, drink shelter, etc. They also have sexual and emotional needs. To live humanly, rather than just exist, they need social contact, affection, love and a measure of freedom. However none of these features of human nature will cause the slightest problems for socialism. On the contrary, socialism will meet these permanent human needs immeasurably better than capitalism or any other previous form of society.
But of course this is not what people mean when they bring up the question of human nature. They mean that human beings are ‘naturally’ selfish and greedy and this will make a society of solidarity and equality impossible.
Again it is important to know the source of this idea. It comes from the Christian doctrine of original sin and has no scientific basis whatsoever. In fact even in our present society it’s not difficult to observe numerous acts of kindness, generosity and self-sacrifice which would be impossible if people were selfish by nature. But under capitalism these features of the human personality are obscured because a society based on production for profit encourages greed, indeed demands it, at every turn.
More generally, the point is that it is the material social conditions in which people live that shape their personality and behaviour. As Marx put it, human nature is nothing but ‘the ensemble of social relations’. The proof of this is seen in the enormous differences in what people in different societies have thought of as ‘natural’.
To the American Indian, private ownership of land was ‘unnatural’. To the 18th-century landowner it was the most basic human right. To the Ancient Greeks, homosexuality was the highest form of love. To the Victorian Englishman it was the lowest. To the traditional Hindu, arranged marriage has been the norm for centuries. To most Westerners it now seems ‘unnatural’. Change the social conditions and you change ‘human nature’.
Even more important is Marx’s point that it is not just that changed circumstances produce changed people, but that people change in the process of changing their circumstances. You can see this in an ordinary strike. Most strikes begin because workers want more money. But as the strike goes on, feelings of solidarity and collective pride often grow and become just as important as the original issue.
Revolution is a strike writ large. In a revolution millions of people stand up for the first time and take control of their society. Their ‘human nature’ will grow accordingly. ‘Revolution is necessary’, wrote Marx, ‘not only because the ruling class cannot be overthrown in any other way, but also because the class overthrowing it can only in a revolution succeed in ridding itself of all the muck of ages and become fitted to found society anew.’
 

Won’t we always need bosses?
‘Workers’ control? It would never work. Workers are too stupid to run industry. Someone always has to be boss.’
This familiar objection to the very basis of socialism contains a mixture of elements. In large part it is just anti-working class prejudice of the kind that is widespread in the middle class, almost universal in the ruling class, and unfortunately not unknown in the working class itself. But it also points to a real problem, not an insoluble problem, but a problem nevertheless.
First let’s deal with the prejudice. The fact is that most workers as individuals, and even more so as a collective, know far more about the immediate process of production than does the management hierarchy above them. After all it is they who actually do the work. The main function of foremen, supervisors, managers, etc. is not to tell workers how to do the job, but to ensure that they do it. They are ‘necessary’ for the simple reason that in a system based on exploitation workers have an entirely reasonable inclination to do as little alienated labour as possible. Many of the other ‘special skills’ of management – advertising, marketing, winning contracts by wining and dining other executives, devising productivity schemes, ‘handling’ strikes and disputes and so on – flow from the requirements of production organised on a capitalist basis.
In a socialist society these special skills would become as redundant as medieval jousting is now.
It must also be remembered that much of the knowledge required for running industry that workers lack has nothing whatsoever to do with their lack of ability. It is simply kept secret from them because employers think – rightly – that it wouldn’t be ‘safe’ for trade unionists, shop stewards etc. to know what is going on.
The main obstacle to workers’ control, apart from capitalist power, is not workers’ lack of knowledge but their lack of confidence in their own abilities. This is hardly surprising for the whole capitalist system, through its schools, its media, its bureaucracies and officials, operates to crush this confidence.
However it is the struggle for workers’ control, die revolution itself, which will remove this obstacle. In revolution workers discover their power, and their confidence soars. The day after they have smashed the state, the prospect of running British Leyland won’t seem so daunting.
So much for the prejudice. What then is the real problem? Class society creates a division between manual and mental labour and capitalism accentuates this division. Moreover, capitalism fragments production itself into innumerable small repetitive operations performed by different workers. The result is that, in general, workers do not have the scientific and technical knowledge needed for complete mastery of the production process, nor will they have it immediately following the revolution. Consequently many of the ‘experts’ who are highly privileged in relation to ordinary workers will still be needed in the first stages of workers’ power. Indeed it may prove necessary to retain their co-operation by continuing to offer them certain limited privileges.
Does this undermine the possibility of workers’ control? No, because even if the experts remain, they can still be placed under the control of the workers. Under capitalism technical specialists are highly paid, but they don’t actually run enterprises. They work for managers and employers who may have little technical knowledge, but who can judge the work of the specialists by how it contributes to their profits. Under workers’ power the specialists will still work for managers and employers – but the managers will be the elected factory council and the employer will be the workers’ state. These bodies may lack technical knowledge, but will judge the work of the specialists by how it contributes to social need.
Workers’ control therefore is a practical proposition. Indeed, looking at the current state of British and world industry, it is the only practical proposition.
 

Don’t revolutions mean violence?
It is certainly likely that a revolution would involve some violence for the simple reason that the ruling class is not going to surrender its wealth and power peacefully. For the same reason, to reject revolution because it involves violence is to reject the possibility of getting rid of capitalism. And however much violence there would be in a revolution, it pales into insignificance compared with the violence involved in allowing capitalism to continue.
Capitalism is inseparable from violence and generates it at every turn. Thus the daily process of capitalist production exposes workers to injury, disease and even death – all in the pursuit of profit. There is the violence of condemning thousands of millions to poverty, and hundreds of millions to starvation in a world overflowing with wealth. There is the violence of military dictatorship – the only form in which capitalism can survive in many parts of the world, and the violence of imperialism which supports and maintains it.
There is the violence of capitalist war which has claimed at least 100 million victims this century and which threatens the ultimate violence of the nuclear holocaust.
No system based on the exploitation of the overwhelming majority by a tiny minority can maintain itself without violence. No system based on the competitive struggle for profits, one firm against another, one country’s firms against another’s, can avoid war. The only way to end this ongoing violence is for the working class to use the collective violence of revolution to overthrow capitalism. But having said this, it’s still important to challenge the capitalist image of revolution as an orgy of mindless bloodletting.
Revolution is violent. It is the forcible imposition of the will of one section of the population, the working majority, on the other, the ruling minority. But precisely because it is a question of the majority repressing the minority rather than the other way around, it is likely to involve relatively little bloodshed.
The bourgeoisie cannot fight its own battles; it is numerically weak. It depends on others, basically workers in uniform, to fight for it. All the violence the ruling class inflicts on the working class is done by one section of the workers against the rest. A powerful working-class movement that is united, ready to fight, and correctly led, can prevent this. It can break the power of the ruling class by winning over the rank and file of the army. When this happens the ruling class is unable to mount the level of resistance which would necessitate the use of very extensive violence by workers. It was because just such a process had taken place in the Russian revolution of 1917 that the October insurrection in Petrograd cost only a handful of lives.
It is also important to remember that revolutions don’t begin with acts of violence by revolutionaries. They arise from the class struggle itself and erupt when the class antagonisms in capitalism boil over.
If, however, the working class fails to use the necessary force at the decisive moment, then it lays itself open to the immeasurably greater violence of capitalist repression. Thus, during the Paris Commune of 1871, 30,000 Communards were slaughtered in a few days. The fascist counter-revolutions of Italy, Germany and Spain took the lives of millions. The Chilean coup often years ago and die Polish coup of 1981 show the same basic feature. In all these cases the failure to press home the revolution is punished by a one-sided civil war of hideous violence and barbarity.
Anyone put off revolution because of its alleged ‘violence’ is simply being duped by the utterly hypocritical arguments of bourgeois politicians who preach ‘non-violence’ to the workers, but never practice it themselves.
 

‘Under socialism they’d make us all the same ...’
‘Under socialism everyone will be the same.’
‘Socialism means grey uniformity.’
‘Socialism denies freedom of choice to the individual.’
This is a litany of complaint that must be familiar to every socialist. But before answering it, let’s consider the record of capitalism on this question, for supporters of capitalism have always claimed the defence of individuality and individual freedom as its supreme virtues.
In fact individuality under capitalism has always been the preserve of the privileged few. From school uniform and rote-learning to army uniform and square-bashing, from terraced housing and tower blocks to production lines and typing pools, the tendency of capitalism is precisely to impose ‘grey uniformity’ on the working class. It is the same in the fields of art, entertainment and sport. Capitalism produces the ‘spectator’ and the ‘mass audience’ – the majority of the population reduced to the role of passive observers to the activities of a few ‘stars’ purveyed by a centralised mass media.
All this derives from the fundamental features of the system – its divisions into classes and its organisation of production for profit. The fact that the ruling class is a tiny minority of society means that it can survive only by maintaining the working class majority in a state of mass conformity. The organisation of production for profit means that the individual creative labour of millions is stripped of its individuality and creativity and turned into so many hours of abstract labour power. Competition compels the capitalist to treat workers not as human beings but as items in die accounts, as mere appendages to machines. The individualism of capitalism was always only the individualism of the entrepreneurs – their freedom to exploit and accumulate without regard to social need.
But even this individualism is largely a thing of the past. In the age of the giant bureaucratic corporation the capitalist manager also becomes just a conforming cog in the accumulation machine.
The bogey of Stalinist Russia is always raised here as an example of ‘socialism’ crushing all individual freedom. But Russia is not socialist but state capitalist – a highly centralised form of exploitation which is an extreme expression of the anti-individualist tendency inherent in capitalism.
Marxists, it must be emphasised, are not opposed to individualism as such, only to bourgeois individualism which operates at the expense of the rest of society. Individualism that contributes to society, that makes it more varied, lively and humane, is something we are all in favour of.
The starting point of socialism is the collective action of workers. But that collective action is simultaneously an increase in the individual activity and freedom of each worker involved. It is the means through which the individual workers can assert their needs, stand up for their rights, refuse to be just entries on a balance sheet and begin to control their own lives.
The victory of the socialist revolution would raise this individual freedom twofold. Through workers’ councils each individual would participate in running society. Through workers’ control each individual would shape his or her working environment. Through the provision of proper contraception, abortion and nursery facilities women would be able to make a free individual choice about having children. With equal pay and work for all, marriage and sexual relationships would also become a matter of free choice rather than economic dependence.
Through the abolition of poverty and the drastic reduction of the working week, each individual would be free to develop his or her talents to the full. Indeed, one of the main reasons for fighting for socialism is precisely to secure a society in which, as Marx put it in The Communist Manifesto, ‘the free development of each is the condition of the free development of all’.
 

n Molyneux: Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism (Foreword)




John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

John Molyneux
Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

Foreword

THIS SMALL book is made up from a selection of articles from the Teach yourself Marxism column in Socialist Worker, the weekly paper of the Socialist Workers Party. The original articles were written in the years 1983–86 and are reprinted here without significant alteration. They have, however, been selected, grouped under topics and put as far as possible into a coherent order by Steve Wright and Peter Marsden, to whom thanks are due. Inevitably, given the conditions of production, there is a certain amount of overlap and repetition.
The Teach yourself Marxism column is written with two sorts of people particularly in mind. The first is the thinking worker who is beginning to question his or her situation under capitalism, and who wants to find out about socialism and Marxism to see whether they offer a credible alternative. This reader has a multitude of questions arising from their experience, the media, what they were told at school, discussions at work, and so on. The column attempts to answer these questions in as simple and straightforward a way as possible.
The second kind of reader is already a committed and active revolutionary socialist. To be a revolutionary activist is to be a permanent persuader; someone who at work, at union meetings and political meetings, on picket lines and in the pub gets involved in discussion and debate on everything from the latest strike to the role of US imperialism or what went wrong in Russia. In all these discussions the revolutionary socialist has to strive to counter the capitalist system of ideas that dominates most people’s thinking, and to put across the socialist, Marxist, point of view. The column aims to assist in this, to provide, again as straightforwardly as possible, some of the arguments the activist needs to have at his or her fingertips.
Not surprisingly, Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism has similar audiences in view and similar purposes. In addition, this book hopes to provide an introduction to most of the main ideas of Marxist theory. It is worth pointing out that virtually every argument put forward in these pages is a compressed version of a longer, more developed and substantiated case to be found elsewhere. For example the section on exploitation in chapter two is a condensation of the theory of surplus value to be found in Marx’s Capital – or more accessibly in his pamphlet Wage Labour and Capital, while the Marxist view of terrorism outlined in chapter five is stated more fully in Leon Trotsky’s Against Individual Terrorism. The interested reader is strongly urged to follow up as many such leads as possible – see our Suggested Reading list at the end of the book.
As an introduction to Marxism this work is one of many; it cannot claim any special merit except, perhaps, one. The majority of commentaries on Marxism treat it as a more or less interesting academic interpretation of the world. This was not at all what its founder intended. Marx produced Marxism not for the university professor and the lecture hall, but for the worker and the factory floor. It is there, a system of ideas for use in all the discussions and battles, large and small, whose sum total constitutes the struggle of the working class for freedom and socialism. Hopefully, Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism makes this, at least, clear.
Finally I would like to dedicate this work to Kevin Murphy, a fine friend and comrade over fifteen years and one of the best arguers for revolutionary socialism I know.
John Molyneux, February 1987

John Molyneux is a member of the Socialist Workers Party in Britain and a regular columnist for the weekly Socialist Worker. He is the author of Marxism and the Party (1978), Trotsky’s Theory of Revolution (1981), and What is the real Marxist tradition? (1985).
 

n Molyneux: Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism (3. Getting our ideas right)



John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

John Molyneux
Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

Chapter Three:
Getting our ideas right


But socialists are such a tiny minority ...
THE MOST obvious obstacle to the socialist transformation of society is the simple fact that most workers are not socialists. Indeed most workers accept capitalism, believe it can’t be changed, and view socialists who want to change it as idealists or troublemakers.
So what does Marxism have to say about this crucial problem? Why do workers so often accept reactionary ideas, and how can this change?
It is one of the most basic propositions of Marxism that it is not ideas that shape the state of society, bur the state of society that shapes ideas. The generally-held ideas of society reflect the way society is organised. In feudal society there was a rigid division between lords and serfs. This was therefore generally accepted as natural and inevitable; to use the language of the time, something ‘ordained by God’. Capitalist society is founded on the profit motive – and therefore this is thought of as ‘natural’. In fact such ideas do more than simply reflect society; they justify it. They justify the current class divisions. As Marxists put it: ‘the ruling ideas of any age will be the ideas of the ruling class’.
If we look at capitalism today we can easily see how this can be so. The ruling class controls the channels for the formation and propagation of ideas: the education system, the newspapers, the television stations and all other means of mass communication, and its ideas are dominant in all these. But the power of ruling-class ideas does not arise simply from a ‘conspiracy’ of rich newspaper proprietors, publishers and university professors, ministers and civil servants and so on. Capitalist ideas seem to make sense because they reflect the world as we experience it. Businesses are run for profit and society is divided into classes – so to believe these things are ‘natural’ and ‘true’ seems simple common sense.
So for Marxists there is nothing particularly surprising about the working-class Tory or the sexist trade unionist. If capitalist ideology didn’t dominate workers’ thinking in this way capitalism couldn’t survive at all.
Similarly socialist ideas will only acquire such ‘obviousness’ when a socialist society exists. So this faces us with an immediate dilemma: if, as we say, socialism cannot be created on behalf of workers, but must be the act of the working class itself, how can this happen when the working class is dominated by capitalist ideas?
Workers’ ideas clearly cannot simply be changed on a mass scale by socialist propaganda. A socialist newspaper such as Socialist Worker can’t match the operations of the millionaire press. The spread of socialist ideas on a mass scale must have a material base; just as capitalist ideas dominate workers’ thinking because they reflect their daily experience, so the spread of socialist ideas will reflect changes in that daily experience.
Here it is necessary to clear up a widespread confusion. It is often supposed that the more people suffer, the more revolutionary they become. But if this were so, then the revolution would have happened long ago. In fact it is not suffering, but the experience of fighting against suffering that forms the material basis for the growth of socialist ideas.
If the level of workers’ struggle is low, and results largely in defeat, then workers – with little control over their own working lives – feel that society cannot be changed. But if the level of struggle is high, and victory follows victory, then workers’ confidence in their ability to change their own lives rises, and they become more able to see that alternatives to capitalism are possible. If the level of class struggle is so high that it threatens the existence of the bourgeois state, then socialist ideas can spread like wildfire.
None of this means that the attempt by socialists to spread their ideas through newspapers, pamphlets and books is irrelevant or unnecessary. Workers do not have to be socialists before they engage in battles that challenge the ruling class – but their ability to win those battles is closely linked to their level of political consciousness. Mass strikes, workplace occupations and demonstrations create conditions in which it is possible for socialist ideas to spread, but – as the example of the trade union Solidarity in Poland proves – it is impossible for workers to improvise, suddenly and in the heat of battle, a fully worked-out socialist understanding of the world.
The socialist ideas have to be there, ready to inform those struggles, to articulate and generalise from these new experiences, and ready to prove their practical relevance by pointing to the way forward.
 

Dialectical materialism? What on earth does that mean?
Marxism is a general theory of society from the point of view of the working class. It includes and integrates into a single whole theories of history, economics, politics and philosophy.
The philosophy of Marxism is usually called ‘dialectical materialism’. Marxism is materialist since it regards the production of the necessities of life as the basis on which ideas arise, rather than vice versa. But what does dialectical mean?
There is a difficulty here because it is obviously not a term used in everyday speech, nor, naturally, is it explained in school. It is a philosophical term deriving originally from ancient Greece, and developed by the great German philosopher Hegel at the end of the 18th century.
Dialectics is the logic of change, of evolution and of development. Its starting point is the idea (and the fact) that everything changes and is involved in an ongoing process of coming into being and ceasing to be. To understand the significance of this compare it with what is known as ‘formal’ logic (originally developed by Aristotle and usually thought of as the rules of sound thinking). The basic idea of formal logic is that something either is the case or is not the case, but that it can’t be both at the same time. For example, the cat is either on the mat or is not on the mat.
For many purposes formal logic is useful and necessary. But as soon as you take movement and change into account, it ceases to be adequate. A cat moving goes through a moment when it is in the process of passing onto the mat or in the process of passing off it – when it is both on and off the mat. Dialectics is in advance of formal logic because it enables us to grasp this contradiction.
This really matters when we come to analyse social development and, in particular, how the transition takes place from one form of society to another. Ruling classes believe in die fixed eternal nature of their form of society. The feudal lords believed feudalism was ordained by God and would last forever. Today’s ruling classes believe capitalism reflects a fixed human nature and will similarly survive forever. Dialectics, however, insists that nothing is fixed or lasts forever. Feudalism arose historically and was destroyed historically. Likewise capitalism is a historical product with a beginning and, sooner or later, an end.
This brings us to the second fundamental proposition of dialectics. This is that social change occurs through internal contradiction, through the struggle of opposites. A given society forms a whole or totality, but within that whole there are antagonisms and opposing forces. The change from one form of society to another is the result of the dominant element being overcome by its antagonist or opposite.
It is no accident that dialectics was developed by Hegel at the time of the French Revolution – the greatest, most radical social upheaval the world had then seen. The dialectical theory of development through contradiction was the philosophical expression of the French Revolution.
But because the French Revolution was a bourgeois revolution, one led by lawyers and intellectuals, it necessarily appeared to Hegel that the driving force of history was the struggle between opposite ideas (between the idea of monarchy and the idea of a republic, between the idea of aristocracy and the idea of equality, etc.). Marx, coming 50 years later and taking the standpoint of the working class, was able to go beyond Hegel and show that this struggle of ideas was a reflection of a struggle of material forces. With Marx the dialectic became the logic of class struggle.
A third proposition of dialectics is that quantitative changes become qualitative ones. Within a particular framework of society changes occur. With capitalism, for example, the forces of production advance and grow bigger and the working class grows more powerful. For a time these changes are quantitative – they modify society but don’t transform it. But sooner or later the changes become too great to be confined within the existing framework. For development to continue, this framework has to be broken and a new social order established.
Thus dialectics is not only the logic of change and of class struggle, but also the logic of revolution. Despite its obscure philosophical origins, it is a powerful practical tool enabling Marxists to grasp the inner dynamics of the working-class struggle.
 

Their truth, and ours
‘We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain inalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness.’
These celebrated lines from the American Declaration of Independence are typical of the ringing proclamations produced by the bourgeois revolutions that paved the way for the development of modern capitalism – typical in three ways.
First, they concentrate on supposedly universal and absolute, but abstract, truths and rights, rather than on anything specific. Second, in the context of the times, when absolute monarchy was the order of the day in most of the world, they were immensely progressive and genuinely radical. Third, even at the time of writing they were being systematically violated by their bourgeois revolutionary authors – the independent United States continued to practice and tolerate slavery for another ninety years.
Today capitalist propaganda and ideology continue, rather perfunctorily, to proclaim these same universal principles, but the practical violations remain, and the radical progressive content has long since disappeared.
Marx, as the theorist of working-class revolution, developed an entirely different attitude to both ‘truth’ and ‘rights’. For Marx there are no absolute or universal truths, for in the last analysis die test of truth is always practice. A proposition is true in so far as it enables human beings to perform certain practical operations in the world. ‘Truth’ is therefore historical and above all concrete. A proposition is true in relation to specific circumstances. Change the circumstances sufficiently and it ceases to be true.
Similarly with ‘rights’. For Marxists there are no god-given rights that all human beings are born with. People, or more particularly groups and classes, have only such rights as they are able to win and defend in struggle.
Whether or not Marxists support these ‘rights’ depends on which classes are involved and what they will use the ‘rights’ to do. Thus we are for ‘the right to work’ when it is a demand around which the working class can be mobilised to fight capitalist unemployment. We are against the ‘right to work’ when it is a justification for scabbing.
Whenever the bourgeoisie and its media hangers-on talk about ‘freedom’ and the like, Marxists will always inquire ‘whose freedom? Freedom to do what?’ It is no coincidence that the bourgeois French Revolution was fought under the banner of a set of abstractions – ‘Liberty, Equality, Fraternity’ – whereas the working-class Russian Revolution fought for specifics – ‘Bread, Peace and Land’.
Another illustration of this point is the question of freedom of speech. The ruling class continually stress that this must be seen as a fundamental human right. In fact, it is a right which in capitalist society is subject to a thousand and one restrictions and limitations. Just try exercising it if you are a soldier, a school student, a civil servant or with your boss at work. Moreover, history has shown that the bourgeoisie are perfectly ready to dispense with any commitment to this right when they feel this is necessary to preserve their rule.
What then is the Marxist attitude to ‘freedom of speech’?
In general we defend it, not because it is some divinely bestowed right, but because it is greatly to the advantage of the working class under capitalism that there should be a free flow of ideas and debate (and this will be true for people under socialism also). Indeed we make a point of defending it precisely where capitalism restricts it. What an excellent thing it would be if soldiers could freely criticise their officers, school students their teachers and workers their bosses, without fear of reprisal.
We do not, however, pretend that freedom of speech can be an absolute or universal right. We do not, for example, defend the right of the National Front to incite racial hatred or indeed to spread their Nazi ideas in any shape or form. Nor, in a workers’ state, would we grant the displaced capitalist class the right to urge insurrection and counter-revolution.
But we do not make a fetish of this denial of freedom of speech, even for racists. It is not for us a matter of absolute principle to stop the mouth of every single fascist or racist regardless of circumstances, still less to ban every point of view we find obnoxious. It is always a matter of strategic and practical judgement.
But how to explain the difference between the bourgeoisie’s apparent commitment to universal rights and principles and the Marxist insistence that all rights and principles are historical and dependent on circumstances? Is it a matter of hypocrisy versus honesty? Yes, but the hypocrisy and the honesty are class-based. The bourgeoisie are obliged to be hypocritical because they are a tiny minority able to rule only if they can pass their interests off as the interests of ‘the whole people’.
Marxism, however, represents the working class, who are in the immense majority and therefore have no need to disguise their specific class interests. On the contrary, a clear understanding of exactly what their interests are is precisely what the working class need to achieve their freedom.
 

The point, however, is to change it
‘The philosophers have only interpreted the world in various ways – the point is to change it.’
So runs the most famous of all Marx’s quotations and, appropriately, it is carved on his gravestone in Highgate cemetery. What the quotation makes clear is that Marx was first and foremost a revolutionary whose primary concern was to participate in the overthrow of capitalism.
Yet it is also clear that Marx was very interested in ‘interpreting the world’. After all, he spent the best years of his life sat in the British Museum working on an ‘interpretation’ of the laws of motion of capitalism. So what is the relationship between theory and practice in Marxism?
Marxism stands for the unity of theory and practice. Revolutionary theory is necessary for revolutionary practice. Revolutionary practice is necessary for revolutionary theory. At one moment the emphasis may be on theory, at another on practice, but in the long run, each is impossible without the other.
Let us deal first with the importance of theory for practice. The working class needs theory, its own theory, because without it it is bound to be dominated, to a greater or lesser degree, by the ideas of the bourgeoisie and the petty bourgeoisie. Everybody, consciously or unconsciously, is guided by certain general ideas about the world. If these ideas are not socialist they all inevitably turn out to be capitalist or semi-capitalist, for as Marx put it, the ruling ideas are always the ideas of the ruling class.
If workers do not believe the emancipation of the working class is the act of the working class, then they will look for salvation from above, or, worse still, come to the conclusion that no emancipation is possible at all. If workers lack a Marxist analysis of the economic crisis they will accept one or other of the various bourgeois explanations on offer: ‘it’s an act of god’, ‘it’s all the fault of lazy workers’ or ‘powerful trade unions’. At best it’s due to ‘government mismanagement’ and the solution is to elect a better government.
In other words, a working class not guided by Marxist theory is bound to play into the hands of its enemies.
To take two examples; in both Iran and Poland the mass of workers fought magnificently against their oppressors, but lacked any worked-out socialist theory. In both cases the gap was filled by religion. In Iran this meant the people, having overthrown one tyrant, raised another in his place, this time with the blessing of Allah. In Poland it meant the workers, and especially their leaders, were susceptible to the church’s calls for peace and moderation in the face of an opponent that was preparing to strike a decisive blow.
Theory, then, is vital to effective practice. But the converse is equally true: practice is vital for the development of theory. Indeed theory derives from the problems encountered in the practical effort to change the world. It was because Marx was engaged in the struggle to change society that he needed to understand how it worked. It was because he had taken the side of the working class that he was able to analyse the workings of capitalism.
Practice is also essential as the test of theory. No theory, however sophisticated, can ever be a perfect representation or reflection of all the complexities of reality.
Theory is always a simplification and a generalisation. Whether it is a valid simplification depends ultimately on whether it stands the test of practice: on whether it helps or hinders humans to shape and control their world.
There have always been some would-be Marxists who have sought to separate theory and practice, to develop theory for its own sake. They have tried to achieve this without involving themselves in working-class struggles. They are destined to disappointment. They cut off theory from both its real source and from the necessary discipline of the attempt to implement it.
All the real advances in Marxist theory have come as a response to developments or problems encountered in the class struggle. Marx’s pamphlet the Civil War in France was produced as a result of the Paris Commune, Trotsky’s theory of permanent revolution from the 1905 revolution in Russia. Lenin developed his theory of imperialism in response to the First World War and wrote State and Revolution during the 1917 revolution.
All the outstanding figures of the Marxist tradition have been both major theorists and active revolutionaries. Theory is essential, but our aim is the unity of theory and practice in practice. The point, as we said at the start, is to change the world.
 

n Molyneux: Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism (5. What do socialists say about ...?)



John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

John Molyneux
Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

Chapter Five:
What do socialists say about ...?


Overpopulation
ONE OF THE most common explanations of the scenes of mass starvation in Ethiopia and of the appalling phenomenon of third world poverty is that these countries suffer from ‘overpopulation’. There are simply too many mouths to feed, or so it is said.
This argument is given added force by the fact that it seems to be believed by a number of third world governments. In recent years, for example, there have been the late Sanjay Gandhi’s forcible sterilisation campaign in India, and the one-child policy in ‘communist’ China.
Nevertheless despite this powerful backing it is an argument that cannot withstand the slightest contact with the facts. Let us begin with the example of Ethiopia itself. Ethiopia has a population of 31 million in an area of 1,222,000 square kilometres (five times the size of the UK). This gives it a population density of 25 per square kilometre, as compared with 228 per square kilometre in Britain. Comparisons could also be made with West Germany (population density 248 per square kilometre), the Netherlands (347), and Japan (315). In other words, far from being ‘overpopulated’, Ethiopia is, in reality, very sparsely populated.
But perhaps Ethiopia is an exception, or perhaps it is unreasonable to compare a largely rural third world country with advanced industrial nations. Let us have a look at a number of third world countries.
First of all the large majority of third world countries have relatively low population densities. Not that this helps them much. For example, Chad, the Congo, Sudan, Somalia, Mali, Paraguay and Bolivia all have population densities of less than 10 per square kilometre, yet all remain desperately poor.
But what of India and China with their so-called ‘teeming millions’ and their attempts at state population control? In fact, both have a population density less than Britain – India 208 per square kilometre, and China 102.
Finally, there are those areas of the third world that are densely populated: Bangladesh (616 per square kilometre), Hong Kong (4,827), Singapore (4,122), South Korea (382), Taiwan (486), Mauritius (480). Strangely – at least strangely for the ‘overpopulation’ theory – many of these areas turn out to be among the most prosperous anywhere in die third world. Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan are, after Japan, the three richest places in the whole of southern and eastern Asia, with South Korea making rapid progress in the same direction. Mauritius, off the east coast of Africa, is undoubtedly poor, but it has wealth per head more than four times the average for the area.
In short, an examination of the facts shows that there is absolutely no causal connection between high population and poverty. Nor should this be surprising, for it is a question not only of facts but also of simple logic. Every extra person is not only an extra mouth to feed, but also an extra worker to produce goods.
Also, it is important to ask why the population is growing in third world countries. The answer is not that people are having more children – the birth rate for the third world as a whole is 33 per thousand per year, slightly less than it was in Britain until the end of the 19th century – but that the death rate, in particular the infant mortality rate, is falling. This in turn comes from an improvement, albeit slight, in general living standards (diet, medical care, sanitation and so on). Far from population growth causing poverty, it is in general a result of a small increase in prosperity.
Why then, if it is such nonsense, is the overpopulation argument so popular? The answer is simple. It is because, for the world’s ruling classes in both the developed countries and the third world itself, it is the perfect alibi. It distracts attention from the vast sums spent on arms which, if redirected, could solve the world’s malnutrition problem, from the obscenity of ‘food mountains’ hoarded because there is no profit in selling to the poor, and from the looting of the third world by imperialism and the multinationals. Like so many capitalist ideas it shifts the blame for the results of oppression from the system onto the oppressed themselves.
The myth of overpopulation can be compared to society’s other myths. For example that ‘people are unemployed because they’re too lazy to work’; that women are raped and battered ‘because they ask for it’; that people are poor because they are idle and spendthrift.
The origins of the whole ‘overpopulation’ theory date back to the 18th-century parson and economist, Thomas Malthus, whose Essay on Population, published in 1798, was designed to counter radical ideas coming from the French Revolution. Marx scathingly dismissed Malthus’ theory as ‘a libel on the human race’. 186 years have not improved it.
 

Religion
‘Criticism of religion,’ wrote the young Marx, ‘is the foundation of all criticism’, and when he wrote this, in Germany in 1843, it was certainly true. At that time society and social thought were very much dominated by religion.
Today in Britain the criticism of religion may seem a much less urgent matter. However a glance round the world, at countries as different as Poland, Iran, Ireland, and Nicaragua, reveals many instances of religion exerting a major influence on the course of the class struggle. It is not, therefore, a question Marxists can afford to forget or ignore.
What, then, is the Marxist attitude to religion? Consistent Marxists are, of course, atheists. The Marxist outlook is materialist. It regards the ideas in people’s heads, including religious ideas, as a response to the material conditions of their lives. As Marx put it, ‘Man makes religion, religion does not make man.’ For Marx religion is an upside-down world view produced by an upside-down world. People deprived by class society of control of their own labour and the product of that labour are thereby deprived of control of their lives and of their society. They respond by projecting their aspirations to control their own destiny on to a supernatural omnipotent god, by projecting their dreams of happiness, peace and fulfilment on to an imaginary afterlife.
Religion arose first in circumstances where the low level of the productive forces made starvation, suffering and alienation inevitable. It gave illusory hope to those whose real situation was hopeless. It was, in Marx’s words, ‘The sigh of the oppressed creature, the heart of a heartless world ... the opium of the people’.
Arising in this way, religion also serves to reinforce the conditions which generate it. Now that these conditions are no longer inevitable, it impedes the struggle to control the bakery on earth by promising ‘pie in the sky’ hereafter. Religion therefore becomes a weapon in the hands of the ruling class. It sanctifies their laws as god’s laws, their order as god’s order, and their wars as god’s wars. In preaching submission to divine authority it simultaneously encourages submission to worldly power.
For Marxists, the struggle against religious illusions is a necessary part of the struggle against the social system that produces those illusions. But in seeking to combat the influence of religion we should not oversimplify its political role. Religion is not always the straightforward ally of all reaction. It can only sustain the class society on which it rests if it retains its hold on the minds of the masses. It therefore has to be adaptable, move with the times, proclaim its sympathy with the poor and even at times for popular movements. Thus the Catholic church in Poland could only exercise its moderating influence on Solidarity if it presented itself as an ally of the workers’ movement.
Because religion is ‘the sigh of the oppressed creature’ as well as the ‘opium of the people’, and because the consciousness of the oppressed has been dominated by religion for centuries, it is often the case that genuine popular movements assume a religious form.
This is particularly the case where the influence of Marxism is weak and where the peasantry plays the major role. It is in these cases that religion assumes its most radical form.
Obviously Marxists should not confuse the religious illusions of the oppressed with the established churches of the oppressors, any more than we confuse the reformist illusions of workers with the reformism of right-wing politicians. The drug addict is not the same as the drugs racketeer. Nor do we use these religious illusions (as the Stalinists did over Poland) to refuse solidarity with those in struggle.
Nonetheless, even in its most left-wing forms religion remains an obstacle to the self-emancipation of the working class, always opening the way to notions of class peace and reconciliation. Above all it cannot provide the scientific understanding of society which is the precondition of transforming society. Only Marxism can do that.
 

War
The rise of the anti-nuclear movement has brought with it a resurgence of pacifism. Marxists, of course, support all movements to disarm the bourgeois state and share with the pacifists the desire to put an end to war and violence. The creation of a society totally free from war is in fact one of our central aims.
But Marxists are not pacifists. Indeed, we are opposed to pacifism.
The first reason for this is that pacifism is completely ineffective as an instrument for preventing or resisting war. This has been proved time and again in the twentieth century.
Both the First and the Second World Wars were preceded by widespread pacifist moods and powerful pacifist movements. A form of pacifism was the dominant ideology of the majority of the Second International, which organised millions of workers before 1914. And in the 1930s pacifist hopes were concentrated in the League of Nations. In both cases these pacifist movements not only failed to stop the war, but also collapsed into total impotence once the wars began.
The root of pacifism’s weakness lies in its failure to diagnose the causes of war. Pacifism tends to regard war as simply the product of misguided violent people with misguided violent attitudes. It therefore sees the remedy as lying in the large-scale conversion of people to peaceful attitudes. In reality war has much deeper roots. Its main cause in the modern world is the capitalist system, which subordinates all production, and with it the whole of society, to the struggle for capital accumulation, which by its very nature is competitive.
If the outbreak of violence between individual capitalists is prevented by the existence of the capitalist state, which has a monopoly of armed force, the existence of many such states only makes war between them all the more inevitable. Moreover, the power of the capitalist state is such that it can impose war on its population regardless of whether they want it or not, just as Thatcher can site Cruise missiles in Britain regardless of the opinion polls.
So even if pacifism succeeded in converting a huge majority to ‘non-violence’ it would still not be able to prevent war. The only way to abolish war is to abolish the system that generates it, and replace competitive production for profit by collective, cooperative, production for need. And this brings us to the second reason why Marxists are opposed to pacifism.
In the struggle to change society, pacifism is not only ineffective, it is positively reactionary. Pacifism preaches non-violence equally to all classes in society, but the only class it has any chance of influencing (apart from the petty bourgeoisie where it generally originates) are the oppressed. The prospect of converting the ruling classes of the world, who know perfectly well that their wealth and power has always rested on the use of violence, is as remote as the prospect of the second coming.
Apply this to such situations as Nicaragua, Vietnam or South Africa. Unless one hopes for the pacifist conversion of the likes of Somoza, Nixon, Reagan, Botha and others, what pacifism would actually mean is telling the Nicaraguans, Vietnamese and black South Africans they mustn’t resist imperialism, genocide and apartheid because that would involve ‘violence’.
Pacifism therefore disarms the oppressed in the face of capitalist and imperialist repression. It’s exactly the same where the class struggle is concerned.
Finally, pacifism paints capitalism in far more rosy colours than it deserves. By counter-posing the struggle for peace to the struggle for socialism pacifism encourages the idea that mere could be a violence-free, war-free capitalism. This can only play into the hands of the cynical politicians, both bourgeois and reformist, who have much experience in deceiving the working class with hypocritical rhetoric about peace, while preparing to plunge them into war.
Marxists see the pre-eminent divisions of the world not as those between nations, but between classes. Workers have nothing to gain from the waging of war between their capitalist rulers, except hardship, suffering, and death. Nor will they gain by victory in war – since this only strengthens the ruling class, the better to exploit the workers. As internationalists, Marxists call on workers of all countries to unite. In the case of an imperialist war between nations, we would call on workers of both countries to oppose the war and work for the defeat and overthrow of their own ruling class.
 

Terrorism
Marxism equals revolution. Revolution equals violence. Violence equals terrorism. Therefore Marxism equals terrorism. This line of argument is repeatedly insinuated by the ruling class and the media. However, the mainstream of the Marxist tradition has always been strongly opposed to the use of terrorism.
The matter was first fully debated in Russia at the end of the nineteenth century when the Narodniks – or ‘Friends of the people’ – were waging terrorist campaigns in their struggle against tsarism. At that time the leading figures of the Russian Marxist movement – Lenin, Plekhanov, Trotsky and others – came out firmly against terrorism and that has remained the position of our movement ever since.
The exploitation and oppression that we are fighting against are the products not of particular government ministers, or even particular governments, but of the world economic system of capitalism. They can be ended only by the overthrow of this system and that requires mass action by many millions of workers, not the assassination of individuals or the blowing up of particular targets, whatever their nature. Equally the society which we want to put in the place of capitalism, one in which working people own and control industry and the state, can only be created by the mass activity of workers themselves, not the actions of a minority.
Terrorism, whatever its subjective motive, represents an attempt by a tiny minority to substitute themselves for this mass action, to do for the working class what the working class can only do for itself.
Even where the terrorist forces are large, the very nature of the enterprise obliges them to operate independently of and behind the back of the working class. And even when terrorism has mass support, it cannot help but encourage in those masses an attitude of passivity, an expectation of liberation from above.
Additionally, terrorism, if it results in the loss of innocent lives, alienates working-class people from causes they might otherwise be won to support. In so doing it creates a favourable atmosphere for increased state repression, which can be, and will be, directed against the left and the workers’ movement in general. Finally, it frequently destroys or wastes the lives of many ardent young revolutionaries.
Terrorism, therefore, is not a weapon of struggle of the working class, but of other classes. Trotsky once described the terrorist as ‘a liberal with a bomb’.
Although some deluded would-be Marxists or anarchists (the Baader-Meinhof group, the Italian Red Brigades for instance) have turned to terrorism, it is the middle-class-led nationalist or communal movement that is most characteristic of terrorist organisation. It is therefore no surprise that terrorism should now be rampant in the Lebanon, where there exist a number of national and religious communities all driven to utter desperation by a veritable avalanche of oppression, while at the same time there is no socialist or working-class alternative even in sight.
But Marxist criticism of terrorism has nothing in common with the hypocritical condemnations and denunciations issued ceaselessly by the ruling-class politicians and the media. When it comes to violence and the slaughter of innocents, the likes of Reagan and Thatcher can and do commit worse atrocities than the most extreme terrorists. In any conflict between the forces of the imperialist or capitalist states and the terrorist who represents the oppressed, our sympathies are unreservedly with the terrorist.
Nor do we accept the alternative which the bourgeois politicians counter-pose to terrorism, namely passive acquiescence to oppression or, at best, a vote in parliamentary elections.
From the Marxist viewpoint, parliamentary democracy suffers from the same basic flaw as terrorism – it is a matter of expecting a small elite, albeit MPs instead of gunmen, to act on behalf of the workers themselves. The ballot and the bomb are at bottom two sides of the substitutionist coin.
We do not deny to the working class and the oppressed the right to use violence against their oppressors. On the contrary, we think such violence is unavoidable because the ruling classes of the world will not surrender their power and privileges without a bitter struggle. We simply insist that, to achieve its aims, such violence must be exercised not by small elites, but by the mass of the working class, and directed not against individuals, but against the roots of the capitalist system.
 

Class
The term ‘class’ is commonly used in a loose and confused way to refer to such things as a person’s family background, education and social standing. Sociologists also employ class as a category in surveys. Usually they regard a person’s class as being defined by their occupation, with occupations ranked in five or six ‘classes’ according to their supposed social status. In both its ‘everyday’ and sociological usage, the purpose of the concept is to serve as a convenient label which can be attached to individuals so as to give some general idea of their ‘life-style’ and attitudes.
For Marxists, the concept of class serves a very different purpose. Its aim is not to determine the appropriate label for every individual, nor to depict exactly every gradation and shading of the social hierarchy. It is to identify the fundamental social forces whose conflict is the driving force of history.
The Marxist theory of class is therefore, first and foremost, a theory of class struggle.
What makes an aggregate of individuals into a ‘class’ is not that they all have the same ‘life-style’ or attitudes, or that they all receive the same pay, but that they have certain basic common interests in opposition to the interests of another class or classes. It is this conflict of interests that generates class struggle.
There are of course innumerable conflicts of interests in society, ranging from the trivial squabble between neighbours to the tragic conflicts between people of different races or nations. But what makes class conflict more fundamental than all these other divisions is that it concerns conflicts of interest in the process of production – that is, in the very basis of society, in the starting point of all historical development.
Antagonistic interests in the process of production are the result of exploitation, that is the extraction by one group of people of surplus from the labour of another group. It is exploitation that divides society into opposed classes. The key to exploitation is the effective possession (ownership or control) of the major means of production by one social group to the exclusion of the other group, who are thereby forced to work for the dominant group and to yield to them control of the social surplus.
Historically these exploitative relations of production have taken many forms and have given rise to different sets of opposed classes, such as slave owners and slaves, lords and serfs, landowners and peasants.
In capitalist society the class struggle is principally between the capitalists (those who own and control capital) and the working class (those who live by the sale of their labour power).
It is now nearly 140 years since Marx advanced the view that this is the fundamental division in modern society. Since then sociologists (the main bourgeois ideologists in this field) have never ceased to claim that changes in the class structures of capitalism have refuted Marx’s proposition and made it ‘out of date’. In particular they have argued that as capitalism develops so the working class declines as a proportion of society while the middle class expands. Recently this old bourgeois argument has been given a new lease of life by certain well-known ‘Marxists’ such as Eric Hobsbawm and Andre Gorz.
In fact the argument rests entirely on the notion of class as a matter of attitudes, lifestyle and occupational category. The vast majority of those claimed for the expanding ‘middle class’ – clerical and office workers, shop assistants, health workers (including nurses), teachers and the like – are, in terms of the relations of production, clearly workers. They neither own nor control the means of production. They live entirely by the sale of their labour power, and they are exploited by capital. They share the same basic economic interests as miners and carworkers, dockers and factory workers.
There are indeed intermediate layers (the ‘middle classes’) – managers and administrators – who are not themselves big capitalists, but who have some control over the means of production and who also direct the labour of others. But these remain relatively few in number. In terms of shaping history, it is not this layer that is decisive. The fundamental division and the fundamental struggle is now, more than ever, between capital and labour.
 

Crime
The capitalist class has a love-hate relationship with crime, as can be seen from a glance at the capitalist media. The newspapers dutifully condemn crime but they also delight in crime stories. ‘Sex Monster’, ‘The Beast’ and ‘Crime Rate Soars’ are among Fleet Street’s favourite headlines. TV and films are the same. There must be a thousand cops and robbers shows for every film or play dealing with a strike (the capitalists are unequivocally opposed to strikes).
Nor is this just a matter of boosting sales and chasing ratings. The ambivalence reflects deep-rooted class interests.
On the one hand the ruling class is officially, and in a sense genuinely, opposed to crime. It needs the ‘rule of law’ to prevent the poor helping themselves to the property of the rich, who do not appreciate being arbitrarily deprived of their Rolls-Royces and diamond tiaras, even if they are insured. Moreover, the smooth running of capitalism requires a degree of order in its business transactions, though this does not prevent numerous capitalists and capitalist officials committing all sorts of crimes.
On the other hand, the ruling class knows that crime does not really threaten it – a class cannot be dispossessed by any number of individual robberies – and it knows that it reaps considerable benefits from the existence of crime. Every time the state is seen to deal with a crime it reinforces its claims to represent the general good of society against anti-social elements – to be the defender of the weak against the strong – and masks its essential function of defending the rich against the poor.
There is nothing like a real or imaginary crime wave for giving the state an excuse to strengthen its repressive powers. There is nothing like the ‘law-and-order’ issue for electing right-wing governments and putting ‘moderates’ on the defensive. For the capitalists, crime plays the same role as the external ‘enemy’. If crime did not exist it would be necessary to invent it.
Anyway the capitalist system produces crime like running produces sweat. An economy based on competition, greed, exploitation and alienation cannot do otherwise. Engels summed up the matter in a speech in 1845. ‘Present day society,’ he said, ‘which breeds hostility between the individual man and everyone else, thus produces a social war of all against all which inevitably in individual cases assumes a brutal, barbarously violent form – that of crime.’
Consequently, all those politicians’ speeches promising a crackdown on crime are so much hot air. Capitalist governments can no more end crime than they can end capitalism.
But what of socialism? In the speech quoted above Engels also maintained that a socialist society would ‘put an axe to the root of crime’. To many this might seem a far-fetched claim. But provided we understand by ‘socialism’ what Marx and Engels understood by it, and don’t confuse it with Russian-type state capitalism masquerading as socialism, men it is not hard to see how crime could be abolished.
A fully socialist society, in the Marxist sense, would be a society in which there was an abundance of the necessities of life (this is quite within reach of modern technology), and in which goods were distributed according to need – that is, truly equally. In such a society, economic crime would become progressively pointless and impossible.
Assume, for example, that everyone wanting a car could have one supplied free and that all cars were designed for use, not prestige or status. There would then be no reason to steal cars – they couldn’t be sold – and if some eccentric wanted to accumulate cars for personal use it would both be glaringly obvious and not matter much. Alternatively, assume that cars are discontinued and that instead there is a free and comprehensive public transport system which takes everyone wherever they want to go. Again, the opportunity and motive for crime would disappear.
Socialism would mean that eventually all goods and services would be put on this kind of footing.
This leaves crimes against the person, committed not from economic motives but from anger, passion, jealousy, bitterness – crimes such as murder, rape and assault. Even today these are only a tiny proportion of crimes and they too have social roots – roots socialism will put an axe to.
At present one of the main causes and arenas of such crime is the restrictive capitalist family, which binds people – through social pressure and economic dependency – in relationships they find intolerable. Socialism will abolish this oppressive family by spreading the responsibility for childcare and housework and cutting all ties of dependency. People will be free to live, or not live, with who they want. In fact socialism will humanise and liberate all personal relationships. This cannot help, at the very least, but greatly reduce all crimes against the person.
The conclusion is simple. The only real fight against crime is the fight against capitalism – itself, the biggest crime of all.
 

The family
Conservative politicians of all parties never cease singing the praises of ‘the family’. This phenomenon reflects the fact that ‘Defend the family’ has always been a key slogan and rallying cry for the ruling class. In view of these people’s attitudes to such things as child benefit, cuts in education, health and social services, housing provision and the rest, all this pro-family propaganda could easily be dismissed as just monstrous hypocrisy.
Nevertheless it is important to recognise that there is an element of sincere class interest involved here. The ruling class recognises, and has always recognised, that the family is a deeply conservative institution. They know that in so far as they can get working-class men and above all working-class women to view the world exclusively from the perspective of their individual family unit they can create a powerful counterweight to class identification and class consciousness. They know that ‘protecting my family’ was ever the alibi of the scab; that in so far as women remain mentally imprisoned in the home (even when they do go out to work) they will not develop a perspective of changing society; and that 99 times out of 100 the first authority confronted by the young rebel and revolutionary is the authority of the family.
Consequently the ruling class has carefully nurtured a mythology of the family. This mythology has two main elements. First, the family is projected as a universal, eternal, unchanging institution reflecting fixed biological and psychological drives. The family is ‘normal’; the family is a matter of human nature. Anyone not living within the accepted family structure or challenging this structure (by being gay, for example) is therefore labelled ‘abnormal’, ‘unnatural’ and ‘deviant’.
Secondly, the family is presented as an idyllic haven of harmony, love and security; an institution which is perfectly adapted to the needs of both society and the individual. Anyone outside the family is therefore not only ‘abnormal’ but also ‘deprived’.
Marxism rejects this reactionary nonsense. The family is not a natural but a social institution. Like any other social institution it has historical origins, roughly coinciding with the emergence of private property and the division of society into classes between five and ten thousand years ago. It has since undergone a long process of historical development in which it has assumed widely differing forms.
The result of this development is that the contemporary nuclear family is a structure adapted primarily not to the needs of men, women and children but to the needs of a particular form of society, namely capitalism, and to its overriding aim, the accumulation of capital.
In the capitalist class it is a mechanism for the maintenance and inheritance of private property and class position. In the working class it serves to produce and reproduce supplies of proficient labour power at very little cost to the employers or their state.
This makes the reality of family life (in all social classes but especially the working class) bear little or no relation to the idealised image. On the contrary, the family constitutes a major arena of oppression in which innumerable unhappy couples are bound together by economic and social dependence; in which half the working class, women, are confined and confirmed in the socially subordinate role of housewife.
The family is also, far more often than is generally acknowledged, an arena of appalling physical and psychological violence, of wife beating and child battering, of father-daughter rape, of repression, inhibition and victimisation of its own members.
Of course, despite this most people still do choose to live in families. The social pressures on them to do so are considerable and the alternative under capitalism can be grim – loneliness and isolation in most cases.
This brings us to the Marxist attitude to the family in the future. Marxists are opposed to the family as it is presently constituted. But the family cannot be banned or simply abolished. It must be replaced and what replaces it must be experienced by the vast majority as something better, more liberating and more fulfilling.
This involves complete equal pay and job opportunities for women in a context of full employment. It involves socialising the burden of housework by means of good communal restaurants and laundries in every neighbourhood. It involves sharing childcare through nursery places for all children. It involves a lot of other far-reaching changes in the organisation of society. So far-reaching, indeed, that they are inconceivable without a total transformation of society, a social revolution.
 

n Molyneux: Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism (Preface to the Korean Edition - July 2005)



John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

John Molyneux
Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

Preface to the Korean Edition
(July 2005)

This booklet consists of a selection of articles written as a weekly column for the British left wing newspaper, Socialist Worker. The column, which lasted from 1983–97, was variously called Teach Yourself Marxism and What Socialists Say; most of the material included here was written in the 1980s.
The column was written with a reader in mind who, according to the mainstream culture, does not exist, namely a thinking, critically minded working class activist. The standard view of working class militants is that they are more or less mindless thugs, motivated by greed and the politics of envy. Not a few middle class intellectuals, even those sympathetic to the working class in the abstract, still accept the notion of militant workers as people only interested in immediate bread and butter issues and crude slogans.
My experience, which is now a long one, is the exact opposite. Worker militants are in general the most intellectually developed - and cultured – representatives of their class. This is partly because involvement in struggle raises consciousness and broadens horizons, but also because they need to be. The worker militant is engaged in a continuous battle of ideas with his or her workmates to combat the equally continuous efforts of the ruling class, via its politicians and media, to impose its view of the world – on everything from current events to human nature – on the working class.
The column was written, therefore, with the intention of assisting this notional reader (though obviously there would be other readers too) in this day to day process of argument and persuasion. Its language had to be as straight forward and clear as possible – lack of formal education was absolutely not to be a barrier to reading it – but its content was deadly serious and sometimes had to be quite complex.
The typical method was to start from ‘common sense’, i.e. from the commonplace assumptions and attitudes (in reality shaped by bourgeois ideology) that the socialist worker would meet with from their fellow workers and to set out the socialist view in relation to this. In the process the column also attempted to build up the main elements of the Marxist world outlook as a whole.
That fifteen years later and on the other side of the world, the publishers of this booklet should deem it of relevance to the workers and socialists of Korea testifies to a very important fact about the modern world, namely that the issues and debates faced by workers in all countries, though not of course identical, are nonetheless remarkably similar.
One such issue which is truly global and is of immense, almost overriding significance, is climate change or global warming. This was not discussed in Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism because at the time it had barely crossed my political radar. Today one must be blind not to see it. All the scientific evidence points to the fact that climate change threatens the world with environmental and humanitarian catastrophe. All the political evidence points to the fact that our rulers are either sleep walking to disaster or, more likely, consciously gambling with humanity’s future for the sake of profit (see the excellent article by Paul McGarr, On the Road to Catastrophe, International Socialism 107). The combination of these two facts constitutes another powerful, indeed compelling, argument for revolutionary socialism: for working to take power out of the hands of their respective ruling classes and establish international planned production for human need.
 

n Molyneux: Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism (4. Strategies of the system)



John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

John Molyneux
Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

Chapter Four:
Strategies of the system


‘You socialists would abolish democracy ...’
ONE OF the main charges made against Marxism by the ruling class and by reformists is that it is anti-democratic. Thus Labour Party leaders often describe themselves as democratic socialists in opposition to Marxists. Partly this is based on the experiences of Stalinism, but also it’s because Marxists advocate revolution.
Revolution, they argue, would be against the rule of parliament and for them parliament is synonymous with democracy. They’re right, of course. Revolution cannot come through parliament, and indeed revolution would overthrow parliament. But they are quite wrong to identify parliament with democracy.
In reality the democracy offered by a capitalist parliament is always extraordinarily limited. Firstly, parliamentary democracy offers no means by which electors can control their representatives. Once elected there is nothing to stop MPs breaking all their pre-election promises. Secondly, MPs do not, in practice, control government. Rather it is the government through a mixture of patronage and pressure that controls the MPs. Thirdly, the government does not control the decisive area of society, namely the economy, which remains in the hands of big business.
Finally, it must be remembered that apart from parliament almost every important institution in society is run without any democracy whatsoever. In the police, the army, in every industry and business (private or nationalised), in the civil service, the schools and colleges, the hospitals, the mass media and so on, the principle of administration is the same – authoritarian appointment from above. In all those areas democratic decisions are never even considered.
In short, the idea that parliament equals democracy, the ‘rule of the people’, is nonsense. It is little more than a democratic fig leaf covering the nakedness of capitalist rule. What’s more, as the example of Chile proved for the umpteenth time – where in 1973 the elected government of Salvador Allende was overthrown by the army with the most horrific bloodshed and repression – ‘parliamentary democracy’ is a fig leaf the ruling class is always willing to dispense with if it interferes with their vital interests.
In contrast, workers’ revolution would produce a society far more democratic in every way than any bourgeois democracy. It would begin by destroying the capitalist state and establishing a new state of workers’ councils. These would be made up of delegates from workplaces, where collective discussion would take place, and who would thus be accountable to, and recallable by, those who elected them. The undemocratic and authoritarian armed forces and police would be replaced by democratically controlled workers’ militia responsible to die workers’ councils. This workers’ power would then be used to establish the foundation of real ‘rule by the people’ – the social ownership and control of the means of production.
Whatever the political set-up, ultimate power in any society rests with those who control the decisive forces of production. Unless these are controlled by the working class all talk of democracy remains a sham.
Furthermore, Marxists not only advocate workers’ democracy in the future, but also fight to defend and extend it in the present. We defend all those democratic rights won by struggle in the past – the right to vote, to strike, to independent trade unions, to free speech – against all attempts by the ruling class to restrict or remove them. We stand for the equal application of those rights to all workers regardless of race, nationality or sex. In all this Marxists are consistent democrats.
 

Isn’t the state neutral?
When the police arrest you on a picket line they are not ‘interfering in politics’, merely ‘maintaining public order’. When the judge or magistrate sentences you he is not interested in the politics of the case, only in ‘upholding the law’. The armed forces, likewise, are ‘outside polities’, they merely ‘defend the nation’ in the Falklands, ‘keep the peace’ in Belfast, and ‘maintain essential services’ when they scab on strikes.
Senior civil servants are non-political too, they simply follow instructions from the government, which, in turn, exercises its power ‘in the national interest’. Over the lot stands the Queen. She is ‘above’ politics, symbolising the unity of the nation.
So run the myths of the ruling class about its state. They reflect a theory of the state developed over centuries by the bourgeoisie. It contains two central ideas. First that the state represents the interests of society as a whole, it is above class. Second, that it is indispensable; without it society would disintegrate into a war of all against all, because ordinary people are ‘naturally’ bad/greedy/stupid, and so need to be ruled.
Marx rejected this view root and branch. He argued that society would disintegrate without a state not because of people’s natural inadequacies but because society is divided into classes with conflicting interests. Societies existed for thousands of years without any state apparatus because classes had not yet emerged. Similarly, after class divisions have been abolished a state will no longer be needed. Public order in a classless society will be kept simply by organisations of the general public without any need for ‘armed bodies of men’ standing over society. The very existence of the state testifies to class antagonisms.
Consequently the state is anything but non-political, rather it is the essence of political power. It is never the representative of the people ‘as a whole’, but always an instrument through which one class maintains its rule over other classes.
The existence of parliamentary democracy doesn’t change this, for every state rests ultimately on economic foundations. Police, judges, soldiers, are not themselves productive; they and their activities have to be paid for. So, in the final analysis, it is always the class that controls the economy that controls the State. Usually the ruling class exercises this control directly by ensuring that senior positions in the state are held by loyal members of its own class. (Thus in Britain today more than 80 percent of judges and generals went to public school.) But even when sections of the state pass into other hands, as in Nazi Germany, the ruling class can still use its economic power to make sure the state protects its interests (German big business did very well under Hitler).
Because of this, the old reformist idea that by winning a majority in parliament, the state can be taken over and used for socialist purposes, is a complete pipe dream. Faced with a reforming government whose policies represent a challenge to capitalist priorities the state machine – acting in concert with big business – has immense resources of obstructions and pressure. Should the government resist those pressures (a highly unlikely event where the Labour Party is concerned) it can still resort to direct force, as the Chilean state did ten years ago.
The working class cannot ‘take over’ the bourgeois state; it must smash it. This is the central conclusion of the theory of the state developed by Marx and Engels and re-emphasised by Lenin in his great book The State and Revolution. Smashing the state means disbanding the police, sacking the judges, breaking the bourgeois army by winning the rank and file over to the workers, and removing the bureaucratic ministries of Whitehall. Above all it involves completely replacing the old state apparatus with a new apparatus arising directly from working-class struggle.
 

Whose law and whose order?
The Tory Party is the enthusiastic party of law and order. Everyone must obey the law they say, because it is the law that makes civilisation possible. The law, they claim, protects society as a whole, and individuals within it, from the threat posed by a minority of anti-social elements. Conjuring up their favourite image of the ‘grannie mugged by thugs’, they go so far as to proclaim that the law protects the weak from the strong.
The Labour right shares this view, except for arguing that their own ‘moderate’ and ‘reasonable’ policies would make the maintenance of law and order easier. The Labour lefts are slightly more sceptical. Where they consider a law to be especially bad (for example anti-union laws) or a cause especially important (such as the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament) they sometimes argue that breaking the law is justified. But fundamentally they go along with the right in accepting the overall framework of the law as it stands.
The Marxist view of the law however is different. It sees the law as defending not society in general, or people in general, but the existing system of society, namely capitalism. Contemporary law is, first and foremost, a set of rules requiring behaviour appropriate to the smooth running of a capitalist economy. Since a capitalist economy necessarily produces a society dominated by a capitalist class, the law necessarily defends the interests of that class.
One reason – in addition to the constant flow of law and order propaganda – why the right-wing view retains a certain plausibility is that most people take the capitalist functioning of the law more or less for granted. They are so used to it that they regard it as ‘natural’. But consider what would happen if the law didn’t reflect and reinforce the property relations of capitalism. What if, for example, it was illegal to charge interest on money loaned? What if judges were in the habit of ruling that millionaires riding around in Rolls-Royces in broad daylight were asking to be robbed, in the same way they suggest that women on their own at night are asking to be raped? Or even more fundamentally, what if the law prohibited the sale of labour power in the same way it does the sale of children? Clearly if the law were changed in any of these ways the capitalist system would break down within weeks if not days.
Not surprisingly the administration of the law reflects its inherent class character. The ruling class retains a firm grip on the higher echelons of the legal profession. About 80 per cent of judges were educated at public schools, and it is still extremely difficult to become a barrister without private means. Anyone who has observed court proceedings at any level cannot fail to notice that they consist overwhelmingly of the middle and upper classes sitting in judgement on the working classes.
These facts give the lie to another cherished myth about British justice – the alleged ‘independence of the judiciary from politics’. Now judges are often independent from parliament. Given that parliament is an elected institution this is actually an advantage for the ruling class. It means that should the ‘wrong’ people get elected to parliament, and should these people by some mischance pass some inconvenient legislation, the judges will always be there to come up with an ‘interpretation’ of the law that sets matters right again. It means that should the right wing decide that parliamentary democracy itself is inconvenient then there are some judges around to provide a legal rubber stamp for the counter-revolutionary activities of the generals and police chiefs.
The real function of the law therefore is the opposite of that claimed by the right. Far from protecting civilisation it protects a social order that threatens the existence of any civilisation. Far from protecting the weak from the strong it protects the rich from the poor, the exploiters from the exploited, the powerful from the potentially powerful. Any movement for serious social change cannot fail to come into conflict with the law. If it has illusions about it, it is hamstrung from the beginning.
 

So how do they maintain their rule?
All ruling classes maintain their rule by a combination of force and persuasion. These two aspects of ruling-class power always complement and reinforce each other. In the middle ages the feudal lord had his soldiers to ensure the peasants performed their work and paid their taxes and the Catholic church to explain to them that the feudal order was God’s order. If the peasants rebelled, the church was on hand to condemn their revolt as sinful. If anyone questioned the teachings of the church, the soldiers were on hand to burn them as heretics.
Today the ruling class has the police – and ultimately the army – to arrest pickets and demonstrators, and the mass media to explain that pickets and demonstrators are extremist monsters who threaten ‘civilisation as we know it’. In so far as the media is successful with its propaganda, it is easier for the police to smash picket lines. Equally, every success of the police in breaking a picket line reinforces the central message of ruling-class ideology, that working people are powerless.
The use of these two methods of control is something that does not change. It is a feature of all class-divided society. The fundamental antagonism between the classes is such that no ruling class is ever able to rule purely by consent. On the other hand, the fact that the exploited and the ‘have-nots’ always vastly outnumber the exploiters and the ‘haves’ means that no ruling class can survive purely by force.
What does change – and sometimes very dramatically – is the balance between repression and ideological control. In some cases, such as South Africa, it is clear that the existing regime has lost practically all legitimacy and credibility in the eyes of the majority of the population and therefore has to depend primarily on force. In comparison, in Britain and Western Europe the element of force, though undoubtedly increasing in recent years, is still a secondary factor. The existing political and economic order – though not necessarily the particular government – still retains the support of the large majority.
One of the most important features of bourgeois rule in modern capitalism is that simple ruling-class manipulation of the education system and the mass media is insufficient to maintain ideological control. The size, strength and organisation of the working class is too great, and the daily clash of interests at the point of production too all-pervasive, for straightforward capitalist propaganda to be enough. Besides, propaganda may be powerful but there is a limit to the extent to which it can get people to believe things that run directly counter to their own experience.
Consequently, the crucial role in the stabilisation of advanced capitalism is played by institutions which have their base not in the ruling class but in the working class, and which are seen as expressing working-class interests and working-class opposition to the system’s worst excesses. Nonetheless, they accept and purvey the basic premises of the system and thereby serve to integrate the working class within it.
In Britain this role is played primarily by the trade union bureaucracy and the Labour Party. If one looks at the strategy of the British ruling class in this light, it is clear that over the last quarter of a century it has pursued one single, central aim – that of raising the rate of profit of British capital – but has done so by different means. Essentially, it has oscillated between a strategy with the balance tilted towards force and one with the balance tilted towards consent.
In the former strategy the ruling class relies principally on its own party – the Tories – and on the law, the police and the willingness of employers to take on the trade unions, combined with an economic policy that stresses market forces and encourages unemployment to rise. It attempts to impose cuts in working-class living standards and weaken trade union resistance by more or less frontal assault. This has been the dominant approach in the Thatcher years.
In the latter strategy it relies principally on the trade union bureaucracy. It attempts to reach an accommodation with the trade union leaders so that they in turn will sell the deal to their rank and file and impose the necessary discipline to make it stick. This was the approach of the Social Contract made between the trade union leaders and the Labour governments of Harold Wilson and James Callaghan in the 1970s.
As one strategy fails, so the ruling class switches its allegiance to the other.
 

Divided we fall ...
‘Ye are many – they are few’, wrote the poet Shelley in 1819, when urging the workers to ‘rise like lions’ against their oppressors. It was true then and it remains true today. The ruling class proper – the big shareholders and financiers, the holders of key posts in industry, the City and the state – is tiny, amounting to only one or two per cent of the population. How then does this small minority of exploiters maintain its power over the vast majority of exploited? Clearly part of the answer is through the use of direct force – such as the massive police operation against the miners in the 1984-5 strike. Equally clearly another part of the answer lies in the ruling class’s control of the media and the education system, which enables it to indoctrinate much of the working class with capitalist reactionary ideas.
However, both these mechanisms of control – the head-bashing and the head-fixing – are made easier and more effective by the divisions which exist within the working class – divisions of craft, locality, nationality, race, sex and so on. Let’s take two examples of how this works.
First the division between British workers and Irish workers. The view that the Irish are stupid (perpetually reinforced in innumerable non-jokes by innumerable non-comedians), and that the war in Northern Ireland is an incomprehensible conflict between religious maniacs, has permitted the army and police to develop there techniques of repression (such as snatch squads) which if first used in Britain would have provoked a chorus of liberal protest. Once perfected and accepted these techniques can then be transferred to Britain for use against workers here with relative impunity.
Second, the division between men and women. The traditional stereotype of the working-class woman as housewife and mother who leaves the world of work, trade unionism, and politics to her husband gives the working-class man a position of relative privilege and dominance in the home. But immediately a strike or dispute breaks out this dubious advantage backfires. The wife, if previously uninvolved and uninformed, experiences the strike not as a positive collective struggle but as a loss of family income, and so as a threat to the security of the home. She is therefore vulnerable to the mass media’s anti-strike propaganda.
What then is the root of these many divisions and how can they be overcome? The root lies in the nature of capitalism itself. Capitalism is a system based on competition between independent producing units, be they small shops, giant multinational companies or even capitalist states. And this competition, Marx pointed out, ‘separates individuals one from another, not only the bourgeois but still more the workers, in spite of the fact that it brings them together’.
Under capitalism labour power becomes a commodity which every worker has to sell to live. This makes every other worker a potential competitor in the labour market, and so long as workers see each other as competitors they are prey to every prejudice about their rivals – the Japanese, German, Korean, black, women – workers who are supposed to be ‘taking their jobs’. And obviously the ruling class does everything it can to foster these prejudices.
But if the divisions derive from the nature of capitalism it is only in the course of struggle that they can be overcome. Clearly socialists must oppose all divisions in the working class at all times, exposing their consequences. However, socialist propaganda by itself cannot defeat the propaganda of the system. Only when it connects with workers’ actual experience in struggle can it be really effective.
The best illustration of this is the question of racism. This is one of the deepest divisions in the working class, and at present most white workers are to some extent racist, not violently racist like the National Front, but racist nevertheless. Moreover it is a racism which is highly resistant to any amount of well-intentioned liberal moralising.
But consider what happens when black and white workers find themselves on strike together and on the same picket line. At once there is created the bond of being in the same struggle against the same enemy. The argument about class unity as opposed to racial division becomes concrete – it fits the immediate situation. When strike-breakers approach, either the white workers overcome their prejudices and link arms with their black workmates, or they hand an obvious present to the boss. Thus the class is unified in struggle.
Of course divisions are not always overcome and often workers are defeated because of them. But this we can say: the moment of the working class’s unification will coincide with the moment of its victory for the very simple reason that ‘We are many and they are few’.
 

n Molyneux: Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism (7. Strategies for Socialism)



John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

John Molyneux
Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

Chapter Seven:
Strategies for Socialism


‘But we’ve already got a mass workers’ party ...’
‘THE LABOUR PARTY is the mass party of the working class.’ This familiar claim is usually made as part of an argument that Marxists should abandon the attempt to build an independent revolutionary party and join the Labour Party.
At first sight it is a claim that seems to have a lot of truth in it. Certainly no other party is in a position to make such a claim and certainly a large proportion of the working class (frequently a majority) have regularly voted for it since 1945. It is also the case that the Labour Party was set up by, and has always retained a close relationship with, the trade unions – which undoubtedly are mass working-class organisations.
These are important facts which should not be lost sight of. They clearly distinguish the Labour Party not only from die Conservative Party – a direct representative of the ruling class – but also from the Social Democrats and the Liberals, neither of which have such an organisational connection with the working class. Because of this, when it comes to a choice between Labour and any of these other parties, as at a general election, Marxists will not abstain, but will support Labour.
Nevertheless these facts alone do not at all suffice as the basis for a Marxist analysis of the class character of the Labour Party. It is necessary also to consider the nature of the party’s programme, its leadership, and above all its actual practice, in order to make an overall assessment of its role in the class struggle. First the programme. The Labour Party does not have a specific document which constitutes its official programme. Its constitution, of course, contains the famous Clause Four commitment to the ‘common ownership of the means of production, distribution and exchange’, but this has never been taken seriously, even for inclusion in election manifestos. In general terms, however, and this applies to both its manifestos and the beliefs of the vast majority of its members at all levels, Labour’s programme is the reform of capitalism through parliament. For the right wing, the centre and even the ‘soft left’ of the party, this means a quite definite acceptance of the need to keep capitalism going while carrying through reforms.
Only sections of the ‘hard left’ even contemplate the idea of actually trying to abolish capitalism by means of systematic reforms, and they are ever willing to collaborate with and capitulate to the centre and the right.
The leadership of the party has lain always with the centre and right. When it has appeared to be captured by the left this has invariably proved illusory as the ‘left’ has moved rapidly rightwards. In terms of their social position, Labour’s leading figures have been at the very least upper middle class and in many cases closely integrated into the ruling class itself. The other dominant force in the party are the top trade union bureaucrats who supply the bulk of the funds and control the annual conference through the block vote system. They form a distinct and privileged layer standing above the working class.
The practice of the Labour Party needs to be considered in terms of its relationship to actual workers’ struggles in industry and in the workplace, and in terms of its behaviour in government. Where the former is concerned, its role is minimal. Most strikes it simply ignores, leaving them to the unions, and when a struggle is so important that it has to take some notice it either ‘supports’ from the sidelines, or equivocates, or tries to play a mediating role in order to get a settlement. In no way does the Labour Party attempt to offer organised political leadership to the industrial struggle. In government the Labour Party has repeatedly shown its preference for the priorities and requirements of capitalism over the needs of the working people it claims it represents. Again and again it has attacked strikes, raised unemployment, held down wages through incomes policies and cut spending on health and education.
Thus in neither programme, nor leadership, nor practice is the Labour Party the ‘party of the working class’. Rather it is a capitalist party operating within the working-class movement. Its role in the class struggle is to give just enough expression to working-class discontent to contain this discontent within the structures of capitalism. It is, together with the trade union bureaucracy, a principal prop and defender of the capitalist order. One further element of the original claim needs to be challenged, namely the idea that Labour is a mass party. In electoral terms it is, and also in its affiliated trade union membership, but this support is overwhelmingly passive. Its individual, real, membership is not above 300,000 and of these not more than about one in ten are active. The party cannot even sustain its own mass circulation newspaper.
The conclusion is inescapable. The ‘mass party of the British working class’ does not yet exist.
 

Can the Labour Party be changed?
Could Labour be changed into a socialist party that really represents and fights for the interests of working-class people? History suggests otherwise.
For 80 years the Labour Party has been sustained by people on the left who were trying to change it. Overwhelmingly the experience has been not of them changing the Labour Party but of the Labour Party changing them.
Leader after leader, Ramsey MacDonald, Attlee, Wilson, Foot, Kinnock, have begun on the left and then progressed to the right, and they are only the tip of the iceberg. Beneath them are innumerable lesser figures who have been subject to the same process of gradual political corruption – ‘radical firebrands’ turned into ‘respectable moderates’ if not worse. Manny Shinwell, Stafford Cripps, John Strachey and Barbara Castle are fine examples from the past. Tariq Ali, Peter Hain, Ted Knight and Ken Livingstone are currently undergoing the treatment.
Even determined Marxists with revolutionary origins (such as the Militant Tendency) are not immune to the process. Years and years of trying to change the Labour Party and they become acclimatised to its reformist routine, embroiled in its structures and end up compromising their politics on the tough (but crucial) issues such as the Falklands War and Northern Ireland or on the question of a parliamentary road to socialism.
However, it is not just past experience that testifies against the possibility of changing the Labour Party, it is also any realistic assessment of the nature of the Labour Party today. First there is the fact that there is still very little that the party rank and file can do to control the behaviour of Labour MPs and nothing it can do to control the actions of a Labour government. Consequently any amount of left-wing resolutions on nationalising the commanding heights of the economy or unilateral disarmament can be won at Labour conferences without the least guarantee that anything will be done about them.
Secondly there is the role of the trade union leaders. Their position in the Labour Party is crucial because they supply the bulk of party funds and they dominate the conference and all the elections through the block vote system. The power of these trade union bosses will always be used against any real socialist transformation of the Labour Party, because the trade union bureaucracy is itself undemocratic and privileged in relation to the trade union rank and file. Thus in order to thoroughly democratise and radicalise the Labour Party it would first be necessary to thoroughly democratise and radicalise the trade unions.
Thirdly the whole structure and organisation of the Labour Party reflects the fact that it is essentially an electoral machine, designed to elect Labour MPs rather than advance the interests of the working class in struggle. The basic units of the party are wards and constituency parties, not workplace branches. The bulk of the membership are passive card-holders except at election times. The transformation of the Labour Party into a fighting socialist party would involve reshaping it and rebuilding it from top to bottom.
The only circumstances in which such a total overhaul of die Labour Party might even be seriously attempted is in the context of mass radicalisation of the working class, which in turn can occur only in the midst of mass revolutionary struggles.
The mass of workers will come to socialism not through reading papers and listening to speeches but through their experience of great class-wide battles. Such revolutionary situations in which the majority of the working class become activated do not, by their nature, last long (perhaps eighteen months at most). At any rate not long enough for the laborious process of purging and remaking the Labour Party. Consequently unless at least the foundations of a revolutionary workers’ party have been laid in advance of these decisive battles, the right wing and reformist leadership will still be able to use that power and influence to secure the defeat of the working class and the return to capitalist ‘normality’.
One argument remains – the negative one that not to be in the Labour Party is to be isolated from the labour movement. But this is to confuse the Labour Party and the labour movement. The basic organisations of the working class are not the Labour Party but the trade unions. So long as socialists make it a point of principle to be active in their workplaces and their unions they can both be part of the labour movement and build an independent revolutionary party. In the long run this is a far more realistic project than pursuing the pipedream of changing the Labour Party!
 

Couldn’t we do without organisation?
Marxism has always had to compete with rival theories. Its main rivals, apart from straightforward capitalist ideology, have been social democratic reformism and Stalinism. But there has usually been another alternative standing, apparently, to the left of Marxism, namely anarchism.
Anarchism clearly is not an important political force in Britain today, but at various times in the history of the revolutionary movement (most notably in the Spanish Civil War) it has exercised some considerable influence. Even now it has definite attractions for the young and rebellious.
First let us be clear that Marxists cannot afford simply to scorn anarchism in the way capitalist ‘common sense’ does. This is because the ultimate goal of anarchism – a society of real freedom and equality in which there is no longer a state or any form of oppression of people by people – is one that Marxists share. Supporters of the present order dismiss such an aim as absurd. Marxists do not. Our disagreements with anarchism are not over the ultimate aim but over how to achieve it; that is, how society is to be changed.
The starting point of this disagreement is a different view of the root cause of exploitation and oppression. To the anarchist the root cause is power: power in and of itself, power in all its forms – state power, the power of political parties and unions and every other kind of authority and leadership.
Anarchists believe that it is the existence of this power and authority which creates class divisions and all other kinds of inequality and oppression. Their ‘strategy’ therefore is to denounce and renounce, on principle, all manifestations of power and authority, and above all every kind of state power. To these they counter-pose the absolute freedom of the individual and the purely spontaneous rebellion of the masses.
Anarchism is thus essentially a moral stance. It lacks any historical analysis of how the things it opposes came about or of why it should be possible to get rid of them now, rather than any time in the past. It simply condemns ‘evil’ and fights for ‘good’.
In contrast Marxism does not regard the state (or ‘power’ in general) as the fundamental problem. Rather it explains the emergence of the state as the product of the division of society into antagonistic classes. This in turn is explained as the consequence of a certain stage in the development of the forces of production. The central task therefore is the abolition of class divisions. This can be achieved only through the victory of the working class over the capitalist class. For this the working class requires organisation and leadership (trade unions, the revolutionary party, workers’ councils, and so on), and the use of power – from the mass picket up to and including the creation of its own workers’ state to combat counter-revolution.
It is this last point which arouses the particular ire of the anarchist. Here they echo the bourgeois arguments: that revolutionary power leads inevitably to tyranny; that Leninism leads inevitably to Stalinism. However, anarchism has failed to come up with any serious alternative way of dealing with the resistance of the capitalists and their efforts to restore the old order.
So far we have been discussing ‘pure’ anarchism which has its social base in the radical petty bourgeoisie – which feels alienated from both the power of big capital and the power of the working class. In so far as anarchism has attempted to gain a base in the working class, it has had to abandon some of its individualist principles and accept the need for collective organisation. Thus it has tended to merge with syndicalism, a form of revolutionary trade unionism which rejects participation in ‘bourgeois’ politics and the role of the revolutionary party.
It is as anarcho-syndicalism that anarchism has come closest to Marxism, and in the wake of the Russian Revolution many anarcho-syndicalists were drawn to the Communist International. But anarchism’s lack of theory, its abstention from politics, leaves the field to the reformists. Its failure to think through the realities of workers’ power disqualify anarchism as a practical guide to the achievement of the revolutionary transformation of society and the emancipation of the working class.
 

So trade unions have a role to play?
The relationship between the trade union struggle and the struggle for socialism is not a new question. It has been around since the beginnings of trade union and socialist movements in the early part of the nineteenth century. It is therefore useful to look back to what Marx himself said about it, especially as it was one of the great weaknesses of the socialists before Marx that they tended to ignore the trade unions.
‘When it is a question’, wrote Marx in 1846, ‘of making a precise study of strikes, unions and other forms in which workers carry out before our eyes their organisation as a class, some are seized with real fear and others display a transcendental disdain.’
The reason for this ‘fear’ and ‘disdain’ was that most early socialists came from the middle class and looked to this class to achieve socialism, either through moral persuasion of the ruling class or through secret conspiracies on the model of the French Revolution of 1789. Marx, however, rejected both moral persuasion and secret conspiracies in favour of class struggle by the workers themselves. Consequently he immediately recognised the crucial importance of trade unions and strikes as the basic way in which workers organised to defend themselves against the employers and built their unity for the future overthrow of capitalism.
But Marx also pointed out the limitations of the trade union struggle. The starting point of trade unionism was the attempt to improve the terms on which workers sold their labour power to the bosses, not to overthrow the boss-worker relationship altogether.
What was needed therefore was not only trade union organisation but also political organisation: the creation of a workers’ political party which would continually raise within the broader workers’ movement the key questions of political power and the ownership of the means of production.
Since Marx’s day these debates have continued. During the early years of the 20th century the workers’ movement internationally was divided into Social Democrats (like the British Labour Party) and syndicalists (like the American Wobblies). The Social Democrats looked to parliament (a later version of moral persuasion) to achieve socialism, and recognised strike action only for limited economic purposes. The syndicalists, reacting against the parliamentarianism of the Social Democrats, rejected the whole idea of political parties in favour of militant trade unionism.
Both strategies proved inadequate, particularly in the sharpened conditions of the First World War, and it was left to Lenin and the Bolsheviks to develop the Marxist position of building a revolutionary political party within all the daily struggles of the working class.
These different approaches reappeared in relation to the British miners’ strike of 1984–5. Labour Party leaders, despite depending on the unions for votes and money, regard political struggle as something to wage through parliament. They therefore reacted to the strike with embarrassment in case it cost them votes. Various middle-class socialists also turned up their noses at the trade union struggle because it was ‘only’ about economic issues. But there were hundreds of thousands of workers who supported the strike and even saw that it could politically weaken the Tories – but did not see it as part of an overall struggle against capitalism. The Marxist tradition is closest to the last of these in that we were 100 per cent in support of the strike and would do everything we could to help it win. But we also recognised that, while a victory for the miners would also strengthen the struggle for socialism as a whole by defeating the Tories, however great this victory, trade union action alone would not be enough. So within the strike and in the course of solidarity work around it we were simultaneously working to draw workers to revolutionary socialist ideas and to the building of a revolutionary party.
 

What about nationalisation?
One of the most widespread myths about Marxism is that it is first and foremost a doctrine of nationalisation and state ownership. This is a myth that is constantly and deliberately encouraged by the ruling class in order to discredit Marxism. Knowing that people generally resent and fear the state bureaucracy, the ruling class puts it about that Marxists want to expand the power of this bureaucracy till it controls everything – like in Eastern Europe.
Unfortunately it is a myth that is also believed and encouraged by many who call themselves Marxists. This is particularly the case with those who call countries like Russia and Poland ‘socialist’ simply on the grounds that their economies are nationalised – despite the fact that they have not a shred of workers’ democracy. It also applies to those who talk of a Labour government introducing socialism by nationalising the ‘commanding heights’ of the economy, or the ‘top 200 monopolies’ as they sometimes put it.
In fact the central idea of Marxism is not nationalisation but class struggle – the struggle of the working class for self-emancipation – leading to the abolition of class divisions and the withering away of the state. Of course Marxists support nationalisation, but as a means through which the working class can take collective control, not as an end in itself. Our aim, therefore, is nationalisation not by the existing capitalist state but by a workers’ state and with full workers’ control.
Without workers’ power and workers’ control nationalisation is not socialism but state capitalism – a further extension of the concentration of capital into larger and larger units. As Engels put it, ‘The more the state proceeds to the taking over of productive forces the more does it actually become the national capitalist ... The capitalist relation is not done away with. It is rather brought to a head.’
Clear proof of this is the behaviour of British Steel, British Rail and the National Coal Board. Far from being islands of socialism in the capitalist sea, they ruthlessly exploit their workforce for the sake of profit just like other capitalist industries. Indeed, in recent years they have been at the centre of the ruling-class assault on jobs, wages and union organisation.
Some people suggest this is because the nationalised industries are only a minority of British industry, most of which remains in private hands. But in Russia, where the state owns almost all the means of production, workers are still exploited and oppressed, and production still serves the accumulation of capital rather than human needs. It is only in conjunction with workers’ power that nationalisation signifies a break with capitalism.
Does it follow from this that Marxists should be indifferent to the current Tory drive towards ‘privatisation’? Not at all. In the first place privatisation goes hand-in-hand with an attack on jobs and working conditions and must be resisted as such. In the second place it generally involves an attack on the quality of service provided by the industry concerned, which must also be resisted.
Institutions like the National Health Service and state education make a real difference to the standard of living of working people. Their defence is a matter of central concern to Marxists. Equally the demand for nationalisation of a company that goes bankrupt can be an important weapon in the struggle to save the jobs of the workforce. (Certainly it’s far better than setting up a workers’ co-op.)
However, in all these cases what we are talking about is reforms within capitalism, not measures that overthrow it, or even initiate its overthrow. Marxists are the most determined fighters for reforms because it is through fighting for reforms that workers build their consciousness, confidence and fighting spirit. But that is no reason to confuse these reforms with socialism, the basis of which is, and can only be, the establishment of workers’ power.
 

What we mean by revolutionary leadership
The standard right-wing view of revolution sees it as a conspiracy engineered by malicious revolutionaries with the mass of people playing only the role of passive bystanders. Clearly this is a stupid caricature. But sometimes, especially when the majority of workers are passive, would-be revolutionaries and others on the left can adopt a kind of mirror image of this reactionary view. They see revolutionaries as heroic individuals acting on behalf of the working class to liberate them from above.
Carried to its extreme, this sort of thinking leads to terrorism and the kind of actions undertaken by the Italian Red Brigades. It has a long history stretching back to the nineteenth century French revolutionary Blanqui, who devoted his life to planning insurrections to be carried through by a special selected elite.
The Marxist view is very different. As Trotsky put it, ‘the most indubitable feature of a revolution is the direct interference of the masses in historic events ... a revolution is first of all the forcible entrance of the masses into the realm of rulership over their own destiny.’
This principle is confirmed by all the experience of workers’ revolutions in the past century and a half. From the Paris Commune of 1871 to the Russian Revolution of 1917, and more recently the May events in France 1968 and the Solidarity movement in Poland, every major confrontation between workers and the existing order has begun spontaneously – not at the summons or behest of a revolutionary organisation.
This in no way invalidates the role of revolutionary leadership. Revolutions may begin spontaneously but they do not end that way. Either in the course of the revolutionary upheaval a revolutionary party is able to win the leadership of the masses, then organise and centralise them for the seizure of power (as was the case in Russia) or the revolution will eventually be stifled and defeated. Nevertheless, the role of the party is to guide the revolution to victory, not to manufacture it. The role of revolutionaries is to lead the masses, not to substitute for them.
All of this may seem obvious in the abstract when we are talking about a full-scale revolution – no one is going to argue that the Socialist Workers Party can overthrow the Tory government by mounting a surprise attack on Downing Street. But it also applies to the thousands of partial economic and political struggles that occur in non-revolutionary and pre-revolutionary situations.
Here the principle can be harder to grasp. Take the case of a small local strike which socialists in the area have been actively supporting, visiting the picket line, collecting money and so on. After a few weeks the strike runs into difficulties and the picket line dwindles. Here there can be a strong temptation for socialist supporters to substitute themselves for the workers on the picket line rather than arguing for a strategy that can re-involve them.
Another example is Ireland. British rule in Northern Ireland has been and remains brutal and oppressive and socialists have a duty to say so loud and clear. But the fact is that for the last ten years there has been no mass campaign in Britain on the Irish question. Some very small revolutionary groups see this as the fault of somewhat larger revolutionary groups. In reality, neither the SWP nor any other left organisation could create such a campaign by sheer willpower in the total absence of a mood of solidarity in at least a section of the working class (above all Irish workers in Britain).
Finally there is the case of a battle such as that of the printers at ‘Fortress Wapping’, where workers fought for their jobs against pre-planned mass strike-breaking, organised by the employer and heavily defended by the forces of the state – the police. From the outset it was obvious to revolutionary socialists that the first step towards winning this vital dispute was a series of militant mass pickets. At the same time it was no less obvious that the trade union leaders were not prepared to organise such pickets, indeed actively opposed them.
In such a situation the substitutionist temptation is there again. Perhaps what the printers aren’t doing we should do for them? Perhaps if every Socialist Worker supporter could be assembled at Wapping every Saturday night that would do the trick? Actually this is neither practical nor desirable, as it would not solve the basic problem in the dispute. The task would remain of mobilising the mass of print workers – and not just those directly involved – and then other trade unionists in their support.
Does this mean revolutionary socialists do nothing? No, it means continuing to support the pickets, and outlining to the workers involved an alternative strategy to that of the union leaders.
Revolutionary leadership is an art which involves the concrete assessment of every concrete situation – there are no universally valid rules. But in general we can say this: it is not a matter of revolutionaries leading themselves, but of drawing into action workers who are not yet revolutionaries. This means neither tail-ending the working class nor being so far ahead of it as to be out of sight.
 

Many campaigns – only one war
The list of injustices in our society is endless; poverty, racism, the Bomb, homelessness, cuts in health and education, the plight of old age pensioners, the treatment of the disabled, police brutality, the oppression of women and gays, repression in Ireland, attacks on the unions, unemployment. One of the crucial differences between liberals or reformists, on the one hand, and Marxists on the other, is that the former tend to regard each issue as an isolated problem capable of being solved on its own, whereas the latter view all of them as having a common root in the economic structure of capitalism.
For the liberals the way to tackle these issues is largely a matter of changing attitudes; of the enlightened – themselves – persuading the unenlightened; of influencing me powerful directly, or else of mobilising public opinion which in turn will influence the powerful.
For Marxists it is first of all a matter of mobilising the power of the oppressed themselves to win concessions from the system through struggle and, in the process, developing and harnessing that power to overthrow the system completely.
To illustrate and evaluate these different approaches, let’s take two examples. First, the treatment of old age pensioners.
Everyone knows the majority of old age pensioners (those from the working class) are treated miserably. After a lifetime working for the system they are ‘rewarded’ with a pittance barely enough for survival. The old make up the largest single group within the 15 million people in Britain who are on the poverty line. Almost everyone would like to see pensioners treated better. Most politicians feel obliged to pay lip service to the pensioners. In an opinion poll, I would guess, 90 per cent at least would favour higher pensions. No one, as far as I know, actually opposes or attacks the pensioners. And yet, despite this immense support, their desperate situation remains unchanged. Why?
First because our society subordinates everything to the accumulation of capital, and from the point of view of capital, pensioners are useless, indeed, worse than useless. Consequently, in the queue for ‘rewards’ pensioners will always come light years behind the Royal Family, the armed forces, the police, Lord Mayor’s banquets and innumerable other vicious or useless obscenities, all of which do contribute – in their way – to maintaining the rule of capital.
Second, because as old age pensioners they lack the collective bargaining power to force an improvement in their lot. This latter condition will remain until organised workers use their industrial strength to fight not only for themselves, but for pensioners too. The first condition will remain until production for profit is replaced by production for need.
Another example is the oppression of women. Sexist attitudes are, of course, still widespread and deeply rooted. Nonetheless in terms of ‘attitudes’ the past 15 years have seen an extraordinary transformation. At the level of ideas, the women’s movement has been an amazing success. There have been two major pieces of legislation, the Equal Pay Act and the Sex Discrimination Act, in force for eight years. Yet the actual conditions of most women have worsened rather man improved. The earnings gap between men and women has widened and child care and housework remain overwhelmingly the responsibility of women.
Again we must ask why, and again the answer brings us back to the requirements of capitalism. For capital women remain a source of cheap labour that it will not, and cannot, afford to pass up. For capital the family structure, which oppresses women, remains an exceedingly convenient arrangement for the reproduction of labour power and maintenance of social control. Only the overthrow of capitalism will create the real conditions for women’s liberation.
Both these examples point to the same conclusion. Oppression takes many forms and each form of oppression generates its own struggle for reform. Marxists support these many struggles, but they don’t lose sight of the fact that the different oppressions have a common source in the capitalist mode of production. The many struggles are not isolated campaigns, but different aspects of a single war – the war of the working class to overthrow capitalism.
 

Why we need a revolutionary party
Capitalism is in a state of deep economic crisis and the capitalist class always reacts to economic crisis in the same way: it attacks the working class. This has been the fundamental reality behind government policy in Britain for the last ten years or more, whether the government has been Tory or Labour. It is going to continue to be the fundamental reality facing the working class for the foreseeable future, no matter who wins the next election or the election after that.
Because the capitalist crisis is world-wide, it is true for workers everywhere. High unemployment in the USA, food queues in the Eastern bloc, starvation in the ‘Third World’ – all are manifestations of the way the world’s ruling classes are making workers pay for the crisis.
Time and again the ruling class will return to the offensive striving to weaken union organisation, drive down wages, cut social services, slash jobs and undermine workers’ rights. All with the basic aim of reducing the share of the national income going to the working class and increasing the share going to profits.
In this way they will eventually provoke a massive and general confrontation between capital and labour. We cannot tell when this will happen but we can be sure that sooner or later it will. The question facing the working class and in particular its politically aware sections, in other words socialists, is how best to prepare for this confrontation so that the working class wins it.
Marxism provides an answer to this question. It is that we should build a revolutionary party.
This is neither easy nor fashionable. It means accepting (for the present) being a small minority within the class as a whole, and it involves much hard work and numerous difficulties. Nevertheless it is essential, for the simple reason that without revolutionary leadership the working class is bound to be defeated in a decisive conflict.
The enemy we face, the ruling class, is highly organised and centralised. This applies to each company, where you can be sure that all the managers of BL, ICI and the National Coal Board will follow a single coordinated strategy, and it applies to each capitalist state, whether East or West. Obviously the army and the police are highly disciplined and act according to a centralised plan.
To defeat such an opponent the working class must also be centralised. It must be able to link its action in Glasgow, Edinburgh and Aberdeen with its action in Liverpool, Birmingham and London. It must be able to pursue the same strategy among miners, dockers, engineering workers, teachers and civil servants. Such coordination can only be supplied by an organisation which unites the workers leading the struggles in all these localities and workplaces.
At first glance the obvious candidates for this role are the trade unions and the Labour Party, with their already established mass memberships. However it is a task they are completely incapable of performing: they cannot coordinate the struggle effectively because at bottom they do not even want to wage it. Both the trade union leaders, whose main concern is to preserve their balancing role between workers and employers, and the parliamentarians, whose main concern is to win votes, fear an all-out struggle by the rank and file even more than they fear defeat by the ruling class. At the crucial moment they will inevitably betray.
This makes the building of a revolutionary party doubly urgent. Unless a credible alternative, with a substantial base in the working class, is built in advance of the general confrontation, the majority of workers will continue to follow their existing leaders – who will lead them to catastrophe as they did in the General Strike of 1926 or in Chile in 1973.
A revolutionary party differs from a reformist party not only in aims and ideas, but also in the nature of its membership, organisation and mode of operation. A reformist party is essentially an electoral machine. Its membership is usually large but passive. Its main jobs are fund-raising and canvassing. This requires neither political education, nor discipline, nor democracy, for no serious action by the party membership is even contemplated. It leads necessarily to the domination of the party by its MPs and its bureaucracy.
A revolutionary party, however, is a combat party. Its membership is smaller (in a non-revolutionary period) but active. Its job is to fight for its political analysis and strategy in all the struggles of the working class, and in so doing win the leadership of the class at rank-and-file level. This requires a high political level, unity in action and real democracy, for the party’s politics have to be carried in practice by the members.
Only a party built on these lines can lead the working class in an all-out conflict with the system. Only the working class, informed and strengthened through the leadership of such a party, can make a socialist revolution and create a socialist society.
 

n Molyneux: Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism (2. So how do we get to this new world?)



John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

John Molyneux
Arguments for Revolutionary Socialism

Chapter Two:
So how do we get to this new world?

LOOK AT human history and you will see a tale of misery. Exploitation and oppression, barbarous cruelty, rebellion and repression, the horror of war – for thousands of years these have not been the exception but the rule.
On the one hand a tiny minority have lived in all the luxury and splendour the times would allow. On the other a perpetual majority – the poor – have waged a life-long struggle simply to survive.
This is one side of history but not the only side. It can also be seen as the triumphant march of human progress, the ceaseless expansion of humanity’s productive capacities, of knowledge and of the ability to harness the natural environment to make life better, freer, more human.
The point is that up to now these two sides of history have seemed inseparable. The amazing growth of the productive forces, the staggering advances in science and technology have not lessened the barbarities inflicted by humans on humans, but refined and perfected them. The enormous increase in the collective material wealth of the world has not narrowed the gap between rich and poor. To look at the world today – the world of modern capitalism – is to see these age-old contradictions pushed to their extreme limits. On one side live the millionaires and billionaires jet-setting from one luxury watering hole to another, on the other are the hideous shanty towns of Calcutta, Sao Paolo or Manila, and die emaciated famine victims of Ethiopia.
And then, of course, there is the final madness: great scientific breakthroughs which reveal the structure of the atom and are put to a hideous application – nuclear weapons.
What distinguishes Marxism from all other theories and ideologies, past and present, is that it has identified a realistic way out of this impasse. A way of abolishing class divisions, of ending exploitation and war, of freeing the world’s workers from unending poverty and drudgery – a way forward for the human race. The key word here is realistic, for the aspiration to freedom and equality long predates Marxm.
From Spartacus onwards the oppressed have rebelled against their oppression, and thinkers have dreamed of a harmonious society. Christianity itself, like all religions, is a distorted expression of these aspirations.
What Marx did, and was the first to do, was to place these aspirations on a scientific foundation. He showed that human emancipation was actually possible, not on the basis of his or anyone else’s special plan or divine inspiration, but on the basis of forces and tendencies already at work in society.
Above all, Marx showed that capitalism itself produced a social force – the working class – whose conditions not only drove it to rebel but gave it the capacity to overthrow capitalism and put an end to all forms of class rule.
This – the workers’ struggle for freedom – is the heart of Marxism, its essential message for all those who want to change the world. Lenin put it this way: ‘The main thing in the teaching of Marx is the elucidation of the world-wide historical role of the proletariat as the builder of a socialist society.’
 

Why we don’t like Mondays
‘Roll on Friday’. This familiar phrase expresses the fact that for most of us the work we do is tedious and meaningless. We wish away our lives clock-watching because we only begin to feel free when we are not at work.
The content of our work, what we actually make or do, is of secondary importance. We do it neither to meet our own needs, nor the needs of others, but simply to earn a living, not as part of our real life activity, but an unavoidable means to carry on with life. Marx recognised that work under capitalism is like this. He called it ‘alienated labour’, and he showed it was bound up with wage labour. Wage labour ensures that most people have to sell then-ability to work to those who control the means of production.
Labour – alienated or not – is the very foundation of society. What is produced and how that production is organised are the basic factors shaping the course of history. The simple fact, as Engels put it, ‘is that mankind must first of all eat, drink, have shelter and clothing before it can pursue science, art, religion, etc’. This is such a simple statement that it is worth considering for a moment why it remained hidden for so long.
First, because for thousands of years the people who actually worked were always the lowest stratum of society. The significance of their work could be ignored. Secondly, because those who run society, slave-owners, landlords, industrialists or bankers, do no productive work themselves, they can flatter themselves that it’s their decrees and commands which make society tick. Moreover, they have an interest in ensuring the rest of us believe this too. Hence the ‘great man’ view of history taught in schools. In contrast it was precisely because Marx had grasped the potential of the working class to master society that he was able to see the real importance of labour.
Marx distinguished two aspects of work. Firstly, he focussed on the actual business of making things, the use of tools to transform raw material into products that can be consumed to sustain human life. A society’s capacity to do this he called its forces of production. Secondly, Marx analysed relationships between people that are necessary for production to take place. These relationships involve both co-operation, as when a tribe goes out to hunt, and subordination, as between worker and capitalist. They are called by Marx the relations of production.
The level reached by the forces of production conditions the relations of production. The earliest stage of the productive forces, the use of primitive tools for hunting, gave rise to the tribe. The development of the extensive cultivation of land produced the social relations of slavery and then serfdom. The growth of trade, manufacture and then industry produced the dominant production relation of wage labour. The sum total of these relations of production within society Marx called the ‘mode of production’.
Marx pointed to four such modes of production (he called them the Asiatic, ancient, feudal and capitalist) as the main periods in past history. The fifth, socialism, he predicted as the coming epoch.
 

What do you mean by exploitation?
What happens when workers sell their labour power to the capitalist? The employer gets the worker’s labour for a certain number of hours, and in return the worker receives a wage. It seems a fair deal – a certain amount of money is exchanged for a certain amount of labour. Both sides agree to the arrangement; exchange is no robbery.
’Exploitation’ is said to be something that occurs only exceptionally, when the employer somehow cheats the workers. The popularity of the slogan ‘A fair day’s wage for a fair day’s work’ shows that many workers also accept this view.
Marx, however, showed that exploitation was not the exception but the rule, and that it was built into wage labour. He began by analysing the ‘commodity’, for under capitalism both capital and labour power are ‘commodities’, goods produced for exchange.
Commodities come in all shapes and sizes, and serve a large variety of purposes. They can be anything from an ocean liner to a packet of cornflakes. Yet they can all (through money) be exchanged for each other. This is only possible because they have one thing in common – they are all the products of definite amounts of human labour time. The value of a commodity is determined by die amount of labour time society has to spend on producing it. (Marx calls this ‘socially necessary labour time’.)
Now apply this ‘labour theory of value’ to the commodity of labour power itself. The value of labour power is also determined by the amount of labour time needed to produce it – that is, by what it takes to feed, clothe, house, educate and reproduce the worker. The worker’s wages pay for the cost of ‘producing’ the worker’s ability to work. In this sense the buying of labour power is a ‘fair’ exchange like any other.
But labour power is different from all other commodities. It is creative. It produces more value than it takes to maintain itself. (If human labour didn’t produce more than it consumed there would have been no development of the productive forces and no history.) But this ‘surplus’ value goes to the capitalist, not the worker.
Thus if a worker sells, say, 40 hours of labour time to die capitalist and is paid £100, enough to support him or her for that week, he or she will produce £100 worth of goods in, say, only 20 hours. The remaining 20 hours of the working week will be unpaid labour for the capitalist.
The unpaid labour is the hidden secret of capitalist exploitation. Beneath the apparent ‘fair’ exchange, it is the source of all profit. For in those extra 20 hours – the figure will of course vary with the circumstances – the worker will produce another £100 worth of goods for the capitalist. This Marx called ‘surplus value’. It is the capitalist’s profit.
Marx’s theory of surplus value does more than prove that capitalism is based on exploitation. It also reveals the irreconcilable conflict of interest that lies at the heart of the system and divides it into warring classes. Driven by competition, capitalists seek always to extend the unpaid labour time they extract from the workers. Driven by human need, the workers seek to reduce it. Hence – on one side – speed-ups, productivity deals, wages cuts; and on the other side wage demands, strikes and the whole trade union struggle.
The only solution to the conflict is for the workers to go beyond struggle over the role of exploitation, and abolish it by seizing the means of production and ending die sale of labour power.
 

What is ‘capital’?
Capitalism is a system dominated by capital. But what is capital? The everyday view, which quite suits our rulers, is that capital is simply a large amount of money, machinery and other means of production. From this it appears that you can’t have any production without capital, and capitalism seems to be an eternal system.
Marx, however, penetrated beneath this appearance to show that capital is not just a thing (money, machines, etc.) but also a social relationship, a relation of production. Capital doesn’t grow on trees, it has to be produced. Capital is therefore ‘stored up’ or ‘accumulated labour’. (Marx also calls it dead labour.) But stored-up labour is necessary for any system of production, including socialism – it only becomes capital in certain social relations.
Firstly, stored-up labour becomes capital when it can be exchanged with the live labour power of workers in a way which increases the value of that stored-up labour. For capitalism to develop there must be a class of people who have been separated from the means of production, and are therefore forced to sell their ability to work to those who own and control the means of production.
Capital, therefore, implies wage labour. They are two sides of the same equation.
Secondly, capital can only exist as many capitals, in other words as production units working separately and in competition with each other. It is this competition which compels those who possess stored-up labour to use it as capital, to strive to expand its value by employing workers, rather than just consuming it themselves. Henry Ford isn’t driven to make more and more profits by personal greed alone, but by competition with General Motors, Fiat, Volkswagen and other giant car firms.
Production for production’s sake, accumulation for accumulation’s sake. This is the basic dynamic of capitalism.
The question of private ownership is of secondary importance. It was the typical form in which capitalism developed, but as long as the workers are separated from the means of production, and as long as the minority who control those means of production are compelled by competition to increase their value and exploit their workers, you still have capital and capitalism.
State-owned British Steel and BL are just as much capitalist enterprises as privately-owned Unilever or ICI. State-owned USSR Ltd is just as capitalist as partially state-owned Great Britain Ltd.
Capitalism is therefore a system in which the living labour of workers is only a means to increase accumulated labour. Living labour is dominated by dead labour. The worker is an appendage to the machine. Socialism, through social ownership and workers’ control, will reverse this relationship. Accumulated labour will serve living labour. Production will be for need not profit.
 

How capitalism causes crises
Capitalism is a system of recurring economic crises. At the moment we’re living through the latest of these. To the ruling class and its hangers-on – its journalists, politicians, economists and the rest – the explanations for these crises vary. Sometimes they are seen as accidents, sometimes as ‘acts of God’ like the weather, sometimes greedy workers are to blame, and sometimes government mismanagement.
What is always clear is that the working class suffers most. Unemployment officially passed the two million mark in 1980. We have now had years of mass unemployment, on a scale comparable to the 1930s, and there is no end in sight. With the real number of unemployed well over four million there can hardly be a working-class family whose lives are not directly or indirectly affected by the misery of the dole queue.
The Marxist explanation of unemployment starts from the fact that capitalist production is production for profit. It follows from this that under capitalism people are only employed when their employment, directly or indirectly, assists in the making of profits. When it ceases to do so they cease to be employed.
The key to the overall level of employment at any time is therefore the average rate of profit across industry as a whole. When the average rate of profit is high capitalists are keen to invest, to expand their operations, to launch new projects and to take on new labour. When the average rate of profit is low, capitalists are reluctant to invest; old industries become out of date and uncompetitive for lack of new plant and are forced to close; new industries fail to take their place. Unemployment rises.
Each of these situations creates a certain momentum of its own. When new workers are taken on they have more money to spend. Demand for goods increases and production rises to meet the demand. Yet more workers are then employed to raise production, and so on. On the other hand, when unemployment rises workers on the dole have less to spend. Demand for goods falls, production falls and more workers are made redundant. There is a slump.
The key question is what makes the rate of profit high or low in the first place? What decides whether the economy spirals upwards into boom or downwards into slump? There are two processes at work here. The first is cyclical. It causes the system to alternate, more or less regularly, from boom to slump and back again. In the boom the increased demand for labour enables workers to push up wages to the point where they cut into profits. The rate of profit falls and the boom collapses into slump. In the slump unemployment cuts the bargaining power of workers and wages fall until eventually the rate of profit is restored. The slump turns into boom.
The second process is more fundamental. It is an underlying long-run tendency for the rate of profit to fall.
Because capitalism is competitive, each capitalist unit strives to produce as much as possible, to grab as large a share of die market as it can. But because it is exploitative, it never pays die workers enough for them to buy up all die goods they produce. As a result, it is always faced with the danger of overproduction – of producing more than can be sold.
Capitalism cannot solve this problem by raising wages, because that would cut into its profits. What is a solution to this problem is for capitalists themselves continually to reinvest their profits by producing ever more ‘means of production’: more machines, and machines for making more machines. This can work as long as the capitalists invest, and this they will do only as long as it produces profits.
However, this investment in means of production itself contributes to a long-term tendency for the rate of profit to fall. The reason is that profit itself derives only from the exploitation of labour power – from the living labour of workers, not from the accumulated labour represented by machines. As capitalists buy more and more machinery, the amount of living labour becomes a proportionally smaller part of the capitalist’s outlay (we have seen this happen enormously in our own time as computers have enabled one worker to perform the task previously done by several).
The result is that the rate of profit – the amount of profit in relation to the capitalist’s total outlay – declines, even though the capitalist will try to counter-balance this by driving the workers harder or for longer hours.
Once the rate of profit falls below a certain level, capitalists lose the incentive to invest and the system faces a crisis of overproduction as ‘means of production’ go unbought – machinery goes unsold, factory buildings and office blocks stand empty. This spirals into recession and slump, firms go bankrupt, workers are laid off, and unemployment soars.
There are a number of factors which can offset the falling rate of profit. In the heyday of British imperialism, for example, huge amounts of capital were exported to pre-capitalist countries – which meant there was less capital to invest in Britain, so less danger of overproduction. The destruction of even larger amounts of capital in war, or by permanent high levels of spending on armaments during peacetime, can also stave off, for a period, the growth of capital in proportion to labour power.
Economic crisis itself destroys or devalues a lot of capital by bankrupting the weaker firms. That makes possible a higher rate of profit for those who survive. This is why capitalism generally alternates between boom and slump and why the system was capable of sustained growth in the 1880s and ’90s and, even more so, in the period 1950–73.
Sooner or later, however, this very growth ensures that the basic tendency for the rate of profit to fall reasserts itself. It’s just such a fall which underlies the present world recession. Moreover, the fact that today’s units of capital are both larger and more concentrated than in the past makes it much more difficult for them to simply go bankrupt. When Britain had a dozen or more car manufacturers, one or two could be sacrificed in a recession to the advantage of the rest. Today BL, the only remaining car firm, cannot be allowed to go under without the risk of irreparable damage to the rest of the economy.
The result is that capitalism finds it more difficult to use a short, sharp crisis to destroy sections of capital and so restore the rate of profit. Instead we have a somewhat less sharp collapse. But one which drags on and on without hope of any recovery.
The tendency of the rate of profit to decline is a fundamental and insoluble contradiction of capitalism. It is a concrete expression of the fact that capitalist relations of production have become a barrier to humanity’s further development of its productive forces. Mass unemployment is a result of contradictions built into the very nature of capitalism, of a system based on the search for profit. Only when production is for need, not profit, will humanity be free of economic crises and the untold misery they cause, free to move forward.
 

Where is history leading?
The basis of society is production. Social relations between people, the form of law and government, depend ultimately on the ability of humanity to produce the necessities of life. This is the first premise of Marx’s theory of history. But how can one mode of production be transformed into another?
It cannot be done simply by will. Nor is it just a matter of convincing people that it’s a good idea. For Marx the first basis for such a change is that, within a particular mode of production, the forces of production should have developed to a level where new relationships of production become possible. Until this has happened all revolutions are doomed to fail.
But once the productive forces have reached this level, the existing relations of production become reactionary. They hold back the further development of society and are ready to be overturned.
Capitalism has long since reached this stage. It has created a world economy and a world division of labour. It has raised productivity to the point that the working day could be drastically reduced. It has increased production to the point where, potentially, there is more than enough to ensure a decent life for all.
But the continued existence of capitalist relations of production prevents this potential being realised. The division of society into bosses and workers, and the competitive struggle between bosses for profits, ensures that poverty and starvation continue, that working hours remain long, and that the world remains divided into hostile, warring states.
The fact that capitalism is still with us shows that the development of the productive forces doesn’t, by itself, change the system. Relations of production are class relations. They imply a ruling class which controls production – and an oppressed class (or classes) that produces. The ruling class has a vested interest in maintaining the reactionary relations of production. Changing die mode of production involves a struggle by the oppressed class that is linked to, and embodies, the rising forces of production, to overthrow the ruling class. The motor of history, therefore, is class struggle.
The change from feudalism to capitalism was one example of this process. It involved a struggle by the middle class – or bourgeoisie – supported by other oppressed classes, to destroy the power of the monarchy and sweep away the feudal restrictions which were blocking the development of capitalism. The decisive moments in that struggle were two great revolutions: the English Revolution of 1642 and the French Revolution of 1789.
The change from capitalism to socialism will be another example. It will involve the struggle of the working class, at the head of all the oppressed, to destroy the power of the bourgeoisie and establish social control of production. Its decisive moment will also be a revolution.
The advance to socialism, however, is far from inevitable. Human history is no mere mechanical process – its advance, or retreat, depends upon the collective class actions and decisions of human beings. Friedrich Engels once wrote: ‘Capitalist society faces a dilemma, either an advance to socialism or a reversion to barbarism.’ What happens depends on the outcome of class struggle.
 

Socialism or barbarism?
One possible product of capitalism in crisis has already revealed itself once this century: fascism, with the Nazi domination of much of Europe, brought war, devastation, and the extermination of millions of people simply because they belonged to a different race, nationality, or political persuasion.
At the moment the fascists are isolated, fragmented and confined to the margins of the political scene. But this doesn’t mean that we can sink into a complacent ‘it can’t happen here’ attitude. Only a few years ago, before it was thrown back by the Anti-Nazi League, the British National Front was a growing threat. In Germany, in 1928, Hitler’s Nazis seemed insignificant. Yet within five years they were in power, and one has only to look at Mitterrand’s France to see a neo-Nazi movement making rapid advances.
For all these reasons an analysis of fascism remains an essential weapon in the Marxist theoretical arsenal. It is also essential that this analysis should be precise. It mustn’t blur the distinction between real fascism and every other form of right-wing authoritarianism. Such confusion not only spreads unnecessary panic but also leads to an underestimation of the brutality and danger of the real thing.
The first point to be made in analysing fascism is that it is not some collective madness that suddenly seizes the whole of society. Nor is it a freak of the German (or Italian) national character, or the product of the evil genius of a demonic charismatic leader. Nor on the other hand is it just any violation of democracy or human rights (under capitalism such violations occur all the time). Rather, fascism is a phenomenon generated by the very nature of capitalism, but which has quite specific class roots. In power, it is a form of bourgeois rule sharply different from ordinary capitalist democracy in that it involves the annihilation of all independent working-class organisations.
The class basis of fascism is, in the first place, the petty bourgeoisie – small shopkeepers, self-employed and the like – and it is from here that the core of a fascist movement is recruited. The petty bourgeoisie feels crushed between big capital on the one hand and the organised working class on the other. In times of severe economic crisis this double pressure becomes more acute and, under the threat of mass bankruptcy, the petty bourgeoisie searches desperately for a way out.
If in this situation the working class, under revolutionary leadership, shows its capacity and determination to resolve the crisis it can draw large sections of the middle class behind it. If, however, the working class fails to give a clear lead then the petty bourgeoisie can swing wildly to the right and turn to fascism.
This is because the ideology of fascism appears to reflect the experience of the enraged petty bourgeoisie. It combines vague rhetoric against international finance with bitter hostility to the labour movement. These contradictory attitudes are cemented together by the racist fantasy that international capitalism and communism are parts of a world conspiracy to undermine the purity of race and nation. (In Germany the Nazis made the Jews their victims; the British National Front in the 1970s tried to blame black people.)
The petty bourgeoisie, however, cannot become the ruling class in modern capitalism. Consequently fascism – basing itself on this class – cannot come to power solely by its own efforts. It needs the backing of the ruling class itself.
But for the ruling class, fascism is a risky option which involves handing the reins of power to people it regards as vulgar fanatics. It will take this step only in very pressing circumstances. Firstly, the economic crisis must be so severe that the profitability of capitalism cannot be restored without the wholesale destruction of the labour movement. Secondly, the ruling class must have been put in fear of its life by that labour movement. Thirdly, it must be confident that the working class is weak enough for the fascist solution to succeed. It has no desire to provoke its own overthrow.
These conditions are most likely to occur in the aftermath of revolutionary situations that have been wasted by reformist leadership. So it was in Italy in 1921, in Germany in 1933 and in Spain in 1936. The price of failing to make the socialist revolution is horrifically high.
 

So what puts socialist revolution on the agenda?
What effect does the state of the economy have on the state of the class struggle? Is it necessary for the slump to become even more severe and for workers to be reduced to extreme poverty before there will be mass rebellion against capitalism? Or does there have to be a new boom in order to restore workers’ confidence?
These are obviously important questions for Marxism, especially at a time when the working-class movement has been seriously damaged and undermined by mass unemployment. They are also difficult to answer – for there is no simple, mechanical or automatic relationship between economic conditions and the level of working-class resistance. Factors such as the historical traditions of the class, the degree of consciousness and organisation, and the quality of its leadership, all have their effect.
Nevertheless on the basis of previous experience of booms and slumps it is possible to make certain broad generalisations.
First of all, conditions of prolonged boom (such as from the Second World War to the mid-1960s) create favourable conditions for the development of a high level of confidence and organisation. However the readiness and capacity of employers to make concessions restricts the scale of the struggle. Strikes tend to be successful but small and short. There are no class-wide life and death battles. Consequently workers feel no compulsion to generalise die struggle politically, and show little interest in revolutionary socialist ideas. In a period of sustained expansion reforms can be won but capitalism cannot be overthrown.
In contrast, conditions of slump or economic crisis sharply raise the stakes of the struggle. The employers, with the threat of bankruptcy at their backs, are much more determined and more likely to enlist the aid of the state.
To make gains, or even to hold on to the gains of the past, workers have to fight much harder and on a much wider scale. The whole struggle becomes more bitter and more generalised and the question of political leadership becomes much more important. The slump creates the potential for both greater victories (up to and including the overthrow of the system) and greater defeats. Moreover defeats in conditions of mass unemployment are likely to be more demoralising.
In general, revolutionary struggle and revolutionary consciousness combine two elements: bitterness at the exploiters and their system and confidence in the possibility of fighting. The former tends to be a product of the slump, the latter of the boom. We can therefore say that it is neither the boom by itself, nor the slump by itself, that raises the class struggle to its highest level, but rather the rapid alternation between one and the other.
Three variations are possible here. First, a boom in which workers’ expectations, confidence and organisation rise, followed by the onset of a slump to which workers respond with mass struggles. Second, a slump in which bitterness accumulates, followed by a boom which gives workers the confidence to fight. And a third possibility is a prolonged crisis with the ruling class continually on the attack and the working class falling back until the former finally overreaches itself and provokes a desperate mass resistance. If this resistance proves successful it can give workers the confidence to return to the offensive.
Situations are possible which combine elements of these three different variations. A small recovery within an overall crisis, for instance, will give some workers slightly more confidence, against a ruling class driven by the crisis to press on and on with its attacks on living standards and thus compelled time and again to risk overreaching itself.
Apart from the 1984–5 miners’ strike, the present bosses’ offensive in Britain has not met with a serious fight back, and the workers’ movement as a whole remains weakened. But the long-term prospects for the ruling class are bleak. Capitalism is not going to return to sustained boom. However, within the continuing crisis there will be repeated oscillations up and down. Each such oscillation carries with it the possibility of an upsurge in the class struggle, as does each new ruling-class assault.
Sooner or later, therefore, the tide will turn, and when it does the stakes will be very high indeed.
 

What we mean by workers’ power
Any well-organised strike needs a strike committee made up of shop stewards or other representatives elected by the rank and file. Its job is to organise picketing, blacking and support from other workers. If the strike spreads throughout the industry or to other industries the strike committee will need to expand to include representatives from all the workers involved, and its tasks and responsibilities will grow too.
If there is a general strike or a succession of mass strikes and occupations, and the working class mounts a serious challenge to I the system, then hundreds of such organisations will be needed. And they will face a host of new tasks: calling demonstrations, maintaining essential supplies and transport, defending picket lines and workers’ organisations against attack, creating an alternative news service to counteract government propaganda, perhaps the co-ordination of rent strikes and the protection of working-class areas.
Such workers’ councils – or ‘Soviets’, to use the Russian word – have always risen from the needs of the struggle itself – and not as an abstract scheme imposed by theorists. This was true of the Russian Soviets of 1905 and 1917, the workers’ councils of the German Revolution 1918–19, those of Spain 1936 and of Hungary 1956.
In the British General Strike there were Councils of Action which could have developed in this direction if the struggle had continued. The inter-factory committees in Poland in 1980, which linked the Gdansk shipyard occupation with hundreds of other workplaces across the country, had the same potential.
Soviets, in taking on many of the functions of government, become alternative centres of power, rivalling those of the state.
This is called ‘dual power’. Dual power cannot last long. It will be ended either by ruling-class repression, as in Germany 1919, or Poland 1981, or by workers’ revolution as in Russia in 1917.
That revolution will mean destroying the bourgeois state and replacing it with the workers’ councils as the basis of the new state power – workers’ power, what Marx called ‘the dictatorship of the proletariat’. Based on elections in workplaces where collective debate and discussion are possible, the workers’ councils will directly represent the interests of the workers as a class. Delegates will be instantly recallable simply by holding mass meeting, in the workplace, and like all state officials they will receive only the average worker’s wage.
The councils, in conjunction with factory committees and die trade unions, will place all production under workers’ control. They will requisition the hotels, mansions and extra houses of the rich to house the homeless. They will place the millionaire press and TV stations at the disposal of workers’ organisations according to their support among the people.
They will organise community nurseries, creches, restaurants and laundries to free women from the oppressive burden of housework. They will put colleges and schools under the control of those who use them, especially the students. The huge waste of resources on fat salaries, pomp and ceremony, Rolls-Royces, banquets and other junketings that accompany the capitalist state, will be ended at a stroke.
Every working person will be able to take part in running the state. By arming the workers and forming workers’ militias the new state will be able to mobilise the necessary force to deal with attempts at counter-revolution. But as this threat recedes, as it will in so far as the revolution is able to defeat the capitalists at home and abroad, so these repressive functions of the state will fade, leaving only the organisation of the whole people in pursuit of its needs. The state as such will wither away.
This is the real meaning of workers’ power. Contrary to all the propaganda about left totalitarianism, it would be a million times more democratic than any bourgeois parliament, enabling ordinary people, for the first time in history, to take control of their lives.
 



The debate over Political Correctness has been going on in the United States for several years and it is to some extent already an issue in Britain. The tabloids are handling the question in their usual style. More ‘serious’ journalists such as Simon Hoggart and Melanie Phillips have also jumped on the anti-PC bandwagon. But what is PC? Despite the capital letters it is not an organisation, a campaign or even a movement. There are no recognised PC leaders, no official or even unofficial PC programme or manifesto. Nor is it even possible to identify key theoretical texts which exemplify the PC outlook. At most, perhaps, it could be described as a trend, a cultural phenomenon, a series of attitudes and practices which are an effect or residue of certain aspects of the movements for black, female and gay liberation. Indeed PC did not even name itself. The term ‘politically correct’ appears to have originated within the left. Paul Berman tells us that:
’Politically Correct’ was originally a phrase on the Leninist left to denote someone who steadfastly toed the party line. Then it evolved into ‘PC’, an ironic phrase among wised up leftists to denote someone whose line-toeing fervour was too much to bear. Only in connection with the PC debate itself did the phrase get picked up by people who had no fidelity to radicalism at all, but who relished the nasty syllables for their twist of irony. [1]
For this reason the analysis of PC is best approached by starting with its opponents on the right whose attacks have constructed it as a bogey.
In retrospect it is clear that an opening shot in the anti-PC campaign was fired by the right wing University of Chicago philosopher Allan Bloom with his 1987 book The Closing of the American Mind. This rather bizarre work, which denounced not only the student revolt of the 1960s and its consequences but also rock music, was dedicated to the proposition that universities and especially American universities were the ‘home of reason’ and the disinterested pursuit of truth until undermined by radical ‘relativists’. Such an eccentric production contained too many hostages to fortune to launch a crusade but nonetheless met with extraordinary success – more than six months at the top of the New York Times best seller list.
Bloom demonstrated to publishers and potential authors one thesis beyond doubt: it is possible to write an alarmist book about the state of higher education with a long winded title and make a great deal of money. [2]
Bloom was soon followed by educational journalist Roger Kimball’s Tenured Radicals: How Politics has Corrupted Our Higher Education and Dinesh D’Souza’s Illiberal Education: the Politics of Race and Sex on Campus which rapidly became ‘the bible of the anti-PC campaign [3]. D’Souza’s work achieved this status partly thanks to the author’s political acuity. For the purposes of his attack on PC he adopted a political standpoint substantially to the left of his real position. D’Souza was a hard right winger, a policy adviser in the Reagan White House and biographer of Jerry Falwell, yet in Illiberal Education he presents himself as a supporter of Martin Luther King, an anti-racist and a sympathiser with the plight of black students. To his political godfathers ‘liberal’ was the ‘L’ word with which they baited their Democratic opponents, but D’Souza claims to write in defence of liberal education. Accordingly he writes in a tone of sweet reasonableness, merely raising issues for debate and making ‘modest proposals’ [4]. This doesn’t change in any way the profoundly right wing character of the book but it does make it possible to win plaudits from the likes of Eugene Genovese. [5]
Part stimulating, part swimming in the wake of the relatively heavyweight tones of Messrs Bloom, Kimball and D’Souza, came innumerable articles in Newsweek, the New York Times, the New York Review Of Books, the New Republic, the Village Voice, the Wall Street Journal and almost every other US paper, magazine or journal of note. Before long even the indolent George Bush had noticed that something was up and decided that it would aid his chances of re-election to join the onslaught. Addressing students at the University of Michigan in May 1991 he declared, ‘Political extremists roam the land, abusing the privilege of free speech, setting citizens against one another on the basis of their class or race.’ [6] With Bush in the field, supported by other leading Republicans such as former education secretary William Bennett and National Endowment for the Humanities chair Lynne Cheney (wife of defence secretary, Dick Cheney) the attack on PC could only intensify.
In a short article such as this it is obviously impossible to document or even summarise all the charges and arguments produced by this conservative campaign, but the essence of their case can be summed up fairly easily. It is that America’s universities have been, or are in the process of being, taken over by a new alliance of radical faculty members (lecturers) and student activists who are destroying the hallowed traditions of American academia and higher education through their obsession with the politics of race and sex. The key weapons of the radicals are said to be affirmative action, ie positive efforts to recruit hitherto under-represented ethnic minority students (basically blacks and Hispanics) which is lowering academic standards, curriculum revision designed to attack the canon of Western civilisation and culture, and language codes prohibiting racial and sexual abuse which contravene the right to free speech. The effect of this leftist subversion is to transform the universities into citadels of totalitarian intolerance in which racial antagonisms are increased, honest academic inquiry inhibited and ‘ordinary’ students and ‘moderate’ or traditional staff members walk in fear of constant repression and harassment by PC fanatics.
Before dealing in detail with these specific issues, some of which present quite knotty problems, some general observations on the nature of the anti-PC campaign are in order. First it should be noted that in America the debate has focused primarily on the narrow terrain of the university, with only limited overspill into other areas (the schools, arts, etc.). In Britain, a point I shall return to later, the key terrain for the PC battle seems likely to be elsewhere, for example the social services.
Second, the issue which in Britain seems most to have caught people’s attention, namely euphemistic language reform (calling short people ‘vertically challenged’ etc.) has only been one small aspect of the debate and not the one which has generated most heat. Far more important have been the fights over affirmative action and the literary heritage.
Third, while the anti-PC campaign was clearly launched by and has been dominated by right wing forces, in its latter stages it attracted at least qualified support from some surprising sources. I have already mentioned the erstwhile Marxist historian Eugene Genovese but others from the left, or at least left of centre, who have weighed in on the anti-PC side include Nat Hentoff of the Village Voice [7], veteran social democrat Irving Howe [8] and perhaps most surprising of all Edward Said, who as the author of Orientalism and Culture and Imperialism many would have identified as himself a Pcer. [9] Paul Berman notes ‘the way that certain liberals and old-school leftists joined the neo-conservatives in making several of the arguments as something new and perhaps quite significant, since previous debates tended to observe a chaste division of left and right’ [10].
At this point it is necessary to mention the intervention of Robert Hughes, author of the best selling history of modern art The Shock of the New and the art critic of Time magazine. In 1993 Hughes published Culture of Complaint – The Fraying of America, which in a number of ways is a quite distinctive contribution to the debate. Firstly Hughes broadens the focus from the university to American culture as a whole which he sees as having become an ‘infantilized culture of complaint’, a ‘broken polity’ polarised between the ‘twin fetishes of victimhood and redemption’ [11]. Secondly, unlike D’Souza and Co, he does not concentrate his attack exclusively on the left. Instead from a position of robust ‘commonsense’ liberalism he treats the politically correct of the left and the ‘patriotically correct’ of the right (the likes of Pat Robertson, Pat Buchanan and Jessie Helms who dominated the pre-election Republican Convention of 1992) as mirror images of each other, twin descendants of America’s witch hunting puritan past; and lambasts both with equal fervour. Thirdly, and this is also in contrast to most of the literature on the subject, Hughes writes with such gusto and panache that it is hard not to be beguiled by him even when one is in sharp political disagreement with a number of his arguments [12]. Nevertheless, despite these distinctions, it was inevitable, given the context and timing of its production, that Culture of Complaint would be received and taken up primarily as a blow against PC.
This then is the anti-PC line up: a formidable array comprising almost all strands of the American media stretching politically from the far right to the liberal left.
Bush’s election defeat in 1992 took some of the wind out of the anti-PCers’ sails. Bush’s attempt to win re-election on the back of conservative cultural themes like ‘family values’ failed. But the potency of the issues on which the anti-PC campaign focused remains. In June 1993 President Bill Clinton withdrew his nomination of a liberal Black civil rights enforcement appointee following a conservative campaign that labelled her a ‘quota queen’. And campus anti-feminists have recently taken to labelling women who speak out against date rape as ‘sexually correct’.
 
The socialist response
A socialist response to the anti-PC campaign has to both analyse the debate as a whole, examining the social forces and politics involved on both sides, and also respond to a number of specific issues raised by the debate which present themselves as concrete practical questions in workplaces, colleges and elsewhere quite independently of our choosing. At the general level the most striking feature of the anti-PC campaign is the disproportion between its rhetoric and the enemy which it is attacking. Irving Kristol claimed in the Wall Street Journal that ‘multiculturalism is as much a “war against the West” as Nazism and Stalinism ever were’ [13]. George Will argued that the war against the politicisation of higher education was more important than the war against Iraq [14], while one of the most common charges against PC has been that it is a new McCarthyism. Thus December 1990 Newsweek headlined its key PC article Is this the New Enlightenment or the New McCarthyism? only to be echoed a few months later by Eugene Genovese: ‘I fear that our conservative colleagues are today facing a new McCarthyism in some ways more effective and vicious than the old.’ [15]
There is a bitter irony in the accusation of McCarthyism for it is clearly the anti-PC crusaders of the right who are the spiritual heirs of the junior senator from Wisconsin, but it is also an absurd overestimation of the PC forces. It should be remembered that McCarthyism at its height had the power to arraign before Congress, fire, blacklist, deport, drive into exile and imprison thousands of supposed Communists and leftists from all walks of life including Hollywood, teaching, and academia itself, whereas not a single academic has been sacked as a result of PC activity. The real McCarthyism was able to persecute not just Paul Robeson, Bertolt Brecht and Arthur Miller but a figure with the standing of Charlie Chaplin. If PC had comparable power Arnold Schwarzenegger would be on the plane back to Austria and Clint Eastwood out of a job, not raking in Oscars.
Even the more soberly expressed claim of D’Souza and Kimball that PC culture now dominates America’s universities is plainly false. Such wild exaggeration is built into the structure of D’Souza’s book, for his method is to select typical PC offences, illustrate them with ‘case studies’ from particular colleges – hence ‘admission policy at Berkeley’, ‘multiculturalism at Stanford’ and so on – and pass the results off as a representative survey of American higher education. It is as if someone were to present a picture of crime in Britain based on case studies of the Yorkshire Ripper, Dennis Nielson and the Moors Murderers.
Reading Kimball and D’Souza one has repeatedly to pinch oneself to remember the elementary fact that America’s universities (like British and other universities) are businesses in their own right and tied by a thousand threads to the giant corporations and the state including, of course, the military. Radical feminists, black militants, left wing socialists, neo-Marxists and the like do not run America’s universities and never will this side of a revolution. In so far as such people exist in the colleges they are a minority influence concentrated in junior positions. The Higher Education Research Institute 1989-90 Survey of 35,000 faculty members of 392 US colleges and universities showed that 40 percent identified themselves as ‘moderates’, 37 percent as ‘liberals’, 18 percent as ‘conservatives’ and only 5 percent as ‘far left’. [16]
Even Robert Hughes, though dissociating himself from Genovese’s McCarthyism charge [17] and other extravagant claims, is still prone to this exaggeration. It is a central weakness of Culture of Complaint that the book is premised on equating the two PCs, politically and patriotically correct, both morally and in terms of their significance. To imagine that Leonard Jeffries, Paula Rothenburg or the Black Faculty Caucus at the University of Texas [18] are the equal of Jerry Falwell, Pat Buchanan or William Bennett (not to speak of Bush) in terms of status and power in American society is absurd. The error derives from Hughes’ over-concentration on the cultural sphere to the exclusion of the economic. As a result he fails to see that ‘the fraying of America’ which he detects is far more the product of the ongoing crisis of US capitalism than of particular statements and attitudes of journalists, academics and politicians. Enthusiasm for his polemic also leads Hughes into rhetorical lapses of his own. When deploring pro-choice disruption of a Village Voice sponsored debate on abortion he immediately reaches for the imagery of fascism, ‘the jackboot and the gag ... Brownshirt ranting’. [19]
Exaggeration and scaremongering however are familiar features of right wing thinking and propaganda. Think of McCarthy himself with his delusions of Communist influence in the US army or the perennial racist inflation of immigration figures and those fears that the ‘great’ British culture is about to be ‘swamped’, or all that hysteria about extreme influence in the Labour Party. No doubt the paranoia is partly genuine, reflecting a nagging suspicion in conservative minds that one day the Earth may open up beneath their feet and swallow them up; no doubt there is an element of sincere shock that hallowed traditions should be challenged at all, but exaggerating the forces of the left (especially when the left is relatively weak) also has the strategic function of disguising the real purposes of a campaign and winning ‘moderate’ support for far right wing views. Demonising Saddam Hussein as the new Hitler helped sell a war on the Iraqi people for control of oil. McCarthy’s anti-Communist witch hunt masked an attack on trade unionism and New Deal liberalism. The assault on Militant in the Labour Party was used to defeat Bennism and tame the soft left.
The next question socialists have to ask therefore is, what is the real target of the anti-PC campaign? The answer is pretty plain: it is what remains of the gains of the movements of the 1960s and early 1970s. The attack on PC is part of the much wider ruling class project to ‘roll back the 1960s’ which has included the attack on unions, the attack on welfare, the war on drugs with its criminalisation of the inner cities and overcoming the Vietnam syndrome by serial invasions of Grenada, Panama, Iraq and Somalia.
The great radical movements of the 1960s (and to be accurate, the early 1970s) – the black movement, the student revolt and the anti-war movement – fell apart in the mid-1970s, part crushed, part exhausted and part incorporated, but they left a legacy. Racism remained, of course, but the laws, the culture and the consciousness of mainstream America with regard to race were significantly changed. So too was the consciousness of black Americans – Malcolm X was killed but not forgotten. There was also the emergence of a substantial black middle class, as both price and condition of the defeat of black revolution. The women’s movement and to a lesser extent the lesbian and gay movement had similar effects.
The universities were also changed. Mass student activism subsided but a generation of teachers who had lived through the 1960s, even if they themselves had not been activists or had moved to the right, could not simply return to the smug conservatism and stifling conformity of the 1950s. In the humanities and social sciences the old certainties of art for art’s sake, cold war politics and functionalist sociology were no longer good enough even for ‘moderates’ and liberals. At the same time the combination of social change and affirmative action meant that the student population ceased to be virtually all white, which itself inevitably put new demands on the curriculum. For the right wing the campaign against PC is the intellectual equivalent of the invasions of Grenada and Panama. They see it as an opportunity to start turning the clock back to the imagined golden age of elitist higher education unsullied by the politics of race and sex. [20]
It is therefore clear that in the PC war socialists must in general side with the left and counter-attack against the right. In that sense we must defend PC. But what kind of defence should this be? One possibility is to take advantage of the distortions and exaggeration in the anti-PC campaign to enter a plea of not guilty, i.e. to argue that it is all a case of right wing hype and that nothing particularly radical or controversial is happening. This option is likely to be attractive to academics and professionals who, while well meaning and progressive, are not political activists and lack a worked out political perspective. [21]
Another possibility is aggressive support for PC and all its works: an approach which sees the PC fight as the latest frontline in the struggle against racism, sexism and homophobia and tends to assume that all opposition and criticism is simply a manifestation of covert bigotry flushed out by PC’s iconoclastic attack on the assumptions of white Western civilisation. [22] This response is perhaps most likely to be adopted by militant black nationalists and radical feminists.
However, for Marxists neither of these options is satisfactory. In the first place it is clear that the PC phenomenon does exist, if only on a limited scale and only as kind of cultural mood, so simple denial will not do. It is also a fact that some of the things done in the name of PC are, to put it charitably, simply silly. Consider the testimony of Edward Said. Said was presenting a paper based on aspects of his book Culture and Imperialism to an advanced historical studies seminar. Its theme was ‘the emergence of a global consciousness in Western knowledge at the end of the 19th century’, which he argued, coincides with a fully global imperial perspective:
The first question after my brief resume was from a professor of history, a black woman of some eminence who had recently come to the university, but whose work was unfamiliar to me. She announced in advance that her question was to be hostile, ‘a very hostile one in fact’. She then said something like the following: ‘For the first 13 pages of your paper you talked about white European males, thereafter, on page 14 you mention some names of non-Europeans. How could you do such a thing?’ I remonstrated somewhat. After all, I said, I was discussing European imperialism, which would not have been likely to include in its discourse the work of African-American women. I pointed out that in the book I say quite a bit about the response to imperialism all over the world ... [including] such writers as ... C.L.R. James. To this my critic replied with a stupefying confidence that my answer was not satisfactory since C.L.R. James was dead! [23]
That an academic of Said’s standing and anti-Eurocentric credentials should be criticised in this way (as opposed to a number of other ways in which he could quite reasonably be criticised) and that he should be driven by PC zealots to public protest is a sign both that something is up and that something is wrong.
Of course socialists support and identify with all struggles against oppression and bigotry, and some PC activity, or activity which is attacked as PC, comes under this heading. But it is also possible for well intentioned (as well as not so well intentioned) anti-racists and anti-sexists to adopt strategies, tactics and positions that are ineffective or even counter-productive and when this happens socialists have a duty to criticise – without however lining up with the right.
The basic problem with PC derives ultimately from its social location. Essentially it is a middle class phenomenon, which is not to say that PC issues cannot arise within the working class movement, but its social roots lie in those sections of the left and of the black, women’s and gay movements which have attained positions of relative comfort and authority within bourgeois society. Moreover at its heart PC is an attempt to use those positions of authority to impose anti-racism, anti-sexism and so on from above. In America, as we have seen, PC culture is concentrated in the universities (and in some of the most elite campuses), but it is not in the main associated with mass student revolt against the govemment or the university authorities, rather it is primarily an attempt to pressurise the authorities and even enlist them as allies. Hence its rather prim and proper character. It is impossible to imagine a genuine mass movement from below – a revolutionary upsurge of the working class or even an uprising of the mass of the oppressed like that in Los Angeles – being ‘politically correct’. For it is in the nature of such a movement that it draws into the struggle the previously backward, unorganised and uneducated who come with many of their old prejudices, habits of thought and speech intact.
All too often PC makes a mistake paralleling the errors of its opponents: the inflation of the importance of the sphere of education and culture and the neglect of the sphere of material conditions and relations of production. Barbara Ehrenreich sums it up when she writes, ‘I’ve noticed students that I would characterise as PC who get very worked up about imagined or real verbal slights, but you don’t see them running en masse to support campus workers when they’re organising or striking.’ [24] Typically PC is characterised by a cultural idealism and moralism which is the besetting sin of intellectuals cut off from the working class and the mass movement.
PC is also a good deal less radical than its proponents imagine, firmly reformist rather than revolutionary. In the PC pantheon of ‘race, gender and class’ class has always come a very poor third [25], but the pursuit of race and gender equality detached from the struggle of the working class inevitably proceeds in a reformist direction more or less regardless of rhetoric or subjective intentions. This is because objectively neither blacks on their own, nor women, nor lesbians and gays have the material power to overthrow American capitalism and its power structure; consequently their focus inevitably shifts to the demand for inclusion within the existing capitalist hierarchy. Nor is PC by any means the most radical form of reformism. Despite all the talk of the ‘rights’ and ‘empowerment’ the main tactic of PC is to appeal to the consciences of ‘the oppressors’ on the basis of moral guilt. Hence the PC cult of victim status so excoriated by D’Souza and Hughes. [26] Unfortunately it is far easier to guilt trip an idealist student or a liberal intellectual than the US ruling class. Guilt is also a very poor basis for fighting racism and other reactionary ideas in the working class. The mass of white workers will be won to anti-racism and unity with black workers through an understanding of their common class interest, not through guilt over the legacy of slavery (for which they were not responsible in the first place).
Therefore, while Marxists and socialists must start from a position of exposing the anti-PC witch hunters and defending PC against the right, the defence must be a highly critical one. Some idea of the exact combination of support and criticism required is best provided in an examination of a number of concrete issues.
 
Affirmative action
Dinesh D’Souza places the issue of affirmative action (i.e. positive discrimination in the recruitment of black and Hispanic students) at the centre of his attack on PC. Affirmative action was, as we have noted, one of the ‘gains’ of the 1960s – indeed in material terms it was, along with the abolition of Jim Crow in the south, one of the most important gains. It was always, however, an ambiguous advance. On the one hand it was a concession – rung from the ruling class by the combined weight of the Civil Rights Movement, black power and inner city insurrections from Watts to Detroit. On the other hand it was a key element in the ruling class strategy to defeat and divide the black movement through the deliberate creation of a substantial black middle class – a strategy that was at least partially successful. Despite this ambiguity the central argument in favour of affirmative action, namely that a degree of positive discrimination is essential if blacks are to overcome the racism built into American education and American society for so long, is one that both socialists and the wider US left have generally supported.
From its inception affirmative action was subject to right wing resistance and counter-attack on the grounds that it constituted ‘reverse discrimination’ and an infringement on the individual rights of whites. One thing that seems to unite racists and oppressors across the world from the white South Africans to Ulster Unionists is their extreme sensitivity to the slightest hint that they may find themselves in the position of underdog. To those of like mind in America affirmative action was a red rag to a bull.
In 1977 the case of Bakke v. The University of California at Davis came before the Supreme Court. Alan Bakke had failed to gain admission to medical school at Davis at a time when the school reserved 16 of its 100 places for ‘disadvantaged’ students. Claiming that his academic record was superior to some of the 16 ‘minority’ students Bakke maintained he had been discriminated against. In 1978 the Supreme Court by a five to four majority found in favour of Bakke, but it was to some extent an equivocal decision. On the one hand the court ruled that the use of an ‘explicit racial classification’ where no formal discriminatory behaviour had been demonstrated was unconstitutional. On the other hand, it also found again by five to four, that affirmative action which made race ‘simply one element’ in the admission process was permissible ‘since universities had a legitimate interest in seeking diversity in their student populations’. [27] In 1990 the Bush administration issued regulations restricting the ability of colleges to award financial aid to minority students. And a civil rights bill intended to reverse some of the Supreme Court’s most far-reaching attacks on affirmative action, passed by the Democratic led Congress in 1992, explicitly outlawed the use of quotas for affirmative action. Thus affirmative action has continued in American universities but under increasing pressure and on a diminishing scale, with the result that, whereas in the 1960s and 1970s the number of blacks attending college expanded enormously [28], in the 1980s the proportions of black high school graduates going to higher education started to fall. [29]
It was against this background of affirmative action in retreat that D’Souza launched his offensive. He is careful not to mount his challenge directly in the name of white majority, but begins by taking up cudgels on behalf of Asian-American (i.e. Japanese, Korean, Chinese) students and then, apparently, on behalf of black and Hispanic students themselves. First he presents individual case studies and statistics to show that Berkeley’s admission policy, which is striving for proportional representation of ethnic minorities, results in Asian students with good grades having less chance of admission than similar black students, due to the fact that Asians over-achieve at high school while blacks under-achieve. Then he moves on to argue that this policy damages black students themselves as the feeling that they are only there because of affirmative action undermines their self esteem, and their inability to compete with better prepared white and Asian students leads to a high drop out rate. Finally he suggests that it is affirmative action which is responsible for increased racial tension, separatism and even for the wave of outright racial incidents that swept American campuses in the late 1980s:
Separatist black and Hispanic groups became a haven from the anxieties that spring from the sharp differences in academic preparations among various racial groups. Indeed separatism can serve as a form of group therapy, in which affirmative action beneficiaries persuade themselves that their difficulties on campus are predominately, if not exclusively, the consequence of rampant bigotry …
Many white and Asian students reciprocate in kind, because they are offended by what they see as university-sponsored discrimination against them ... some respond with barely suppressed exasperation whenever they see black and Hispanic students make the slightest mistake, or congregate together on any occasion. [30]
Let us take the last argument first. D’Souza’s language is cautious but essentially what he says is that white racist activity like assaults on black students by a white mob at Massachusetts or arson of a black fraternity house at the University of Mississippi [31], are the result, almost the ‘inevitable’ and ‘excusable’ result, of affirmative action. The structure of this argument should be familiar. It is the same logic which ‘explains’ and partly justifies racist violence in Germany or Britain by the presence of too many immigrants who are supposed to be taking over ‘our’ houses, ‘our’ jobs and so on. It is based on the assumption that if the black presence were reduced numerically the racist resentment would fade. The falsity of this assumption is demonstrated not only by the history of immigration and immigration control, but also by the history of American universities themselves which for centuries remained almost exclusively white without any disappearance of racism. [32] Rather it is the campaigners against affirmative action, like D’Souza himself, and a number of other senior Republicans, who are encouraging such racism.
To D’Souza’s arguments about unfairness to Asian students and damage to black and Hispanic students’ self esteem and so on socialists have a simple answer – an egalitarian system of higher education open to all. Of course it would be objected that such a solution is not realistic. But we should be clear about why it is ‘unrealistic’. It is not that American society couldn’t afford it. It is that the American ruling class wouldn’t grant it. It is that even if higher education were made open to all it would not be egalitarian (the ruling class would ensure that some colleges were more privileged than others) because America is a competitive, class divided society in which the primary function of education is not the enlightenment and development of the population as a whole but the selection and training of the bourgeoisie and the middle class. But then revolutionary socialists are revolutionary not because they prefer revolution to reform but because the contradictions and evils of capitalist society cannot be removed solely by means of reform.
In the absence of an egalitarian system socialists must continue their support for affirmative action. The alternative is to side with the racists and the right and see the black and Hispanic student presence dwindle to a tiny minority of the offspring of the upper reaches of the already established black and Hispanic middle class. Socialists must combine this with support for every measure that improves the general education and wider socio-economic position of blacks, Hispanics and other oppressed groups whose acute educational difficulties are the cumulative result of capitalist slavery, capitalist imperialism and capitalist racism.
At the same time socialists should have no illusions as to what affirmative action can achieve. The most it can do is to provide some opportunities for some students who would not otherwise have had them. It cannot end racism nor create genuine equality in society as a whole or even within higher education. It cannot even manage to be ‘completely’ fair even in its own terms. An unequal, racist, sexist society cannot be put right by means of educational social engineering. Education both reflects and shapes society. Socialists fight for it to shape society in an egalitarian direction but must recognise the material fact that the element of reflection inevitably outweighs the element of shaping. More fundamental change can be achieved only by a mass movement in which students, teachers and professors can play a role but which must be led by the working class.
 
Speech codes
The question of speech codes has been one of the most controversial issues in the PC debate. Many universities responded to the outbursts of racism and bigotry in the late 1980s by establishing codes making the use of abusive and offensive language pertaining to race, gender, and sexual orientation – perhaps best described as ‘hate speech’ – into a disciplinary offence. A coalition of the right, much of the media, and liberals, including the influential American Civil Liberties Union, have attacked speech codes as violations of the principle of free speech, a principle which in America has the special status of being enshrined in the First Amendment to the constitution.
Many of those currently invoking the First Amendment against university speech codes can easily be exposed as the most obvious hypocrites: people who rush to the defence of the most vile racism, while demanding censorship of anti-religious, left wing or sexually explicit language that they find offensive. A good example is Republican Henry Hyde who sponsored legislation in Congress to outlaw speech codes but who has also ‘co-sponsored a constitutional amendment to ban flag burning, endorsed the Helms amendment to deny federal funding for “homoerotic” art and supports the regulation barring abortion counselling in federal funded health clinics’. [33] Such people are the political or intellectual equivalent of police who defend the right of Nazis to march through black or immigrant areas on the grounds of ‘democracy’ while systematically persecuting those same black people and attacking left wing or anti-racist demonstrations.
However, not all those in the anti speech codes campaign fall into this category. Some like Nat Hentoff, who has spent ‘three years of reporting on anti free speech tendencies in higher education’ [34] for the Village Voice, the Washington Post and the New Yorker, appear to be genuine liberals who actually believe in freedom of speech as an absolute principle. Therefore there is an argument that has to be taken on intellectually. Literary theorist Stanley Fish, in an article entitled There’s No Such Thing as Free Speech and It’s a Good Thing Too, cites the example of Milton:
Not far from the end of his Aeropagitica and after having celebrated the virtues of toleration and unregulated publication in passages that find their way into every discussion of free speech and the First Amendment, John Milton catches himself up short, and says of course I didn’t mean Catholics, them we exterminate. ‘I mean not tolerated popery and open superstition, which as it extirpates all religions and civil suprentacies, so itself should be extirpated.’ [35]
Fish’s point is well made. The fact is that no society has ever permitted total freedom of speech without any restrictions whatsoever and it is hard to see how it could. Certainly in contemporary America and Britain and every other bourgeois democracy there are a multitude of restraints on free speech. First there are legal limitations like the Official Secrets Act, the libel and slander laws, laws against incitement to riot or violence, blasphemy laws and so on. Even more important there are institutional rules which curtail rights of free speech in innumerable situations. Imagine a soldier trying to exercise his freedom of speech to a superior officer or child to a head teacher or even a student to a college president. A large number of employers place restrictions on their employees’ freedom to speak about their work or to go to the press. These restrictions are usually presented as matters of respect for authority, or not bringing the company into dispute or just good manners, but they remain restrictions on freedom of speech nonetheless. The problem with almost all liberals is that they simply don’t notice all these violations of their ‘absolute’ principle, they just take them for granted. So if a worker is sacked for telling the manager to fuck off, or a defendant is sent down for contempt of court for calling a judge a geriatric git, that is accepted as normal, but if a student or professor is disciplined for using race or sex hate words, that becomes an issue of freedom of speech.
A further difficulty for those who try to make the claims of free speech inviolate is the impossibility of drawing an absolute dividing line between words and deeds. Consider the example of blackmail. This is generally accepted as being a crime, yet it may consist entirely of words. ‘Pay me £1,000 or I will tell the papers your guilty secret.’ Then there is the cynical politician who deliberately incites racism. Is he or she any less guilty than the thug who beats someone on the street? Racist, sexist and homophobic epithets are on this borderline between speech and action. There are many situations in which they are associated with violence and can lead to violence and in which they cause as much hurt or offence as violence.
Taking all these considerations into account, it is clear that ‘freedom of speech’ cannot legitimately be invoked to defeat or protect hate speech. Moreover socialists, whose whole aim is to unite the working class and fight all forms of oppression, have special reason to combat these disgusting and divisive terms. Therefore, in general terms, attempts to combat abusive language have to be defended. Once again, however, it cannot be an uncritical defence. Speech codes have a number of defects which socialists must not lose sight of. First there is the obvious point that outlawing certain expressions does not in itself change attitudes or ideas. Thus there is the fact that speech codes are normally drawn up and imposed by university administrators, rather than emerging from below, and consequently are bureaucratically operated. This in itself is likely to compromise and alienate the codes in the eyes of students by associating them with the rest of university’s authority structure and disciplinary procedures.
There is also the danger that politically sophisticated right wingers will dance rings round any speech code while non-political and unsophisticated students may fall foul of it. This is especially likely if it is mechanically and pedantically applied. Such cases are then likely to be seized on by the right and the media to discredit anti-racism and anti-sexism as a whole.
Finally there is the likelihood that speech codes will be used against the left rather than the bigots. It is easy to imagine situations where calling scabs scabs or Nazis Nazis would become disciplinary offences. Selfa and Maass give an example from Harvard where a white Southern student was allowed to hang a Confederate flag in her dormitory while a black woman was required to remove a ‘No Racism’ banner bearing a swastika, and cite the University of Michigan where the authorities did nothing when right wingers destroyed shanty towns built by anti-apartheid and Palestinian activists but disciplined student journalists who criticised Israel.
For all these reasons the best strategy for student activists is not to rely on speech codes but to concentrate on mobilising students for collective struggles against racism, sexism and homophobia. If this is done the social pressure of student opinion will be far more effective than codes in discouraging hate speech.
 
Language reform
It is through its attempts to promote language reform that PC, certainly in this country, has gained its greatest notoriety and been subject to the most ridicule (though as we noted earlier this has not been its most controversial aspect in America). Language reform is related to the attempt to outlaw hate speech but is also distinct from it. All the main terms of racist, sexist and homophobic abuse are well known parts of everyday speech and their insulting nature is commonly acknowledged. Also they all have perfectly straightforward non-offensive alternatives already in common use. Eliminating hate speech therefore involves little more than omitting certain deliberately derogatory and offensive expressions.
In contrast language reform involves discovering pejorative or oppressive meanings in words or expressions where none was previously acknowledged and attempting to replace them with new, often artificially created, words and expressions. At the same time even the strongest supporters of PC have not generally tried to make use of these neologisms a disciplinary matter (though doubtless there is an exception somewhere). Rather the attempt is to reform the language through example, moral pressure and sometimes administrative measures.
Language has of course always been a political issue and political struggles have always involved battles over language. In the Reformation the translation of the Bible into common language was a political question. The suppression of native languages by conquerors – a common practice ranging from the banning of Gaelic in the Highlands to the prohibition of Kurdish in Turkey – has always been a political question. Forms of address, sensitive indicators of social rank, have always been political. In The Revolution Betrayed Trotsky indicted the Stalinist bureaucrats for their habitual use of the second person singular with subordinates and workers. ‘How can they fail to remember’, he asks, ‘that one of the most popular revolutionary slogans in Tsarist Russia was the demand for the abolition of the use of the second person singular by bosses in addressing their subordinates.’ [36] Revolutions in thought have introduced new terms and concepts which are important to the new way of understanding the world but which at first may seem strange or obscure. It makes a difference whether we speak of the ‘creation’ or the ‘evolution’ of the species, whether we call modern society ‘industrial’ or ‘capitalist’, whether we demand a ‘people’s state’ or a ‘workers’ state’. Revolutions in practice have always led to the renaming of cities and streets, to calling people citizen or comrade instead of sir or master and to the popularisation of new words. Here is Trotsky again:
Notice with what sensibility the languages of civilised nations have distinguished two epochs in the development of Russia. The culture of the nobility brought into world currency such barbarisms as Tsar, Cossack, pogrom, nagaika. You know these words and what they mean. The October Revolution introduced into the language of the world such words as Bolshevik, Soviet, Kholketz, Gosplan, Piatiletka. Here practical linguistics holds its historical supreme court. [37]
Yet one senses an obvious difference between all these examples and many of the efforts at PC language reform. A note of caution is necessary here, for it is clear that many of the most absurd examples are apocryphal. Have you ever actually heard anyone use ‘vertically challenged’ or ‘follicly impaired’ other than ironically? Nevertheless there is an element of pompous artificiality present in PC language which positively invites parody. What this derives from is not an attempt to make language reflect real social change but a vast overestimation of the role of language in bringing about social change and the attempt to substitute language reform for real reform. To put the matter sharply the strategy of the Bolsheviks was to win over the mass of workers, soldiers and sailors, storm the Winter Palace and transfer all power to the soviets, and then rename the streets. It was not to imagine that renaming the streets would bring about the revolution. [38] All too frequently PC seems to get this the wrong way round.
The most fruitful sources of positive linguistic change in recent times have undoubtedly been the black movement, the women’s movement and the gay movement. The shift from ‘coloured’ or ‘Negro’ to ‘black’ that took place in the 1960s both reflected and signified a great step forward in pride and self assertion. The appropriation of ‘gay’ was also obviously a progressive step since all that existed before was the clinical (and usually pejorative) ‘homosexual’ or hate speech, and gay has won very widespread acceptance. ‘Homophobia’ was also useful as the appropriate naming of a specific bigotry. ‘Sexism’ contributed by the women’s movement, which has generally replaced the more clumsy ‘male chauvinism’ (also contributed by the women’s movement) has served the same purpose as homophobia and has also achieved widespread use.
However, probably the most radical successful challenge to existing linguistic practise has been the challenge to the generic use of ‘man’, mankind’ and ‘he’. It is a striking fact that before the 1970s everything written by people of every political persuasion (including male and female Marxists) employed this form, but somewhere in the mid to late 1970s this changed quite quickly and everyone who supported the goal of women’s equality, which meant virtually everyone on the left, started to write ‘people’ for ‘men’ and ‘humanity’ for ‘mankind’. Of course the change was far from universal but in broadly progressive circles it was quite thoroughgoing. It seemed that at the historical moment the issue had only to be raised for substantial numbers of people to alter their practice. This was possible because this particular linguistic reform was a product of a real movement and a real change in the consciousness of millions of women and men which in turn arose from real changes in material conditions and social relations (the influx of women into paid employment, higher education and the professions, the pill, abortion rights). The innovations introduced by the black and gay movement were effective for the same reasons. In addition such changes could be made without making the language pedantic and complex – PC often accomplishes the opposite (for instance by tokenistically insisting on writing he/she when ‘they’ would be more readable).
The problem underlying many of the recent PC efforts has been that these real mass movements have receded, leaving a layer of intellectuals stranded in academic or cultural ghettos trying to continue the struggle by purely verbal means and falling over themselves to find linguistic wrongs to be linguistically righted.
The social condition has been reinforced by two other influences which are, at bottom, expressions of the same situation. The first is French philosophy and social theory, deriving from the work of Sansurre, namely structuralism, post-structuralism, deconstructionism, postmodernism et al. [39] This has led to a pervasive and deep seated philosophical idealism according to which (reversing Marx) social consciousness determines social being and language determines social consciousness. A good example of the kind of thinking this has produced is provided by Dale Spender whose book Man Made Language has been influential in the language reform project: ‘A patriarchal society is based on the belief that male is the superior sex and many of the social institutions and much social practice is organised to reflect this belief.’ [40] Note that here society, institutions and social practice are all based on ‘belief’. Where this belief comes from is not explained. This has led to claims that language as a whole is male created and male controlled.
These claims are as plainly and simply false as the idea that the human mind created the physical world or that humanity has suffered lamentably from the idea of gravity. [41] While some men (essentially ruling class men) can exercise a disproportionate influence on some parts of language and some of its meanings, language as a whole is no more controlled by men as a whole than is the world economy or world culture. It is in the nature of language that it evolves historically through human practice – which includes, albeit in subordinate roles, the practice of women, children, blacks, Jews and everyone else in society. [42]
While it is true that the development of language gave an enormous boost to the development of consciousness and thought, and that the nature of language exercises an important influence on what is thought and what is ‘thinkable’, it cannot be true that there is no consciousness or thought prior to language or animals would be unable to hunt, cats would not find their way home, chimps could not engage in elementary tool use and babies would not be able to learn language. Nor is it true that language constructs or determines consciousness from nothing. If it were, the project of language reform would itself be inconceivable. There is an ongoing complex interaction between external material conditions, physical and psychological human needs, human social relations and human thought and language. Within this interaction social being – the combination of circumstances, needs and social relations – remains primary.
The development of language is tied to the development of society, reflecting the contradiction and conflict at the root of society, not just the views of the ruling class and their academic followers.
Nevertheless intellectuals have always been drawn to theories that flatter their role and place them at the centre of historical change. What this leads to in practice is such things as the futile attempt to purge English of all negative uses of the word black, as in ‘black day’, ‘black spot’, ‘blackmail’, and ‘blacking’ (or even non-pejorative uses such as black coffee) or all words with male associations such as ‘seminal’ or ‘seminar’ or to replace ‘history’ with ‘herstory’ or ‘women’ with ‘wimmin’. The net effect of this fetishism is simply to provide entertainment (at the left’s expense) for the press and the occasional refuge for scoundrels, as when certain trade union officials opposed to blacking Timex products because it involved breaking trade union laws claimed they objected to ‘blacking’ as racist.
What it also fails to understand is that, if people or conditions are renamed or redescribed but reality is not changed, the new name or new description will soon come to take on the old meaning and connotations. Thus a school which practises streaming may decide to rename its A, B and C streams L, M and N, but the children at the school will still tell you that the N class is the ‘thickies’ class. Similarly the attempt to relabel backward children as ‘special needs’ or ‘children with learning difficulties’ or disabled children as ‘differently abled’ results, in the absence of any deeper change, only in people saying ‘special needs’ or ‘differently abled’ and thinking ‘backward’ or ‘disabled’. Worst of all the obsession with language serves to trivialise and discredit anti-racism and anti-sexism in the eyes of many working class people whose exploitation and harsh conditions of life ensure that they have far more serious and pressing things to worry about than pedantic linguistic niceties. In this respect PC can be directly counterproductive, objectively strengthening the reactionary ideas it sets out to combat.
The second more mundane and material influence on PC language reform has been the professional need for jargon. Under capitalism all the elite professions – doctors, lawyers and so on – tend to develop their own jargon incomprehensible to the lay public. Some of this is justified by convenience and/or the need for specific scientific rigour but much of it is elitism pure and simple. It excludes the majority from the professions’ deliberations while mastery of the jargon serves as a badge of club membership. The academic world is full of this and Marxist academics are certainly not immune to it. It plays a considerable part in PC language. As Barbara Ehrenreich comments, ‘I have seen PC culture in college campuses, chiefly among relatively elite college students or relatively elite college campuses. It amounts to a form of snobbery’. [43]
For socialists with an orientation on the working class any snobbery about how working people, awaking to political consciousness, express themselves is disastrous. This does not mean compromising with racist or sexist ideas but it does mean focusing on what people do and what they think rather than on the formalities of language. The Marxist motto is not, ‘In the beginning was the word’, but, ‘In the beginning was the deed’.
 
Western culture and the canon
Of all the issues arising in the PC debate in America it is the struggle between the defenders of Western culture and the proponents of multiculturalism which has probably generated most heat. The European and the North American bourgeoisie has invested a great deal – financially, politically, intellectually – in its particular view of history and culture. This view depicts the ‘rise of civilisation’ as a more or less linear process beginning in the Middle East (temporarily annexed to Europe for those purposes) and running through Ancient Greece, Ancient Rome, the Middle Ages, the Renaissance, the Reformation and the Enlightenment to present day Western democracy. It depicts all, or almost all, the highest philosophical, scientific and artistic achievements (Homer, Plato, Aristotle, Dante, Michelangelo, Shakespeare, Newton, Mozart, Goethe, Kant, Einstein etc.) as lying within this tradition. Until recently this world historical picture has permeated and dominated all education in the West; indeed it remains overwhelmingly dominant to this day. At present, however, it is facing a challenge from within American universities – a challenge mounted in the name of multiculturalism.
This debate has raised a host of issues ranging from the status of scientific knowledge to the origins of Ancient American civilisation – enough to fill volumes with many of the individual controversies requiring specialist knowledge in their own right. All I shall attempt to do here is to offer a brief summary of the multiculturalist case and the outline of the Marxist response to the issue as a whole. The main charges levelled at the canon of Western civilisation are as follows:

That this form of education is inappropriate for a multicultural society and a multicultural student body – it assumes a single, more or less homogenous dominant culture and fails to meet the needs of minority students (for role models, sense of identity, self esteem and so on).
 
That this Western tradition is not only inappropriate but false. That its profound Eurocentric bias has distorted the true picture of human development, excluding, downgrading and trivialising the contributions of non-white, non-European cultures.
 
That the Western tradition as a whole has been imperialist, racist, ‘classist’, sexist, homophobic and so on.
 
That all, or virtually all, the individual products of this tradition are permeated or at least tainted with racism, sexism and other reactionary ideologies.

On the basis of these charges the conclusions are drawn that both the canon and the curriculum are in a drastic need of revision; that the Western tradition and all its works must be criticised in such a way as to expose its inherent oppressiveness and, if not ousted altogether, at least removed from the centre of the stage and placed on an equal footing with other cultural traditions; that the study of DWEMs (Dead White European Males) must give way, at least partly, to the study of work produced by the oppressed.
Naturally such accusations and proposals have produced howls of outrage from traditionalists and conservatives inside and outside the academy. Where should Marxists stand?
We must begin by recognising the truth of some of the multiculturalist case. It is true that the Western cultural tradition is a tradition shaped by exploitation, oppression, slavery, conquest and so on (although it has also been shaped by resistance to all that, albeit not to the same degree). It is true that the presentation of that tradition in education has been Eurocentric and either explicitly or implicitly racist in its downgrading of all other traditions. It is true that the real history of humanity has been profoundly distorted. It is true that the most outstanding representatives of this tradition are nevertheless the products of this society and that much of their work has been tainted by reactionary ideas and that Kant was a racist, T.S. Eliot an anti-semite and so on, not to speak of a minor figure like Larkin. It is true also that education and students would benefit from the correction of Eurocentric distortions and the study of Confucius alongside Locke, Rabindranath Tagore as well as Walt Whitman, Ben Okri and Toni Morrison as well as William Golding.
However, we must also recognise that Marxists arrive at this (partial) agreement from a different starting point and with a different methodology from that which is currently dominant within the multiculturalist tendency. Marxists approach culture from a perspective of historical materialism. Culture in all its forms arises from the economic foundations of society – its forces and relations of production. As Engels repeatedly stressed in his letters on historical materialism, the relationship between the economic base and the ideological superstructure is not one of simple reflection or mechanical determination [44], nevertheless there is always a relation and production remains primary. There is no philosophy, religion or art so rarefied as to be completely detachable from the material conditions in the society of which it is a product. Moreover in a class divided society the dominant culture will always be the culture of the dominant class, of the class which because it controls the means of material production also controls the means of mental production. [45] From this it follows that if the ruling class in society is slave owning then inevitably the culture will reflect this. If the ruling class is imperialist then this will leave its mark on the religion, the literature and the arts. If the society is one in which women are oppressed, sexism will be found in its paintings, its music and its novels.
But from this approach there also follow certain crucial differences with the PC version of multiculturalism. When PCers condemn Western civilisation as aggressive and oppressive they put the accent on Western as if it were an active explanatory category. For Marxists the key category is civilisation. The rise of civilisation – living in the cities – derived from the production of a surplus above what is needed for immediate subsistence and the consequent division of society into classes one of which lived off the labour of the other. Thus civilisation, up to the present, and all its culture have rested on the foundation of exploitation, and therefore are inseparable from aggression, repression, violence and the rest. The historical fact that over the last 500 years the forces of production developed more rapidly in Europe and North America may mean that Western civilisation developed these characteristics to the highest degree – to the level of Auschwitz and Hiroshima – but these characteristics are also to be found in every civilisation based on exploitation and division into classes, that is every society, North, East, South and West that stands between the end of primitive communism and the achievement of socialism. It is therefore futile to condemn Western civilisation in the name of Eastern, African or other civilisations as if war, oppression, slavery and other abominations were not to be found there and it is the temptation to do this which often exposes PC to ridicule, for such claims can so easily be refuted. [46]
Similarly when PCers speak of Western European Male Culture they are stressing categories which are at best secondary and omitting the category which is actually fundamental to explaining contemporary culture, namely bourgeois or capitalist. Of course it is true that capitalism developed first in Europe and Europeans happened to be white and that this gave the white European bourgeoisie an epoch of world economic, political and cultural dominance, but to imagine there is some intrinsic link between whiteness or Europeans and capitalism or dominance is as absurd as imagining there is something peculiarly British about industrialisation or Chinese about gunpowder. It is also an intellectual capitulation to the racist mythology it seeks to combat. Capitalism can develop and has developed on all five continents among people of black, brown or white skins and in the process has given rise to a remarkably similar culture.
Again because PC discourse tends to omit or downplay the categories of capitalism and class it also tends to exaggerate the homogeneity of Western culture and underestimate its contradictions, producing a kind of cultural or even biological reductionism far wider than the economic reductionism of which Marxism is often accused. The idea that the content of every individual’s thought or art is mechanically fixed by that individual’s race, gender, class or nationality is manifestly false. Blake, Shelley, Rembrandt, Goya and Brecht are all Dead White European Males, and all have a prominent place in the canon, yet to imagine that the work of any of them represents an uncritical expression of the status quo or the dominant culture is never to have looked at it. Indeed the work of all of them contains much that can inspire the revolt of the oppressed of both sexes and all continents. Even among writers whose politics were reactionary – the likes of Balzac, Kipling, Eliot, and Lawrence – elements of a powerful critique of existing society are present.
Indeed even to speak of Western culture as feudal, capitalist and imperialist is still an oversimplification. Any class society is a society of class domination but it is also a society of class struggle. There is always resistance and the resistance always makes an impact on the culture. The Bible contains not only, ‘Render unto Caesar that which is Caesar’s’, but also, ‘It is harder for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven than for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle.’
Medieval culture was predominantly feudal aristocratic and religious but it also contains John Bull’s lines, ‘When Adam delved and Eve span, who was then the Gentleman?’ Michelangelo worked for the Medicis and the Pope but his work, for example his Slave sculptures, also gave extraordinarily powerful expression to the struggle for human freedom. Eighteenth century English painting was predominantly in the service of the landed gentry – Gainsborough’s Mr and Mrs Andrews being the supreme example – but alongside Gainsborough stands the sharp satire of Hogarth.
Imperialism has left its mark on the English literary canon from Robinson Crusoe to Heart of Darkness but resistance to imperialism is by no means absent, think of Wordsworth’s sonnet Toussaint L’Ouverture, Swift’s Modest Proposal, or Yeats’ Easter 1916.
In the 20th century the United States has been the premier capitalist country and its culture is inevitably saturated with capitalist values yet American culture also includes Steinbeck’s The Grapes of Wrath, Chaplin’s Modern Times, Ginsberg’s Howl and the songs of Joe Hill and Woody Guthrie and that is without mentioning the black contribution.
Therefore any simplistic rejection either of Western culture as a whole or of individual writers or artists on the grounds of their colour, ethnicity, gender or class is foolish in the extreme.
For Marxists this aspect of the PC debate has a familiar ring, for a similar tendency making similar mistakes arose within our own tradition after the Russian Revolution. Proletcult, the movement for proletarian culture, took its stand on the ground of class, not race or gender, but it fell into the same grandiose rejection of past culture, the same oversimplification of the relation between politics and art and the same illusions that a new culture could be generated by dogmatic prescription. At the time the foremost Marxist theoreticians, Lenin and Trotsky, firmly rebutted these exaggerated claims and explained that a revolutionary attitude to ‘Western’ – i.e. bourgeois – culture meant not throwing it in the dustbin but a long struggle to appropriate its achievements for the benefit of all the exploited and oppressed who have hitherto been denied them. [47]
One relatively new issue which has featured prominently in the PC debate is the question of Afrocentrism. This is an account of historical development advanced by a number of black nationalist writers, such as Molefi Kete Asanta and Leonard Jeffries in opposition to the dominant Eurocentric account. This perspective comes in a number of different versions but its main claims are that Africa is the birthplace of humanity, that Egypt is the birthplace of civilisation, that civilisations that developed elsewhere (Iraq, Greece, China, Central America) were the result of a direct cultural diffusion from Africa and that therefore Africa rather than Europe should rightly stand at the centre of human history.
Of course Afrocentrism is a reaction to the blatant (and covert) racism that has long pervaded Western culture – the kind that refused to believe that the magnificent constructions of the Great Zimbabwe could have been built by Africans. Also some of its claims are true or probably true – that human beings first emerged in Africa, that Egypt is in Africa and that Egypt was one of the earliest civilisations and had a significant influence on Greece. Nevertheless there is an evident defect in the Afrocentrist approach in that it attempts to invert Eurocentrism using many of the same highly ideological and unscientific racial categories. For example there has been heated controversy over the precise skin colour of Ancient Egyptians with European scholarship (particularly in the 19th century) attempting to lighten or whiten the Egyptians, much as Jesus was depicted as white, and Afrocentrists arguing they were black. But from the standpoint of any serious historical account and especially from the standpoint of historical materialism, which rejects completely the idea that culture or civilisation or science or art is the monopoly of any race and rejects the concept of ‘race’ itself as anything other than a social construction, the skin colour of the Egyptians is a minor empirical question of no more contemporary political significance than whether Ancient Britons painted themselves with dark or light blue woad. Similarly the claim that Ancient Chinese and Ancient American civilisations were African in origin (which both appears improbable and has little or no empirical backing) repeats the Eurocentric error of denying cultural progress to ‘other’ peoples.
Inverting the myths of the oppressors is not a method confined to Afrocentrism. It has been practised by feminists who try to portray women as the ‘caring’, ‘peace loving’ sex, by some vulgar Marxists who glorify the backwardness of the working class and by Stalinists who argued that, since the Western bourgeoisie depicted Stalinist Russia as an evil empire, it must be a workers’ paradise. It is always shoddy theory leading only to the substitution of one myth for another.
Having made a critique of Afrocentrism, however, it is also necessary to distinguish between the realm of theoretical struggle and the realm of political struggle, between theoretical compromise and political solidarity – the two are connected but not identical. For example, Malcolm X in his autobiography records his induction into the historical theory of the Nation of Islam according to which whites were a race of ‘devils’ specially bred on the island of Patmos 6,000 years ago by the evil scientist Mr Yacub. [48] This ‘demonology’, as Malcolm X himself later called it, is purest nonsense of similar scientific standing to the myth of God creating women from Adam’s spare rib. But this in no way alters our political solidarity with Malcolm X as a great fighter for black liberation and our support for him against the racists, the ruling class and the liberals (many of whom doubtless hold more accurate theories of human development). Similarly in many political struggles against racism we have to stand with the Afrocentrists without making concessions to their erroneous theories.
One final criticism must be made of the PC approach to ‘Western culture’ and the canon. Pigeon holing art, artists and audiences into rigidly circumscribed ethnic, gender or national boxes creates an obstacle to understanding and appreciating one of the most important contemporary cultural trends both in ‘high art’ and on the streets – namely cultural interaction, borrowing and fusion. In reality cultural fusion is as old as human culture itself, but in the era of world capitalism, international production and global communications its frequency and variety has enormously increased. From the Latin American novel to South African music and Zimbabwean sculpture, cultural borrowing and interaction are at work producing vital artistic innovation. Traditionalists will deplore or dismiss these developments as in a previous generation they condemned jazz, blues and then rock as ‘jungle music’, but life and art will pass them by. More dangerous perhaps is the threat of absorption, corruption and homogenisation by the Disney/Hollywood (or, for that matter, Bombay) money machine. But it is clear that this rich diversity cannot be defended or encouraged by the mechanical methods of PC. What is required is a genuine internationalism which understands that all culture is a creative human response to the social conditions of people’s lives in all their complexity and contradictions.
 
A note on Britain
So far this article has focused on the PC debate in America but clearly many of its arguments and conclusions are applicable to PC in Britain. There are however some differences which require comment. In the first place both the controversy and the phenomenon itself have been on a much bigger scale in the US than has been the case or seems likely to be the case in the future in Britain. There are a number of reasons for this: the fact that the left in Britain is more rooted in the working class and its mass organisations; the fact that blacks and other ethnic minorities are a higher proportion in the US and also a higher proportion of the student population and constitute stronger lobbies within bourgeois politics; the fact that the black, women’s and lesbian and gay movements have all been bigger in the US.
For all these same reasons PC activities in Britain (and the attacks on them) seem likely to be concentrated in areas such as social work, the probation service, schools (as opposed to universities [49]) and local government and their associated trade unions. These are areas which have attracted left wingers and in which left ideas, especially anti-racist, anti-sexist ideas have had a strong presence. However they are also areas in which educated leftists in the upper ranks of the white collar working class, or the middle class, hold managerial or semi-managerial positions. Thus the temptation arises to attempt to impose anti-racism, anti-sexism and so forth from above by means of administrative regulations. This leads straight to some of the more detrimental features of PC. The problems of PC are particularly acute when the agencies concerned are involved in administering inadequate and declining resources so the tensions between the professionals, seen as representing the state, and their clients are aggravated.
In many ways the controversy surrounding what the media called ‘loony left’ Labour councils in the 1980s was an example of what today would be dubbed a controversy about PC. Young ‘Bennite’ Labour councillors were elected full of plans to improve services and fund initiatives for blacks, women, lesbians and gays. The latter usually consisted of a mixture of genuinely progressive policies and a certain amount of PC type tokenism. The Labour councils’ failure to resist rate capping and the poll tax left them presiding over worse, not better, services, but clinging to their tokens, which were usually cheap but often irrelevant to most workers white and black, male and female. To put it crudely, it cost less to stick up signs proclaiming the borough a nuclear free zone or to rename a tower block Nelson Mandela House than it does to provide decent street lighting or house repairs. This obviously left the councils open to attack from the right and the press with a good chance of the attacks striking a chord among working class people. Labour’s sustained move rightwards has by and large eliminated the left councils and shifted the focus for the PC onto the welfare agencies and the like.
Social work is a good example of an arena in which PC is likely to arise. Social workers are employed by the capitalist state to handle the casualties of exploitation, poverty and unemployment. By ‘handling’, the state means a combination of help and discipline to maintain social stability. Within this combination the people who become social workers put the emphasis on help (at least subjectively). The state, however, puts the emphasis on social control. Social workers, no matter how well intentioned or left wing cannot escape entirely the disciplinary role they are constrained to play. Most working class people are aware of this and therefore view social workers with deep ambivalence. That social workers make efforts to address this problem is, of course, a step forward. But the nature of their objective position means this is likely to be done in a bureaucratic, dogmatic, top down manner.
One instance which perhaps does not strictly come under the heading of PC but illustrates the dangers was the response by some social services to the problems of child sexual abuse. Obviously social workers were put in an impossible situation, subject to the contradictory imperatives of protecting children and keeping families together – damned if they intervene and damned if they don’t. Nevertheless it is clear that in some instances such as Cleveland they overcompensated for past denial, erected a dogma of near universal child abuse and reacted in a way that was disproportionate and extremely insensitive to working class families and children.
Another more evidently PC example is the question of mixed race adoption. A number of social services have taken a position of total opposition to all mixed race adoption, including by mixed race couples. The well meaning justification for this policy is that since black people face racism in this society only black parents can give black children the support they need to deal with this. But behind this argument stand a number of typical PC ideas: that all whites are racist, that ‘white culture’ and ‘black culture’ are completely distinct and separate entities and that black culture, at least, should remain so.
This fails to recognise that there are many white adoptive parents who are anti-racists, who are perfectly capable of supporting black children against racism, who will know or learn about black culture, and who will bring up their children proud to be black, just as there also exist black parents who will bring up their children as Uncle Toms. In the meantime, since there is a surplus of black children in need of adoption, children are left in care or institutions. At the same time the ‘same race only’ policy, by focusing on skin colour instead of attitudes, concedes the right wing racist argument that ‘race’ is a fundamental and insuperable division in the human species and that black and white cannot live together or fully integrate. Here multiculturalism justifies racial separation and works against class unity, the only real basis for fighting racism.
The National Association of Probation Officers (NAPO) also seems to have gone overboard for PC. Charlie Kimber, in an excellent Socialist Worker article on PC, reports:
In 1991 delegates to the union’s conference were given a handbook outlawing terms like ‘paymaster’ as sexist and ‘fat chance’ as sizeist. The next year the national executive ruled out a motion which included the term ‘tinkering’ on the grounds that it was offensive to gypsies. It added that strike breakers could not be termed ‘scabs’ because it was offensive to people with skin disorders ... NAPO also mobilises language monitors to listen to conference delegates. [50]
As Charlie succinctly comments, ‘This is nonsense’. It also seems likely that it is an attempt to compensate linguistically for the deeply problematic role that probation officers are obliged to play as the soft wing of the judicial system.
Another focus for PC in Britain is the race relations industry – the network of official bodies centred on the Commission for Racial Equality, staffed by people professionally employed to improve race relations and combat racism. Traditionally the race relations industry has been dominated by liberal (or even right wing) paternalist whites and extremely moderate and respectable middle class blacks, but there is also a more radical left wing of the same industry. However, what the left shares with the right is that their anti-racist activity tends to be confined to the committee room. They spend their lives drawing up policies for the health service, the police, education and so on, hardly ever stepping into the streets or the estates to confront racism at the sharp end. Words are, once again, at a premium. The left contends with the right over language, over what the committee should be called, over what its aims and obligations should be and so on. Thus arises a culture obsessed with terminological correctness.
In all of these situations socialists have the task, by no means an easy one, of separating out and supporting every genuine step forward against oppression and discrimination from meaningless and counter-productive tokenism, without giving comfort to the right. An example of how not to respond is provided by Melanie Phillips. In an anti-PC diatribe in the Observer she launched into an attack on social work training which employed all the hyperbolic language of the American right wing. So we are regaled with shock-horror reports of ‘a corruption of the traditional values of open-minded education’, of ‘totalitarianism’, of ‘browbeating into false confessions’ and ‘vicious intolerance’. In the course of her attack Phillips, like D’Souza and Hughes before her, undoubtedly scores some hits. However, she also roundly condemns social work training courses for being required to deal with ‘processes of structural oppression, race, class and gender’ and for ensuring students are aware of ‘individual and institutional racism and ways to combat both through anti-racist practice’. [51] To this one is forced to reply, what sort of social work course for contemporary Britain would not deal with these issues? After all they form part of every A level and GCSE Sociology course.
Above all what is nauseating about Phillip’s rhetoric, and also typical of many anti-PC campaigners, is that she writes throughout in tones of expectant martyrdom, congratulating herself on her courage at defying the ‘conspiracy of silence’. In fact she is expressing views that will be warmly applauded by every Tory MP, not a few Labour MPs, and every newspaper editor and proprietor and for which she is rewarded by appearing on numerous TV discussion programmes. In short she has played straight into the hands of the right.
As I write these lines Home Secretary Michael Howard is promising to end the right of silence and increase the prison population and Secretary of State for Social Security Peter Lilly is denouncing single parents and foreign scroungers. In the same week the West Midlands police responsible for the incarceration of the Birmingham Six are let off without even facing trial. It all makes a sickening spectacle but in the context of the furore over PC it also seems a useful reminder of who is really threatening ‘traditional liberal values’, who really displays ‘vicious intolerance’ and who really gets ‘browbeaten into false confessions’.
At the same time a correct identification of the real enemy – the ruling class, its state machine and its political representatives – is the key to avoiding the follies of PC. If we make our primary focus not correcting the language of the student, the teacher and the railway worker but the mobilisation of the same student, teacher and railway worker against the class attacks of that enemy – attacks which are thoroughly material as well as verbal and which include racist, sexist and homophobic attacks – we will not only do more to strike at the roots of racism, sexism and homophobia, but also improve the language and culture of the student, teacher and railway worker in the process.

Notes
1. P. Berman (ed.), Debating PC: The Debate over Political Correctness on College Campuses (New York 1992), p. 5. This combines a collection of articles from across the US political spectrum, including pieces by Edward Said, Irving Howe, Stanley Fish, Dinesh D’Souza, and Barbara Ehrenreich. It is therefore an essential source for the debate as it happened in the US.
2. J. Searle, The Storm over the University, ibid., p. 86.
3. L. Selfa and A. Maass, PC: What’s Behind the Attack on Politically Correct? (Chicago 1991), p. 5.
4. D. D’Souza, Illiberal Education (New York 1991), p. 251.
5. ‘With admirable restraint and civility, D’Souza has written an informative account that provides a rare combination of tough-minded analysis, principled judgements, thoughtful proposals and a humane solidarity’. E. Genovese, former Marxist and author of Roll, Jordan, Roll: The World the Slaves Made, quoted on the dust jacket of Illiberal Education.
6. Quoted in L. Selfa and A. Maass, op. cit., p. 2.
7. See N. Hentoff, “Speech Codes” on the campus and Problems of Free Speech, in Debating PC, op. cit., p. 2.
8. See I. Howe, The Value of Canon, in ibid.
9. See E. Said, The Politics of Knowledge, in ibid. Said also appeared on a late night TV discussion programme chaired by Christopher Hitchens in which he was billed and spoke as an opponent of PC.
10. P. Berman, ibid., p. 5.
11. R. Hughes, Culture of Complaint – The Fraying of America (New York 1993), p. 11.
12. My guess is that such stylistic seduction was responsible for the relatively uncritical review of Hughes’ book that appeared in Socialist Review (July/August 1993).
13. I. Kristol, The Tragedy of Multiculturalism, Wall Street Journal, 31 July 1991.
14. See L. Selfa and A. Maass, op. cit., p. 3.
15. E. Genovese, Heresy Yes – Sensitivity No, New Republic, 15 April 1991, p. 30.
16. Faulty Attitudes and Characteristics: Results of a 1989–90 Survey, Chronicle of Higher Education, 8 May 1991, A16–A17, cited in L. Selfa, op. cit., p. 9.
17. See R. Hughes, op. cit., p. 56.
18. Jeffries is the Afrocentrist author of the theory of Ice people (whites) and Sun people (blacks), Rothenburg is the author of a textbook, Racism and Sexism: An Integrated Study and professor of philosophy and women’s studies at William Paterson College of New Jersey. The Black Faculty Caucus was in a dispute about ‘multiculturalism’ at the University of Texas in 1990.
19. R. Hughes, op. cit., p. 16.
20. This may be an accurate characterisation of the anti-PC campaign as a whole, which has been dominated by the right, but it obviously does not fit someone like Hughes who makes clear his commitment to what he sees as a non-PC multiculturalism and anti-racism. The problem with Hughes is that he takes the very real gains of the 1960s for granted and fails to appreciate the extent to which they were won through struggle, including methods that were extreme or revolutionary. It is this classical liberal error of failing to understand that the cultural and intellectual climate depends not only on rational argument but also on the clash of real social forces, which leads him to write a book which, whatever his intentions, lends aid and comfort to the reactionaries.
21. One example of this approach is M. Berbe, Public Image Limited: Political Correctness and the Media Big Lie in Debating PC, op. cit. Berbe knocks a lot of spots off Messrs Bloom, Kimball and D’Souza but essentially his article does not go beyond being a defence of ‘young faculty members’ against media misrepresentation. Another is P. Rothenburg, Critics of Attempts to Democratise the Curriculum are waging a Campaign to Misrepresent the Work of Responsible Professors, ibid.
22. See for example M.K. Asante, Multiculturalism: An Exchange, ibid.
23. E. Said, ibid., pp. 173–174.
24. B. Ehrenreich, The Challenge for the Left, ibid., p. 335.
25. The term ‘classism’ is among the least happy of the PC inventions with its tendency to reduce the material relationship of class exploitation to a mere ideological phenomenon of class prejudice, i.e. snobbery (a tendency put forward by the bourgeoisie and its apologists including, of course, John Major). It is therefore a theoretical step backwards from the concept of class as such and particularly from ‘class struggle’. It should be noted that, whereas socialists oppose racism and sexism, we support classism in the sense of supporting class consciousness and class struggle.
26. D’Souza repeatedly attacks what he calls ‘the victims revolution on campus’, but the reality is not revolution but pressure for reform.
27. R. Polenberg, One Nation Divisible: Class, Race and Ethnicity in the United States since 1938 (New York 1980), p. 271.
28. Between 1970 and 1977 ‘the number of black students had more than doubled’, ibid., p. 276.
29. ‘In 1975, 32 percent of black high school graduates enrolled in institutions of higher learning. In 1988, 28.1 percent of black high school graduates did. During the same period, the white enrolment level increased from 32.4 to 38.1 percent’. L. Selfa and A. Maass, op. cit., p. 12.
30. D. D’Souza, op. cit., p. 51. Conservatives like D’Souza use Asian academic ‘overachievement’ to claim that racism is no barrier to those with the ‘right’ values and dedication to hard work – both of which are assumed to be ‘Asian’ cultural traits. In fact, Asian achievement is a function of class. Unlike other racial minorities in the US (i.e. Blacks and Latinos), the Asian population is a heavily middle class population, owing to US immigration policies which favoured middle class Asian immigrants over working class Asians.
The 1990 US Census showed that four of 10 Asian families earn more than $50,000 annually and that a similar percentage (39 percent) of Asians 25 years and older have four or more years of college education. Two-thirds of Asian voters voted for Bush in the 1992 election.
In fact, the University of California admits Asians at a rate of more than three times their representation in Californian high school graduating classes – more than twice the rate at which it admits Latinos. See A. Hacker, Affirmative Action: The New Look, New York Review of Books, October 12, 1989, pp. 63–65.
31. See L. Selfa and A. Maass, op. cit., p. 10.
32. The extent of white dominance of American universities in the past is well symbolised by the fact that Harvard, the oldest and most prestigious of all the colleges, has only had two tenured black professors in more than three centuries.
33. L. Selfa and A. Maass, op. cit., p. 17.
34. N. Hentoff, “Speech Codes” on Campus and Problems of Free Speech, Debating PC, op. cit.
35. S. Fish, in Debating PC, op. cit., pp. 231–232.
36. L. Trotsky, The Revolution Betrayed (London 1967), p. 104.
37. L. Trotsky, In Defence of the October Revolution (London 1971), p. 28.
38. It should be noted that the Bolsheviks did not get around to giving even themselves the politically correct name of Communist Party until well after the revolution.
39. For a Marxist critique of these tendencies see A. Callinicos, Is There a Future for Marxism? (London 1982) and Against Postmodernism (Cambridge 1992).
40. D. Spender, Man Made Language (London 1980), p. I.
41. See K. Marx and F. Engels, The German Ideology (London 1985), p. 37.
42. It is hard to think of a more marginalised and oppressed group than the gypsies, yet the argot of my home town, Portsmouth (and Portsmouth is not alone on this) contains numerous Romany words which are widely used in the working class: dinlo (stupid), chary (child), mush (bloke), chore (steal), bok (luck or bad luck), kushtee (good, OK).
43. B. Ehrenreich, in Debating PC, op. cit., p. 335.
44. See for example, Engels to J. Bloch, 25 Sept 1890, in Marx, Engels, Selected Works II (Moscow 1962), p. 488.
45. See K. Marx and F. Engels, op. cit., p. 64.
46. D’Souza and Hughes are both able to make great play of African complicity and Arab practice in the slave trade (see D. D’Souza, op. cit., pp. 76–77, and R. Hughes, op. cit., pp. 140–147). Indeed Hughes is able to turn the slavery argument round into a special merit of the West on the grounds that while ‘Africa, Islam and Europe all participated in Black slavery ... only Europe (including, here, North America) proved itself able to conceive of abolishing it.’ (p. 146) But Hughes misses two crucial points again through his focus on culture rather than economics and struggle. First, Western abolition of the slave trade and slavery derived not from morality but from the transition to industrial capitalism for which slavery is unsuited – hence the conflict between the northern industrialist states and the Southern plantation based states. Second, he ignores the role of the slave revolts such as that led by Tousaint L’Ouverture in San Domingo.
47. See L. Trotsky, Literature and Revolution (London 1991), and L. Trotsky, On Literature and Art, (New York 1970), especially, Class and Art, pp. 63–82.
48. See The Autobiography of Malcolm X (Harmondsworth 1968), pp. 258–262.
49. The main exception to this and the main instance of PC in higher education has been in the upper echelons of the National Union of Students. In recent years the NUS conferences and the NUS bureaucracy have been dominated by frantic tokenism and identity politics. This has been linked to a move to the right in terms of both general politics and student struggles and PC has been used, more or less consciously, as a weapon against the revolutionary left to attack direct action or any kind of vigorous politics as ‘macho’ and ‘intimidatory’.
50. Socialist Worker, 31 July 1993.
51. M. Phillips, Oppressive Urge to Stop Oppression, the Observer, 1 August 1993.



The central theoretical argument in Sheila McGregor’s enthusiastic polemic against me (A reply to John Molyneux on women’s oppression, International Socialism 2:30) is contained in the following lines:
If it is the case that oppression divides the working class internally against itself, it can never be in the interests of any workers anywhere at any time to maintain that oppression. To argue that it is in the immediate interests of male workers to maintain women’s oppression, is the same as arguing that it is in the immediate interests of male workers to maintain the rule of capital. In which case it follows that workers should defer building for the socialist revolution and co-operate with capital in their immediate interests. (p. 91)
In other words Sheila rejects, on principle, the idea that working-class men might in any way benefit from women’s oppression on the grounds that to entertain such a notion is ‘logically’ to break with revolutionary socialism and Marxism or, as she puts it later ‘the first step towards departing from that tradition’. (p. 95)
In support of this position Sheila cites the famous quotation from Marx on the antagonism between English and Irish workers being ‘the secret of the impotence of the English working class’, and quotations from Lukacs’ Lenin to the effect that ‘the actuality of the proletarian revolution’ provides the criterion by which ‘all questions can be judged’ (pp. 90-93).
Let us begin by noting what, for Marxists, is indisputably correct and true in this argument: namely that all divisions in the working class weaken the revolutionary struggle of the working class and are therefore against the class interests of the proletariat as a whole. Let us also note that this is not an argument against my position. On the contrary my whole argument both in my article and in my debate with Sheila at the 1985 Socialist Worker Skegness Rally, was that the oppression of women divides the working class and that male sexism constitutes an obstacle to workers’ unity which must be fought in the interests of the class as a whole.
In fact this basic Marxist position can only be turned into an argument against me if it ‘follows’ from the fact that oppression and disunity weakens the class as a whole that no section or part of the class can ever receive any immediate ‘benefit’ from, or have an immediate or short-term interest in, such oppression or disunity. To ‘prove’ this requires a rather more extensive look at the Marxist tradition than two brief quotations. Or rather I should say that once we take a more extensive look we find that Marxists have repeatedly recognised the existence of such immediate ‘benefits’ and immediate interests, and repeatedly contrasted them to the historical interests of the class as a whole.
 
The contradiction between immediate and class interests of workers
The first example I shall give of a Marxist who recognises that a section of the working class can benefit from the oppression of other workers and indeed recognises that male workers benefit from the oppression of women, is none other than Chris Harman. It was Chris’s argument, in the article that started this particular controversy, that:
... the benefits working-class men get from the oppression of women are marginal indeed ... The benefits really come down to the question of housework. The question becomes the extent to which working-class men benefit from women’s unpaid labour ... What the working-class male gains directly in terms of labour from his wife can be roughly measured. It is the amount of labour he would have to exert if he had to clean and cook for himself. This could not be more than an hour or two a day. [1]
As can be seen Chris accepts that benefits do exist and even attempts to measure them. My difference with Chris was not one of principle but an empirical difference as to ‘the significance of these benefits’. Chris says they are marginal. I maintained: a) that the benefits were greater than he suggested [2]; b) that even though these benefits were indeed marginal compared with those of the ruling class and compared to those both sexes would get from socialism, they were nonetheless sufficient to have a significant effect on the behaviour and consciousness of working-class men and thus constitute an obstacle (though not an insuperable one) to class unity.
It was in this context that I introduced the analogy with the situation of Protestant and Catholic workers in Northern Ireland: my point being that although the privileges of the Protestant workers were marginal they had nonetheless had a significant impact on their behaviour and consciousness over the last sixty years. Here I shall call up my second Marxist ‘witness’ on the question of ‘short-term benefits’ for one section of the working class – Eamonn McCann. But first let’s recall what Sheila makes of my argument.
If, however, you separate the immediate from the long-term interest of Protestant workers, as John does in his article, then you end up arguing not only that it is in the immediate interests of Protestant workers to preserve their privileges over Catholics, but that unity is not in the immediate interests of the Protestant working class and therefore that Protestant workers realising their revolutionary potential is not in their immediate interests. If that is the case, then we would have to abandon any perspective for socialist revolution in Ireland which involved the Protestant working class. (p. 92)
Now compare McCann writing on this question in 1972:
Half a century ago the Protestants had to choose between the Union and bourgeois rule from Dublin ... On a short-term economic basis home rule from Dublin would not have been in the interests of the Protestant masses.
It is not true that the Protestants, blinded by propaganda, made a crazy choice. They made a perfectly rational economic decision between the alternatives offered. Which is not to say that their conscious decision was based on cold economic calculation. It is to say that there was a curious economic instability underpinning all the quasi-religious jingoism with which the Unionist case was expressed, a rationality which was not being challenged in the existing working-class movement.
It is academic to argue that there was a third alternative – the socialist Ireland of Connolly – which would have better represented the interests of all workers. This is an attractive truism. But the socialist Ireland was not really on offer. [3]
What remains is for Sheila to explain how Eamonn, thirteen years later, has not yet ‘abandoned any perspective for socialist revolution in Ireland’. I must say that when I made the analogy with the Northern Ireland situation I did so in the knowledge that I had frequently heard this argument put forward by SWP speakers, particularly in debate with Militant supporters who denied that Protestant workers received any privileges and therefore refused to support the national struggle of Catholic workers or the IRA in any way.
However, Chris Harman and Eamonn McCann might not be considered decisive for the Marxist tradition and so let us return to the classics. In a letter to Marx in 1858 Engels wrote: ‘The English proletariat is actually becoming more and more bourgeois ... For a nation which exploits the whole world this is of course to a certain extent justifiable.’ [4] In a letter to Kautsky in 1882 he wrote:
You ask me what the English workers think about colonial policy. Well exactly the same as they think about politics in general. There is no workers’ party here ... and the workers gaily share the feast of England’s monopoly of the world market and the colonies. [5]
In other words, Engels is saying, the real material advantages, benefits [6], privileges – call them what you will – received by the English working class as a result of imperialism form the material basis for its susceptibility to bourgeois ideology.
And what was Lenin’s reaction to these lines? Did he denounce Engels for breaking with Marxism? Not at all, he used them as a basis for his theory of the labour aristocracy. According to his theory reformism, or opportunism, as Lenin called it, had gained the hold it did on the European labour movement because of the ability of imperialism to use the superprofits gained from its exploitation of the colonies to ‘benefit’ or ‘bribe’ a thin upper crust of workers and workers’ leaders. ‘Why’, asks Lenin:
... is this opportunism stronger in Western Europe than in our country? It is because the culture of the advanced countries has been, and still is, the result of being able to live at the expense of a thousand million oppressed people. It is these thousands of millions in superprofits that form the economic basis of opportunism in the working-class movement. [7]
Lukacs, in the same work that Sheila quotes from, makes the same point: ‘Revisionism ... always sacrifices the genuine interests of the class as a whole ... so as to represent the immediate interests of specific groups ... Revisionism could only become a real current within the labour movement because the new development of capitalism made it temporarily possible for certain groups among the workers to gain economic advantages from it.’ [8]
Of course, it might be objected that we in the SWP have always been critical of this particular theory of Lenin’s. However this criticism has been empirical, it has been that the mechanisms of ‘bribery’ were not as Lenin suggested and that the recipients of benefits were not who he suggested – not that Lenin was taking the first step away from Marxism in even contemplating the idea. The major article on this question in the SWP tradition is The Economic Roots of Reformism by Tony Cliff. Cliff argues, against Lenin, that the benefits of imperialism, and hence the influence of reformism, were not limited to a thin upper crust but permeated the working class of Britain and the advanced capitalist countries as a whole. A rather lengthy quotation from Cliff is very instructive here.
The expansion of capitalism through imperialism made it possible for the trade unions and Labour Parties to wrest concessions for the workers from capitalism without overthrowing it. This gives rise to a large reformist bureaucracy which in turn becomes a brake in the revolutionary development of the working class.
But the trade union and Labour Party bureaucracy are effective in disciplining the working class in the long run only to the extent that the economic conditions of the workers themselves are tolerable. In the final analysis the Base of Reformism is in the capitalist prosperity ... If Reformism is rooted in imperialism, it becomes also an important shield for it, supporting its ‘own’ national imperialism, against its imperialist competitors and against the rising colonial movements. Reformism reflects the immediate day-to-day, narrow national interests of the whole of the working class in Western capitalist countries under conditions of general economic prosperity. These immediate interests are in contradiction with the historical and international interests of the working class and socialism. [9]
What is really striking here is how close Cliff’s formulations, especially in the final sentence (as well as the formulation of Lukacs) are to my position that
One reason why sexist ideology is so powerful is because it connects with the immediate (though not long term) interests of male workers. The immediate interest of male workers in male dominance stands in contradiction to their historical interest in the unification of the class and constitutes an obstacle to the achievement of that unification. [10]
Clearly it is still open to Sheila to argue empirically, as Chris Harman does, that male workers’ benefits are minimal, but equally clearly she cannot argue that to talk of one section of workers benefiting (immediately) from the oppression of other workers is, on principle, anti-Marxist. Unless of course, she wants to convict Engels, Lenin, Lukacs, Cliff, McCann and Harman of the same heinous crime.
 
Causes and consequences of Sheila’s confusion
The root of Sheila’s confusion on this question lies in her failure to understand that contradictions between the immediate day-to-day interests of individual workers, or of sections of workers arise from the very structure of capitalism. Capitalism both unites workers in factories, towns, nations, and as a class which is commonly exploited and, at the same time, divides them by making them into competitors one against the other, or one group against the other groups, on the labour market. To overcome this competition amongst themselves workers require conscious organisation (union, party, International, etc.). Thus Marx writes: ‘Large-scale industry concentrates in one place a crowd of people unknown to one another. Competition divides their interests. But the maintenance of wages, this common interest which they have against their boss, unites them in a common thought of resistance – combination. This combination always has a double aim, that of stopping competition among the workers, so that they can carry on general competition with the capitalist.’ [11]
Sheila’s failure to grasp this and her belief that the immediate interests of every section of workers are always identical to their overall class interest leads her into an important mistake as to the basis of the Marxist standpoint. She repeatedly argues as though the Marxist standpoint should be based on representing the immediate interests of sections of workers (male workers, Protestant workers in Northern Ireland, etc.). In fact, of course, the starting point for Marxists is always the interests of the class as a whole. As Marx puts it:
The Communists are distinguished from other working-class parties by this only: (1) In the national struggles of the proletarians of the different countries, they point out and bring to the fore the common interests of the entire proletariat, independently of all nationality; (2) In the various stages of development which the struggle of the working class against the bourgeoisie has to pass through, they always and everywhere represent the interests of the movement as a whole.
Of course if there were not and could not be, any other interests than ‘the common interests of the entire proletariat’ and there was no possibility of immediate interests apart from ‘the interests of the movement as a whole’ then Marx’s historic declaration would be a pointless tautology. But what of the Marxist standpoint in relation to these various immediate or special interests. The answer is that we call on workers to subordinate their immediate (local, sectional, gender or national) interests to the interests of the class as a whole (and therefore to their own long-term interests). An exceptionally clear formulation of this point is to be found in Lenin’s definition of internationalism:
Proletarian internationalism on the other hand demands: (1) subordination of the interests of the proletarian struggle in one country to the interests of the struggle on a world scale; (2) that the nation which achieves victory over the bourgeoisie shall display the capacity and readiness to make the greatest national sacrifices in order to overthrow international capitalism. [12]
It therefore does not at all ‘follow’ from arguing that male workers have a certain immediate day-to-day interest in maintaining women’s oppression, ‘that workers should defer building for the socialist revolution and co-operate with capital in their immediate interests’, as Sheila alleges, any more than it ‘follows’ from recognising that Protestant workers gain certain immediate marginal benefits from the oppression of Catholic workers that we have to ‘abandon any perspective for socialist revolution in Ireland which involved the Protestant working class’.
Once we are clear on this general point it is possible to deal with the particularly emotive, but also particularly illogical, argument which Sheila seems to consider a trump card – the case of the Notts miners. She writes:
The majority of miners in Nottinghamshire thought it was in their immediate interests not to join the national miners’ strike but scab instead. Do we therefore postulate that their deeply-held backward views somehow coincided with their immediate interests? Is it true they got 52 wage packets striking miners did not receive, so did they immediately benefit from working? Does that mean it was in their immediate interest to scab? (p. 98)
Sadly the answers to these rhetorical questions are not at all what Sheila imagines them to be. First is most certainly is true, as a matter of simple fact, that the Notts scabs did get 52 wage packets striking miners did not receive, and so immediately benefited from working. Yes, in this sense, their backward views did coincide with their immediate interests. Or, to put it another way, only a minority of Notts miners had sufficient class consciousness to place the interests of miners (and the working class) as a whole, and their own long-term interests, over their immediate interests and thus made the sacrifice of a long strike. And no, Sheila, this does not mean, for reasons already explained, that it ‘follows’ from this that we should support them scabbing. But then what else is a scab but someone who puts their immediate interest in a wage packet before the interests of their class and what else is a picket line but a means of forcibly making the collective interests of the class more ‘immediate’ to the would-be strikebreaker?
How then does all this relate back to relations between men and women workers? Capitalism both unites them and divides them. It unites them in a common class situation with a common interest in fighting the ruling class and overthrowing it. It divides them by making them into competitors in the labour market and competitors for free time in the home. Moreover it establishes a division of labour which gives to the male worker certain important advantages in this competition from which he receives certain immediate benefits. [13]
And the Marxist standpoint? The Marxist standpoint is that we are for bringing to the fore the common interests of men and women workers to achieve unity in the struggle and that we call on male workers to subordinate their immediate interests in women’s oppression to their class interests which demand a fight against that oppression.
The consequence of Sheila’s confusion in this whole area is that her formulations deprive Marxism of an important tool of analysis for understanding the grip and persistent hold of certain reactionary ideas on sections of the working class. Sheila, by her position, is forced to explain this grip and persistence purely by ruling class indoctrination. She is forced to deny that bourgeois ideology has any point of contact with the immediate interests of sections of workers. Now ruling-class indoctrination is important of course but where it is successful on a mass scale and over a long period of time it is almost invariably precisely because it has such a connecting point in real life, i.e. because it has a certain material basis.
This, as we have seen, was the whole point of the labour aristocracy theory and Cliff’s amendment of it, but it applies to many other situations as well. It applies, as McCann demonstrated, to Northern Ireland, or does Sheila imagine that the persistent and stubborn loyalism of Protestant workers can be explained purely by the force of Orange ideology without reference to the slight but real privileges of Protestant workers? If so she is attributing astonishing powers to ideology and what is more she would need to explain why the ruling class has granted and maintained these privileges in the first place. It applies to the hold of racism on white workers, of Zionism on Jewish workers in Israel and, the extreme case, of apartheid on what remains of a white working class in South Africa. [14] But this is hardly some amazing new discovery by John Molyneux. It is simply the result of the strategy of divide and rule by granting small privileges that has long been consciously practised by ruling classes throughout the world and long recognised by Marxists.
To refuse to recognise it, as Sheila does, is to be forced back into the classic split between crude mechanical materialist economism (’the working class is automatically united by its immediate economic interests’) and crude idealism (’the working class is brainwashed by the ruling class’). It is also to underestimate the level, nature and centrality of the struggle involved within the working class to break the hold of reactionary ideas. A good example of this is the Militant Tendency which takes a similar starting point to Sheila’s and applies it consistently to women, positive discrimination, black sections in the Labour Party, Ireland, Israel and even the white working class in South Africa.
I have now answered Sheila’s theoretical argument. There are innumerable other points in Sheila’s article to which I would like to reply but for reasons of space I shall restrict myself to the three most important of them: working-class men as enforcers of women’s oppression, the role of the party, patriarchy and the women’s liberation movement.
 
Are male workers involved in enforcing women’s oppression?
It would have been open to Sheila to argue empirically that most male workers do not enforce women’s oppression: that they do not expect or demand their dinner to be cooked for them or their washing done, that they do not regularly take themselves off down the pub (leaving the wife stuck at home babysitting), that they don’t refuse or ‘fail to learn how’ to change nappies, that they don’t take advantage of their wife’s economic dependence, that they don’t on some occasions (on all too many occasions I’m sorry to say) employ physical violence against their wives. But Sheila does not do this, instead she presents a ‘logical’ argument:
To argue that men ‘enforce’ women’s oppression is to suggest that women themselves reject that oppression. The truth in society is somewhat different; both men and women by and large accept their respective roles in society and in the process women themselves accept their own role as wife and mother. (p. 96)
To see how unconvincing and mechanical this argument is, simply substitute ‘foremen’ or ‘police’ for ‘men’ and ‘workers’ for women:
To suggest that foremen/police ‘enforce’ workers’ oppression is to suggest that workers themselves reject that oppression.
The ‘truth in society’ is indeed somewhat different: it is that working-class women, like workers as a whole, do not generally either accept or reject their oppression in toto, rather they tend to rebel against concrete partial manifestations of it (this particular speed up of the line, this wage cut, or having to do the dishes all the time, etc) and that when they do the first ‘enforcer’ that they come up against is not the capitalist, who is safely out of reach, but the foreman, the cop, or in the case of the woman, her husband.
The rest of Sheila’s arguments on this point reveal the same mechanical either/or way of thinking.
Single women and married women without children participate equally in the workforce. Either husbands must agree with their wives not sticking to their traditional roles in the home or have failed to see the benefit which would occur to them if they did. (pp. 96–97)
Not at all. Husbands accept their wives working (partly because of shifts in ideology, mainly because of the financial gain to the family) and expect them to continue to take the main responsibility for the home.
To argue in this context that men are the enforcers of women’s oppression is to fail to see that women’s role is shaped by the needs of capital not by working-class men. (p. 97)
Once again the false, mechanical counterposition. My argument is not (of course!) that women’s role is shaped by men but that capital shapes the roles of both men and women and shapes them in such a way that working-class men are to some extent involved in enforcing women’s oppression. To argue otherwise is precisely ‘to fall into the idealist error of denying that social relations are always relations between real people’ (Cliff quoted in McGregor, p. 96). Engels, Eleanor Marx, and many others used to say that ‘within the family the man is the bourgeois, the woman the proletarian’. Obviously the analogy is not, and was not meant to be, exact, but to Sheila it would clearly be incomprehensible or else ‘the first step in departing from the Marxist tradition’.
 
The role of the revolutionary party
Sheila says that I did not, in my article, state clearly what form our intervention to overcome sexist divisions should take beyond calling for ‘special efforts and special methods of agitation and propaganda’. In fact I was clearer than Sheila gives me credit for because I added a footnote to the passage she quotes. Sheila fails to mention it so, for clarity, I reproduce it here.
See for example, Clara Zetkin’s speech to the Fourth Congress of the Comintern on Organising Working Women. (International Socialism 1:96) In this speech Zetkin asserts: ‘One thing has become apparent: we require special organs to carry on the Communist work of organisation and education among women and make it part of the life of the Party ... To accomplish our purpose it is necessary to set up party organisers, Women’s Secretariats, Women’s Departments or whatever we may call them to carry on this work.’ Zetkin then goes on to contrast the situation on the Bulgarian and German CP, ‘where our Women’s Secretariats and the Communist Women’s Movement has become one of the strong points of the general life of the party’, to that in Poland and Britain where the CPs have ‘refused or postponed the setting up of a special body for systematic agitation among women. ‘ [15]
To clarify matters further let me state that I do not propose the setting up of such a Women’s Department in the SWP at present – the level of working-class women’s struggle and the nature of the period are not such as to justify it – but I do believe that such measures will be necessary in the future when the level of struggle is higher. Likewise I am not in favour of a special women’s paper at present but I do think that sooner or later we will need one. I repeat, this is perfectly in accord with the Marxist, indeed the Bolshevik tradition.
Sheila then goes on to draw out the ‘logic’ of my assertion that it cannot be assumed, or taken for granted, that the revolutionary party will automatically highlight the interests of women workers.
Put bluntly it means that revolutionary men are not capable of fighting for women’s liberation as they cannot be trusted to understand that the revolutionary struggle requires combating sexist divisions inside the working class. (p. 99)
It means nothing of the kind. To say that a person or a party cannot be ‘trusted’ to do something ‘automatically’ is not to say that they are incapable of doing it. Could we ‘trust’ miners automatically not to be sexist? Of course not! Could miners be won to an anti-sexist position in the course of the struggle (especially when the question was argued with them)? Of course they could! Can we ‘trust’ white workers not to be racist? No. Can they be won to anti-racism? Yes.
In fact I find that Sheila’s whole use of the concept of ‘trust’ in relation to the party rather bemusing. Surely none of us should simply leave the correctness of party policy to trust, whether it is on women or anything else. Surely there has to be a continual struggle by means of debate, argument and sometimes organisational means to assure this correctness is achieved? [16] Surely Sheila is continually engaged in such efforts herself or does she take the correct activity of party members purely ‘on trust’?
But what of ‘the doubts’ Sheila says I cast on the Marxist tradition? To have a critical attitude to our tradition, to recognise some of its weaknesses, is not to cast doubt on its overall validity. Nevertheless I did say that ‘the history of the Marxist movement shows that Marxists too have an unfortunate tendency to “forget” the woman question’. This is indeed a one-sided statement but I am a Marxist and I was arguing with other Marxists and rather took it for granted that we were aware of our positive achievements. Also I did cite some examples. Sheila notes, but makes no attempt to deal with these examples except in that which refers to our own organisation. She writes:
With regard to our own history, I would argue that the problem we suffered from was not that we forgot the question of women’s liberation but that we forgot the Marxist tradition. We suffered in fact from absorbing petty bourgeois feminism into our ideas and our practice in the period when we were engaged in building Women’s Voice groups. (p. 96)
The second sentence here is undoubtedly true but what about the long period – twenty years or more – before Women’s Voice? Does Sheila mean we didn’t forget the questions of women’s liberation at that time? If so she is simply wrong. I can remember when the question of women’s liberation was first raised in IS around 1970 (as well as some of the reactions to it) and when the simple statement that ‘We are for the real, social, economic and political equality of women’ was first inserted in Where We Stand. Or does Sheila mean we forgot the Marxist tradition on women including Marxist support women’s liberation?
This is true, but the question is why did we forget it and what reminded us of it? The answer is we forgot it because there was no women’s movement outside the party and we were reminded of it because, as I said in my first article, ‘the self-activity of women outside the party followed by that of women inside the party compelled the Trotskyist movement to confront its own theory and practice’. [17] I stand by this assertion because I vividly remember the process happening, but my memory is confirmed by Lindsey German who in 1978 observed:
The major positive aspect of the Women’s Movement in the last few years has undoubtedly been on the reintroduction of feminism into the socialist – and to some extent the trade union movements ... The changing ideas about women have meant that very few women inside the organisation accept the old subservient role [my emphasis – JM] that was prevalent up until three or four years ago. [18]
Indeed one of the reasons why we absorbed a considerable amount of petty bourgeois feminism is precisely that neither our membership nor our leadersip had a well worked-out Marxist position on the question. You will search in vain for any substantial article on women’s liberation in the issues of International Socialism before the early 1970s and it was not until 1981 that Lindsey German’s Theories of Patriarchy appeared and until 1984 (fifteen years after the birth of the women’s movement in Britain) that Cliff’s book and Harman’s major article came out. Hence it is the case that ‘even the most revolutionary men are not exempt from the short-term benefit men derive from women’s oppression’ and that ‘just as women workers will have to take the initiative to bring to the fore the women’s aspect of the class struggle so women revolutionaries will have to take the initiative within the revolutionary party.’ [19]
 
Patriarchy and the Women’s Liberation Movement
Sheila’s final argument is that my position is the thin end of a wedge leading to patriarchy theory, feminism, separatism et al. To establish this she moves step by step from an assertion that the idea that working-class men benefit from women’s oppression ‘is associated with the theory of patriarchy’, through the arguments of Sheila Rowbotham (early and late) to the horrors of ‘feminist incomes policy’ and ‘glorification of motherhood at Greenham Common’. These are said somehow to be ‘the consequences’ of holding my position.
Let me therefore state for the record (again!) (i) that I believe that Marxism is the only theory capable of explaining and consistently combating women’s oppression, (ii) that women’s liberation can come only through socialist revolution, (iii) that the class struggle demands unity between men and women workers, (iv) that this in turn requires a unified revolutionary party.
Naturally this will not satisfy Sheila. She will say this may be what I intend but will not be where my ideas lead. What she fails to see is the fundamental difference between my position and that of all the various patriarchy theorists she tries to associate me with. The latter all pose the division between men and women as either transcending class divisions, or as equally important as class divisions, or as parallel to class divisions. I, on the other hand, state unequivocally that class divisions are the fundamental divisions in society and treat the division between men and women as strictly subordinate to the class struggle. I approach the question of ‘men benefiting’ exclusively as an obstacle to be overcome in the fight for class unity against the bourgeoisie (both male and female). Nothing I have said even gives a hint of suggesting a cross-class alliance of all women against all men.
But Sheila will continue – ‘You say working-class men benefit, they say working-class men benefit’. Of course by this method of argument you can ‘prove’ that anything leads to anything. Doesn’t just mentioning the question of women’s oppression ‘lead’ to separatism? Doesn’t pointing out racism and the special oppression of blacks ‘lead’ to the danger of black nationalism? Didn’t Lenin’s analysis of imperialism and the right of nations to self-determination create an opening for third world nationalism, and so on? But then as Lenin pointed out, ‘Any truth ... if exaggerated, or if extended beyond the limits of its actual applicability can be reduced to an absurdity.’ [20]
It seems to me that with equal logic one could argue that the ‘logic’ of Sheila’s position is to minimise, or even deny altogether, the reality of women’s oppression. Of course Sheila’s commitment to women’s liberation is far too serious to permit that to happen. Nevertheless I would argue that the consequence of Sheila’s arguments, that is of denying the reality of something experienced by working-class women in their daily lives, is actually to repel radicalised women from the SWP and strengthen petty bourgeois feminism, not so much inside but outside the party.
But in the last analysis none of these arguments about consequences relieves us of the duty to state what is. And ‘what is’ in this case is that working-class women do suffer an extra or special oppression over and above that suffered by working-class men and working-class men do gain a certain limited, immediate benefit from this in terms of their greater freedom from the burden of housework and child care.
Which is not to say that this is the whole story, for against the stake which male workers have in perpetuating women’s oppression there is also a powerful, in the long run more powerful, factor working to unite men and women workers in opposition to women’s oppression, and that is their own common class interest. However this side of socialism there will always be a tension between this immediate divisive factor (reinforced by bourgeois sexism) and the unifying class factor (fought for by socialists). It is a tension which can be overcome only in the course of struggle – struggle against capital and struggle within the working class against sexism. [21] These are not two separate struggles but two aspects of the same struggle, neither of which can ultimately be won without the victory of the other.

Notes
I would like to thank Jonathan Neale for a number of very helpful discussions in the preparation of this article.
1. Chris Harman, Women’s Liberation and Revolutionary Socialism, in International Socialism 2:23, pp. 26–27. In this Chris follows the earlier argument of Lindsey German that ‘even in these situations (where women do full-time paid labour and also run the home) it is doubtful that the husbands benefit more then marginally. Theories of Patriarchy, International Socialism 2:12.
2. The crucial question here was whether (as Chris argued) ‘the labour devoted to children was something the wife provides to the system and not to the husband’ (Harman, op. cit., p. 27) or whether (as I argued) ‘she is both producing the next generation of labour power for the system and doing something for her husband by relieving him of the necessity of doing his share of the work.’ (Molyneux, International Socialism 2:25, p. 119). On this point Sheila does not answer my arguments but merely reasserts that ‘John mistakes the appearance of a wife’s role within the family through a personal service for the husband, for the reality that wives perform their duties on behalf of capital’. But how can this dual character of women’s labour be divided into ‘appearance’ and ‘reality’? When a wife cooks a meal for her husband she does indeed refresh his labour power for the capitalist to exploit but she also keeps him alive. Or is Sheila suggesting that it is only a capitalist con-trick that workers need to eat? Marx in Capital explains that under capitalism all commodities (and the the labour that produces them) have a dual character: they possess both exchange value and use value. He does not, of course, male the absurd suggestion that the exchange value of commodities is ‘real’ while their use value is only a matter of ‘appearance’.
3. Eamonn McCann, After 5 October 1968, International Socialism 1:51, pp. 10 & 11.
4. Marx-Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow 1965, p. 110. Sheila, given the interpretations she puts on some of my arguments, might wonder at the word ‘justifiable’. What! Is Engels supporting the proletariat becoming bourgeoisie! It would follow that the working class would have to abandon the aim of the socialist revolution, etc. etc. Clearly what Engels means is that the phenomenon of the proletariat accepting bourgeois ideas is materially determined.
5. Ibid., p. 351.
6. In his Preface to The Conditions of the Working Class in England in 1844 (London 1968) Engels actually uses the dreaded word ‘benefit’, stating that ‘a small privileged protected minority [of the working class] was permanently benefited’ by the industrial expansion from 1848 to 1886.
7. Lenin, Speeches at the Congresses of the Communist International, Moscow 1972, pp. 45–6.
8. Lukacs, Lenin, London 1970 (emphasis in the original).
9. T. Cliff, Neither Washington nor Moscow, London 1982, p. 116.
10. Molyneux, op. cit., p. 120.
11. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy, in Karl Marx, Selected Writings, Oxford 1978, pp. 213–4. Marx returns to this idea in The Communist Manifesto, writing ‘This organisation of the proletarians into a class ... is continually being upset again by the competition between the workers themselves’, and it should be noted, in the passage on English and Irish workers quoted by Sheila, ‘The ordinary English worker takes the Irish worker as a competitor who lowers his standard of life’.
12. Lenin, Speech to Second Congress of the Comintern, in J. Degras, The Communist International 1919–1943, London 1971, Vol. I, p. 43.
13. I disagree with Sheila’s assertion that ‘women’s oppression does not consist in an unequal division of labour in the home but in a division of labour between the point of production and home’. (p. 94) This division has never been absolute and was ‘typical’ only in one phase of capitalist development. Moreover there has always been also an (oppressive) division of labour in paid employment with men being recruited to certain better-paid jobs and women being recruited to other, worse-paid jobs, and an (again oppressive) division of labour in the home. In my first article I concentrated on the benefits men get from the latter but it is also the case that male workers gain a certain (short-term, immediate etc.) benefit from the fact that women are discriminated against in the competition on the labour market for the better-paid jobs.
14. I must stress that I am not saying that the relationship between men and women is the same as that between Jewish and Arab workers or white and black in South Africa (clearly the factors for unity are much greater) merely that the methodological point is the same.
15. Molyneux, op. cit., p. 122.
16. In Party and Class Chris Harman went so far as to suggest ‘a limitation on (party) membership to those willing to seriously and scientifically appraise their own activity and those of the party generally.’
17. Molyneux, op. cit., p 123.
18. L. German, The Women’s Movement and the Left, SWP International Discussion Bulletin, No. 9. Lindsey would now, rightly, disown much of this article but the facts she records here remain facts.
19. Molyneux, op. cit., p. 121.
20. Cited in Lukacs, Lenin, op. cit., p. 96.
21. It was precisely such a dual struggle that was waged in the miners’ strike. The strike created favourable conditions for the overcoming of sexism but there still had to be a political fight on the question. Comrades will remember, for example, the rampant sexism in evidence on the Mansfield demonstration and the many arguments that followed it.



About 20 years ago I spoke on Marxism and religion at the Socialist Workers Party Easter Rally in Skegness. I began, roughly, with the words, “Today, in Britain, religion – fortunately – is not a major political issue.” Unfortunately, this is no longer the case. Today religion, or rather one religion in particular, namely Islam, is at the centre of political debate.
Scarcely a day passes without a news item raising the alarm about alleged “hate preaching” imams, or a mosque being taken over by “fundamentalists”, or an opinion piece about the deeply flawed nature of Islam, or a radio discussion about whether “moderate” Muslims are doing enough to combat “the extremists” and prevent Muslim youth from being “radicalised”, or a TV programme on the plight of Muslim women, or a scare story about some stupidity committed in the name of Islam somewhere in the world. As I start to write this article I see the following report in the Independent on Sunday:
Islamic extremism in Britain is creating communities which are “no-go areas” for non-Muslims, the Bishop of Rochester, the Rt Rev Dr Michael Nazir-Ali, warned yesterday. Bishop Nazir-Ali says non-Muslims face a hostile reception in places dominated by the ideology of Islamic radicals.
Regardless of the merits or accuracy of the individual story or claim, and this is a particularly absurd one, the relentless flow of this kind of comment and coverage has turned Islam into a religion under siege. This incessant problematisation of Islam and demonisation of Muslims have created the phenomenon now widely referred to as Islamophobia.
For readers of this journal, it should be no mystery why this has occurred. It is not an expression of some visceral Christian hostility to Islam stretching back to the Crusades or the conflict with the Ottoman Empire (even though these atavisms are sometimes mobilised ideologically). It is because the majority of the people sitting on the world’s most important reserves of oil and natural gas happen to be Muslim and, secondarily, because, since the Iranian Revolution of 1979, much of these peoples’ resistance to imperialism has found expression in Islamist form. If the people of the Middle East and central Asia had been predominantly Buddhist or Tibet held oilfields comparable to those of Saudi Arabia or Iraq, we would now be dealing with “Buddhophobia”. Seeping out from the White House, the Pentagon, the CIA and Downing Street, coursing through the sewers of Fox News, CNN, the Sun and the Daily Mail would be the notion that, great religion though it undoubtedly was, there was some underlying and persistent flaw in Buddhism. “Intellectuals” such as Samuel Huntington, Christopher Hitchens and Martin Amis would be on hand to explain that, despite its embrace by naive hippies in the 1960s, Buddhism was an essentially reactionary creed characterised by its deepseated rejection of modernity and Western democratic values, and its fanatical commitment to feudalism, theocracy, misogyny and homophobia.
However, the fact that it has happened – the fact that Islamophobia has been developed, nationally and internationally, as the principal ideological cover and justification for imperialism and war (as straightforward racism was in the 18th and 19th centuries) – has enormously increased the importance of a correct theoretical understanding of, and political orientation towards, religion in its many different forms. Indeed it can be said that a deficient, mechanical or one-sided understanding of the Marxist analysis of religion has been a substantial contributing factor to a number of left individuals and groups completely losing their former political bearings and ending up as left apologists for imperialism.
The most notorious example of this is, of course, Christopher Hitchens, who has written a book on religion, God is Not Great (of which more later), and whose trajectory from leftist intellectual and radical critic of the system to “critical” supporter of George Bush has been precipitous and extreme (though in Hitchens’ case one cannot help suspecting that material inducements have played a larger role in his race to the right than any mere theoretical error). Other examples include members of the Euston Group, such as Norman Geras, and, among left groups, the French organisation Lutte Ouvrière, whose hostility to the hijab turned them into temporary allies of the French imperialist state against its most oppressed women citizens [1], and the sorry case of the semi-Zionist and Islamophobic Alliance for Workers’ Liberty.
At the same time, and not by coincidence, in the US and Britain there has arisen a verbally militant anti-religious, pro-atheist campaign, spearheaded by the biologist Richard Dawkins and accompanied by the aforementioned Hitchens, the philosopher Daniel Dennett and others. A critical examination of how these people present their arguments against religion will bring out important features of the Marxist position. But first I want to set out the fundamental principles underlying the Marxist analysis of religion, beginning not with Marx’s direct comments on religion but with the basic propositions of Marxist philosophy.
 
Materialism and religion
Marxist philosophy is materialist. According to Frederick Engels in Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy:
The great basic question of all, especially of latter-day philosophy, is that concerning the relation of thinking and being ... The question of the position of thinking in relation to being ... in relation to the church was sharpened into this: did God create the world or has the world existed for all time? Answers to this question split the philosophers into two great camps. Those who asserted the primacy of the mind over nature and, therefore, in the last instance, assumed world creation in some form or other ... comprised the camp of idealism. The others, who regarded nature as primary, belong to the various schools of materialism. [2]
Marxism, argues Engels, not only stands firmly in the materialist camp but is where “the materialist world outlook was taken really seriously for the first time and was carried through consistently ... in all relevant domains of knowledge”. [3]
Marxist materialism, reduced to its essentials, involves commitment to the following propositions:

The material world exists independently of human (or any other) consciousness.
 
Real, if not total or absolute, knowledge of the world is possible and has, indeed, been attained.
 
Human beings are part of nature, but a distinct part.
 
The material world does not derive, in the first instance, from human thought; human thought derives from the material world.

Propositions (1) and (2) correspond to the presumptions and findings of modern science, and have attained the status of common sense. This is because they are confirmed in practice, millions or billions of times every day, as are most of the findings of science. Proposition (3) also corresponds to the findings of modern science, especially those of Charles Darwin, and modern paleontology and anthropaleontology, but was, as it happens, articulated by Marx before Darwin:
The first premise of all human history is, of course, the existence of living human individuals. Thus the first fact to be established is the physical organisation of these individuals and their consequent relation to the rest of nature ... The writing of history must always set out from these natural bases and their modification in the course of history through the action of men. Men can be distinguished from animals by consciousness, by religion or anything else you like. They themselves begin to distinguish themselves from animals as soon as they begin to produce their means of subsistence, a step which is conditioned by their physical organisation. [4]
Proposition (4) is the most distinctively Marxist and the least widely shared. Many people who take a materialist view of the relationship between humans and nature take an idealist position on the relationship between ideas and material conditions, and on the role of ideas in society, history and politics. Almost without thinking they may accept that “the Cold War was fundamentally a clash of ideologies” or that “capitalism is based on the idea of economic growth”. For this reason Proposition (4) is the one Marx and Engels insist on most strongly and often:
Men are the producers of their conceptions, ideas, etc. – real active men, as they are conditioned by a definite development of their productive forces ... Consciousness can never be anything else than conscious existence ... In direct contrast to German philosophy, which descends from heaven to earth, here we ascend from earth to heaven ... We set out from real, active men, and on the basis of their real life-process we demonstrate the development of the ideological reflexes and echoes of this life-process. [5]
Does it require deep insight to comprehend that people’s ideas, opinions and conceptions, in a word, their consciousness changes with every change in their life conditions, their social relations and their social being? [6]
In the social production of their life, men enter into definite relations that are indispensable and independent of their will, relations of production which correspond to a definite stage of development of their material productive forces. The sum total of these relations of production constitutes the economic structure of society, the real foundation, on which rises a legal and political superstructure and to which correspond definite forms of social consciousness. The mode of production of material life conditions the social, political and intellectual life process in general. It is not the consciousness of men that determines their being, but, on the contrary, their social being that determines their consciousness. [7]
Just as Darwin discovered the law of development of organic nature, so Marx discovered the law of development of human history: the simple fact, hitherto concealed by an overgrowth of ideology, that mankind must first of all eat, drink, have shelter and clothing, before it can pursue politics, science, art, religion, etc; that therefore the production of the immediate material means of subsistence, and consequently the degree of economic development attained by a given people or during a given epoch, form the foundation on which the state institutions, the legal conceptions, art, and even the ideas on religion, of the people concerned have been evolved, and in the light of which they must therefore be explained, instead of vice versa, as had hitherto been the case. [8]
Thus it is clear that a definite attitude to religion is present, both implicitly and explicitly, in the most fundamental ideas of Marxism. Moreover it should also be clear that this attitude has a dual character. On the one hand, for the thoroughgoing and consistent Marxist, as for the thoroughgoing and consistent materialist, religious faith, in all its many forms, is excluded. Religious ideas, like all other ideas, are social and historical products. They are produced by human beings, and this necessarily precludes religious belief, since religious ideas claim to transcend and take priority over nature, human beings and history. By the same token, philosophical idealism and religion are intimately linked. If mind has priority over matter, whose mind can that be but the mind of god? If ideas are the ultimate driving force in history, where do those ideas come from if not the mind of god? And is not god, as in the terminology of Georg Hegel, “the absolute idea”? As the Bible puts it, “In the beginning was the word, and the word was god.” This is why Leon Trotsky, at the very end of his life, wrote that he would die “a Marxist, a dialectical materialist and, consequently, an irreconcilable atheist”. [9]
On the other hand the same Marxism clearly demands a materialist explanation of religion. It is not enough to view either religion as a whole or any particular religion as simply a delusion or folly that happens to have gripped the minds of millions for centuries. A common habit of less thoughtful religious believers (especially religious believers in imperialist countries) is to mock or dismiss as superstition the religious beliefs of others (especially so-called “natives”) on the grounds that they are obviously irrational or contrary to well known laws of nature, without realising that exactly the same applies to their own beliefs – in the virgin birth, the resurrection, the feeding of the 5,000 or whatever.
But Marxism does not just generalise this mistake by pointing to the equal stupidity of the cargo cultist and the Catholic, the Rastafarian and the Anglican. It requires an analysis of the social roots of religion in general and of specific religious beliefs; an understanding of the real human needs, social and psychological, and the real historical conditions, to which such beliefs and doctrines correspond. A Marxist needs to be able to understand why a belief in the divinity and immortality of Haile Selassie could inspire a musician of the calibre of Bob Marley in Trenchtown, Jamaica, in the 1960s, or why the belief in the divinity and immortality of Jesus inspired an artist (and mathematician) of the calibre of Piero della Francesca in 15th century Florence.
If we now turn to Marx’s most important statement directly on religion, the first couple of pages of The Introduction to a Contribution to the Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right
[10], we find it to be a condensed expression of all these elements. It begins with the assertion, “For Germany, the criticism of religion has been essentially completed, and the criticism of religion is the prerequisite of all criticism.”
By this Marx means that the combined work of the scientific revolution, the Enlightenment (especially the French encyclopaedists) and the Bible criticism of German secular left Hegelians has demolished the claims of Christianity and the Bible to offer a factually true account of nature or history, or even an internally coherent theology. Moreover this work was necessary and progressive because a genuinely critical analysis of the world was not possible until human thought was liberated from the fetters of religious dogma. But this single sentence is all Marx says on this aspect of the question. Taking the factual refutation of religion as given, he proceeds rapidly to his main point, the analysis of the social basis of religion: “The foundation of irreligious criticism is: man makes religion, religion does not make man.” This is the starting point. What follows is a paragraph of exceptional density, typical of Marx, in which a PhD’s worth of insights are compressed into a few sentences:
Religion is, indeed, the self-consciousness and self-esteem of man who has either not yet won through to himself, or has already lost himself again. But man is no abstract being squatting outside the world. Man is the world of man – state, society. This state and this society produce religion, which is an inverted consciousness of the world, because they are an inverted world. Religion is the general theory of this world, its encyclopaedic compendium, its logic in popular form, its spiritual point d’honneur, its enthusiasm, its moral sanction, its solemn complement, and its universal basis of consolation and justification. It is the fantastic realisation of the human essence since the human essence has not acquired any true reality. The struggle against religion is, therefore, indirectly the struggle against that world whose spiritual aroma is religion.
Thus religion is a response to human alienation – man who has “lost himself”. But this is not an abstract or ahistorical condition; rather it is a product of certain specific social conditions. This society produces religion, an inverted view of the world in which humans bow to an imaginary god of their own making, because it is an inverted world in which people are dominated by the products of their own labour. But religion is not just a random collection of superstitions or false beliefs; it is the “general theory” of this alienated world, the way in which alienated people try to make sense of their alienated lives and alien society. Therefore it performs the rich array of diverse functions listed by Marx: “encyclopaedic compendium”, “logic in popular form”, etc. And therefore to struggle against religion is to struggle against that world “whose spiritual aroma is religion” – this world of alienation in which people need religion.
Two points need to be made about this passage. The first is that it is almost universally ignored by commentators offering summaries or explanations of Marx’s views on religion. This may be because they have not read it (unlikely) or have not understood it (more likely), or (most likely) because it is radically incompatible with the attempt to reduce the Marxist theory of religion to a simple one-dimensional analysis such as, “Marx argues that religion is a tool of the ruling class” or “according to Marx religion functions to pacify the toiling masses”. Of course, Marx does say this kind of thing about religion but he says much else besides. To reduce the complex totality of his theory to just one of its strands is effectively to falsify it. The second point is that Marx is so keen on its conclusion that he repeats it again and again in a veritable storm of metaphors and aphorisms. [11]
However, before concluding his argument on religion, Marx inserts one more highly significant paragraph:
Religious suffering is, at one and the same time, the expression of real suffering and a protest against real suffering. Religion is the sigh of the oppressed creature, the heart of a heartless world, and the soul of soulless circumstances. It is the opium of the people. [12]
This passage is much better known than the previous one, but that is largely because of its much quoted final phrase (often presented as the essence or the totality of Marx’s analysis). In fact it is the first sentence that is probably the most interesting and most important for understanding the political role of religion. Marx’s insistence that religion is both an expression of suffering and a protest against it is the key point, giving the lie to any analysis which focuses only on religion’s narcotic and soporific effects. It also points in the direction of the important historical fact (to which I shall return) that there have been many progressive, radical and even revolutionary movements that have either taken a religious form, had a religious coloration or been led by people of religious faith.
In the course of their work Marx and Engels made numerous references to and analyses of religion. In particular the young Marx wrote On the Jewish Question, a polemic in favour of Jewish emancipation; [13] Engels contributed a number of interesting studies of the historical development and role of Christianity, particularly in The Peasant War in Germany, Anti-DÃ¼hring, the introduction to the English edition of Socialism: Utopian and Scientific, Bruno Bauer and Early Christianity, and The History of Early Christianity. [14] However, all these comments have one thing in common: they never take religious doctrines, sects, churches, movements and conflicts at face value, nor treat them as simple follies or deceptions practised by the priests, but regard them always as distorted reflections and expressions of real social needs and interests. A few extracts will illustrate the point.
From The Peasant War in Germany:
In the so-called religious wars of the 16th century, very positive material class interests were at play, and those wars were class wars just as were the later collisions in England and France. If the class struggles of that time appear to bear religious earmarks, if the interests, requirements and demands of the various classes hid themselves behind a religious screen, it little changes the actual situation, and is to be explained by conditions of the time in Germany. The revolutionary opposition to feudalism was alive throughout all the Middle Ages. According to conditions of the time, it appeared either in the form of mysticism, as open heresy, or of armed insurrection.
From the introduction to Socialism: Utopian and Scientific:
Calvin’s creed was one fit for the boldest of the bourgeoisie of his time. His predestination doctrine was the religious expression of the fact that in the commercial world of competition success or failure does not depend upon a man’s activity or cleverness, but upon circumstances uncontrollable by him.
From The History of Early Christianity:
Christianity was originally a movement of oppressed people: it first appeared as the religion of slaves and emancipated slaves, of poor people deprived of all rights, of peoples subjugated or dispersed by Rome ...
[The risings of peasants and plebeians in the Middle Ages], like all mass movements of the Middle Ages, were bound to wear the mask of religion and appeared as the restoration of early Christianity from spreading degeneration ... But behind the religious exaltation there was every time a very tangible worldly interest.
And, incidentally, from the same work, a footnote on Islam:
Islam is a religion adapted to Orientals, especially Arabs, i.e., on one hand, to townsmen engaged in trade and industry, on the other, to nomadic Bedouins. Therein lies, however, the embryo of a periodically recurring collision. The townspeople grow rich, luxurious and lax in the observation of the “law”. The Bedouins, poor and hence of strict morals, contemplate with envy and covetousness these riches and pleasures. Then they unite under a prophet, a Mahdi, to chastise the apostates and restore the observation of the ritual and the true faith and to appropriate in recompense the treasures of the renegades. In a hundred years they are naturally in the same position as the renegades were: a new purge of the faith is required, a new Mahdi arises and the game starts again from the beginning. That is what happened from the conquest campaigns of the African Almoravids and Almohads in Spain to the last Mahdi of Khartoum who so successfully thwarted the English ... All these movements are clothed in religion but they have their source in economic causes.
The point here is not the historical truth or falsity of all or any of these specific observations, but the consistent methodology underlying them.
 
Dawkins, Hitchens and Eagleton
Richard Dawkins is an evolutionary biologist who first came to prominence with his book The Selfish Gene, and thereafter built himself a considerable reputation and career as a populariser of science. In 2006 he published The God Delusion, a full frontal assault on religion and defence of atheism, which became an international bestseller, generated huge controversy, especially in the United States, and attracted plaudits from sources as diverse as Ian McEwan, Michael Frayn, the Spectator, the Daily Mail and Stephen Pinker.
I should say at the outset that I do not at all share the apparently widespread admiration of Dawkins’s style and intellect. Reading Dawkins after Marx is like going from Leo Tolstoy or James Joyce to Kingsley Amis or Agatha Christie. Where Marx packs a book into a paragraph, Dawkins expands a short essay into a large book. In fact all 460 odd pages of The God Delusion do not take us intellectually beyond what Marx summed up in the first sentence of his analysis in 1843, namely that the criticism of religion is essentially complete. What Dawkins offers is an “Enlightenment”, empiricist, rationalist refutation of religion – a “scientific”, i.e. positivist, demonstration that there is a complete lack of factual evidence to support what he calls “the god hypothesis” and that, on the contrary, the evidence makes it almost (if not absolutely) certain that god does not exist. This is supplemented by logical refutations of the various arguments advanced for god’s existence ranging from the venerable “proofs” of Thomas Aquinas and “Pascal’s Wager” to the bizarre recent speculations of one Stephen Unwin, and numerous examples of the follies and crimes perpetrated in the name of religion. I suppose there are some people for whom this will be revelatory and others who may enjoy it because it makes them feel smarter than the ignorant masses who swallow these superstitions, but theoretically there is nothing new here, indeed very little that is not at least 200 years old.
The only real exception to this lies in Dawkins’s attempt to explain why religion is so widespread in human society, but this attempt is a rather miserable failure. Being a committed evolutionary biologist he feels obliged to frame his explanation in terms of genetic advantage in the process of natural selection, but his blanket hostility to religion also obliges him to deny that religion can be advantageous for individual or societal survival. He tries to wriggle out of this contradiction by suggesting that religion is a side-effect of a characteristic that he claims is advantageous in the struggle for survival, namely a propensity for children to believe what they are told by their elders. Clearly this does not withstand criticism. First, the extent to which youthful suggestibility outweighs youthful scepticism, especially into adolescence, is debatable. Second, it is equally debatable whether such suggestibility is, on balance, advantageous. Third, it seems highly likely that both the extent and advantageousness of suggestibility are massively socially conditioned and very different in different societies. Finally, like any theory that explains the behaviour or beliefs of children by the behaviour or beliefs of their parents, it is left with the problem of explaining the parents’ disposition in the first place if it is to avoid being caught in an infinite regress.
As Marx pointed out, “The educators themselves must be educated.” [15] In other words Dawkins’s explanation turns out to be no explanation at all. Moreover it is symptomatic of his whole approach that neither in this section nor any anywhere else in The God Delusion does the author find time seriously to consider the Marxist theory of religion.
However, intellectual unoriginality and mediocrity are by no means the main objection to this book. (It would be churlish to cavil so over a work that was second rate but reasonably sound.) The main objection is to the reactionary political conclusions that flow from the weak methodology. As Marx argued in relation to the German philosopher Feuerbach, mechanical materialism invariably leaves the door open to idealism, and Dawkins is a particularly clear example of this. Without noticing it, he flip flops from a vulgar materialist genetic determinism in his view of human nature and behaviour in the abstract, to a rampant idealism in his view of the role of religion in concrete historical circumstances. Again and again he makes the mistake of assuming that when people do something in the name of religion it really is religion that is determining their behaviour. The following passage from his essay The Improbability of God epitomises his approach:
Much of what people do is done in the name of god. Irishmen blow each other up in his name. Arabs blow themselves up in his name. Imams and ayatollahs oppress women in his name. Celibate popes and priests mess up people’s sex lives in his name. Jewish shohets cut live animals’ throats in his name. The achievements of religion in past history – bloody crusades, torturing inquisitions, mass-murdering conquistadors, culture-destroying missionaries, legally enforced resistance to each new piece of scientific truth until the last possible moment – are even more impressive. And what has it all been in aid of? I believe it is becoming increasingly clear that the answer is absolutely nothing at all. There is no reason for believing that any sort of gods exist and quite good reason for believing that they do not exist and never have. It has all been a gigantic waste of time and a waste of life. It would be a joke of cosmic proportions if it weren’t so tragic. [16]
In fact this is no more than a souped up version of the familiar nostrum that lots of wars are caused by religion. It will not stand a moment’s critical scrutiny. Let us take the example of Ireland. The view that the conflict in Ireland was essentially or primarily about religion is both manifestly false and plainly reactionary. It is false even in terms of the declared statements and consciousness of the principal protagonists. If many, though by no means all, Republicans were Catholics, no Republican would have said (or believed) that they were fighting for Catholicism; they fought for an independent, united Ireland. Things were less clear on the Unionist side where religious bigotry played a much larger role; nevertheless the principal declared goal was a “national” one, namely remaining “British”. Moreover, it is abundantly clear that behind these conflicting national aspirations lay not religious differences about the doctrine of transubstantiation or the fallibility of the pope but real economic, social and political issues of exploitation, poverty, discrimination and oppression. To see the conflict as basically about religion was reactionary because it fitted with the racist stereotype of the Irish as primitive and stupid (after all “we” gave up fighting about religion centuries ago) and helped to legitimise British rule as a neutral arbiter between warring religious factions.
To his credit, Dawkins opposed the Iraq war, and politically he is no friend of George Bush, but, in the context of the “war on terror”, his approach to religion becomes, even if unintentionally, even more reactionary. For it is central to the ideology of the neocons, Bush, Cheney, Blair and Brown that Muslim hostility to “the West” is unprovoked and unjustified. It is not seen as a reaction or response to Western imperialism, exploitation and domination, but rather an offensive religion-based campaign aimed at destroying, conquering or perhaps converting the non-Muslim world.
Some see these aims as inherent in mainstream Islam [17], while for Bush, Blair and Co. it derives from an “evil” misinterpretation or perversion of Islam, but in both cases the motivation is religious. It is an interpretation which flies in the face of the declared statements of both Al Qaida, who made explicit political demands such as the removal of US troops from Saudi Arabia, and the 7/7 bombers in London, who said they were motivated by what was being done to Iraq, and defies reason. The notion that America, Britain or any big Western nation could be destroyed, conquered or, indeed, converted by planting bombs on the underground or flying planes into buildings is so utterly absurd that it cannot be the real motive for any sustained campaign. The idea that the US could be induced by a terrorist campaign to stop supporting Israel or to get out of Afghanistan is also mistaken but it is not completely implausible. For Bush, Blair and Co, however, the “religious” interpretation is mandatory, as without it they would be forced to concede the culpability of imperialism and of their own policies – and the Dawkins approach dovetails with this and reinforces it:
“Mindless” may be a suitable word for the vandalising of a telephone box. It is not helpful for understanding what hit New York on 11 September ... It came from religion. Religion is also, of course, the underlying source of the divisiveness in the Middle East which motivated the use of this deadly weapon in the first place. But that is another story and not my concern here. My concern here is with the weapon itself. To fill a world with religion, or religions of the Abrahamic kind, is like littering the streets with loaded guns. [18]
Similar to Dawkins, but worse, is Christopher Hitchens. His book, God is Not Great, is on an even lower intellectual level than The God Delusion, with a more arbitrary combination of self-serving personal anecdote and rambling journalistic polemic. Its adaptation of the atheist case to Islamophobia is embodied in the title (a mocking reference to the Muslim cry, “God is Great!”) and blatant throughout. I suppose out of deference to his radical past he actually quotes, approvingly, a couple of the key paragraphs of Marx on religion. He then proceeds to ignore their meaning completely. In the key section, “Religion Kills”, he takes us on a whistlestop tour of six strife-torn cities – Belfast, Beirut, Bombay, Belgrade, Bethlehem and Baghdad – in each case offering a swift summation of the conflict exclusively in terms of religious hatreds, without any reference to history, imperialism, oppression or class. It is a travesty of socio-political analysis. The “analysis” of Palestine is especially striking:
I once heard the late Abba Eban, one of Israel’s more polished and thoughtful diplomats and statesmen, give a talk in New York. The first thing to strike the eye about the Israeli-Palestinian dispute, he said, was the ease of its solubility ... Two peoples of roughly equivalent size had a claim to the same land. The solution was, obviously, to create two states side by side. Surely something so self-evident was within the wit of man to encompass? And so it would have been, decades ago, if the messianic rabbis and mullahs and priests could have been kept out of it. But the exclusive claims to god-given authority, made by hysterical clerics on both sides and further stoked by Armageddon-minded Christians who hope to bring on the Apocalypse (preceded by the death or conversion of all Jews), have made the situation insufferable, and put the whole of humanity in the position of hostage to a quarrel that now features the threat of nuclear war. Religion poisons everything.
This is risible, but when Hitchens says, and I quote verbatim from YouTube, “I am absolutely convinced that the main source of hatred in the world is religion” [19], he is also saying the cause is not the material facts of capitalism, imperialism, inequality, exploitation or class conflict, just a mistaken idea people have lodged in their heads.
Vigorously opposing the arguments of Dawkins and Hitchens does not, however, involve diluting in any way the classical Marxist critique of religion or opening the door to some kind of theoretical compromise with religious ideas. At this point we need to leave the odious Hitchens for the far more congenial Terry Eagleton, who provides an example of what should be avoided. Eagleton is an eminent cultural and literary theorist, friendly to Marxism, who, in the past, attacked the racism and other bigotries of Philip Larkin. He recently distinguished himself by denouncing the Islamophobia of his academic colleague Martin Amis. In 2006 he wrote a highly critical review of The God Delusion for the London Review of Books. Although Eagleton’s review advances some of the same arguments as this article, for example in relation to Ireland, the general terms of his critique are not Marxist. His principal argument is that Dawkins has attacked fundamentalist religion, Christian and Islamic, as if it represents all religion, while ignoring more sophisticated “liberal” theology of which Dawkins is largely ignorant:
What, one wonders, are Dawkins’ views on the epistemological differences between Aquinas and Duns Scotus? Has he read Eriugena on subjectivity, Rahner on grace or Moltmann on hope? Has he even heard of them? Or does he imagine like a bumptious young barrister that you can defeat the opposition while being complacently ignorant of its toughest case? [20]
As a criticism of Dawkins’s book this has some validity, but there are also serious problems here. First, it is not reasonable to argue that it is necessary to master all the ins ands outs of Christian (or Buddhist, or Zoroastrian) theology before one can make an intellectually sound case for atheism and for rejecting theology as such. Second, in demonstrating his understanding of the liberal theologians’ concept of an immaterial, impersonal god of love and tolerance, in contrast to the Old Testament god of vengeance, Eagleton leaves decidedly open the possibility that this liberal god may actually exist, or be worthy of worship. He does the same when he offers his picture of Jesus as proto anti-imperialist revolutionary:
Jesus did not die because he was mad or masochistic, but because the Roman state and its assorted local lackeys and running dogs took fright at his message of love, mercy and justice, as well as at his enormous popularity with the poor, and did away with him to forestall a mass uprising in a highly volatile political situation. [21]
For a Marxist the loving, caring, impersonal god of Dietrich Bonhoeffer and the radical Jesus of Terry Eagleton are both just as much human creations, illusory projections, as the unpleasant bigoted gods of Ian Paisley or Osama Bin Laden.
 
Religion and socialist politics
To conclude this article I shall outline a brief and rather schematic summary of the principal political conclusions that flow, and have flowed historically, from the foregoing analysis.
First, and contrary to widespread opinion (fostered by widespread misrepresentation), Marxist socialists are absolutely opposed to any idea of banning religion. This is not some new position but was explicitly stated by Engels as far back as 1874 in response to a proposal by followers of the French socialist Louis Blanqui. The reasons given by Engels remain valid to this day:
In order to prove that they are the most radical of all they abolish god by decree as was done in 1793:
“Let the Commune free mankind for ever from the ghost of past misery” (god), “from that cause” (non-existing god a cause!) “of their present misery. There is no room for priests in the Commune; every religious manifestation, every religious organisation must be prohibited.”
And this demand that men should be changed into atheists par ordre du mufti is signed by two members of the Commune who have really had opportunity enough to find out that, first, a vast amount of things can be ordered on paper without necessarily being carried out; and, second, that persecution is the best means of promoting undesirable convictions! [22]
Far from banning religion, Marxists argue that religion should be a private matter in relation to the state, and complete freedom of religion should prevail under both capitalism and socialism. Lenin spelt this out unambiguously in an article from 1905:
Religion must be of no concern to the state, and religious societies must have no connection with governmental authority. Everyone must be absolutely free to profess any religion he pleases, or no religion whatever, ie, to be an atheist, which every socialist is, as a rule. Discrimination among citizens on account of their religious convictions is wholly intolerable. Even the bare mention of a citizen’s religion in official documents should unquestionably be eliminated. [23]
The only sense in which Marxists contemplate the elimination of religion is through its gradual withering away as a result of the disappearance of its underlying social causes – alienation, exploitation, oppression, etc. Marxist socialists are, however, opposed to any state privileges for religion and call for the disestablishment of any or all official state churches (such as the Church of England).
Inevitably the general perception of the Marxist attitude to religion is considerably influenced by the experience of the Stalinist regimes in Russia, Eastern Europe, China, Cuba, North Korea, etc. A systematic investigation of this experience is impossible in this brief article and, hopefully, readers of this journal are well aware that the policies of these regimes were in no way representative of genuine socialism or Marxism. Nevertheless, certain observations are worth making. Stalinist repression of religion is often both exaggerated and misunderstood. It is exaggerated in that, in general, the Stalinist regimes did not repress the main religions or churches but tolerated them and even formed alliances with them, on condition that these churches were politically compliant (which they mainly were). It is misunderstood in that, where religious groups or individuals were persecuted, it was primarily because they were politically troublesome, rather than because of their faith as such. But then these were societies in which all political opposition was suppressed. A broad overview of the “Communist” states’ treatment of the religious can be found in the last chapter of Paul Siegel’s The Meek and the Militant
[24] and an especially useful case study of the Russian Revolution’s dealings with its Muslim minority is provided by Dave Crouch in an earlier issue of this journal. [25] Crouch shows how in the early years of the revolution the Bolsheviks adhered strictly to the Leninist principles outlined above and thus met with considerable success in winning Muslims over, whereas the rise of Stalin led to the adoption of increasingly top-down authoritarian policies, including an assault on the veil, which proved disastrous.
In determining their attitude to popular movements with a religious coloration, which are many and varied, Marxists take as their point of departure not the religious beliefs of the movement’s leaders or of its supporters, or the doctrines and theology of the religion concerned, but the political role of the movement, based on the social forces and interests which it represents.
To put this in perspective consider the respective historical roles of Catholicism and Protestantism. In the Middle Ages and the Early Modern period Catholicism was essentially the religion of the feudal aristocracy and therefore almost universally reactionary. By contrast radical Protestantism tended to represent either the rising bourgeoisie or the plebeian elements below and to the left of it. The great rebels and revolutionaries of those times, the Thomas Muenzers, John Lilburnes and Gerard Winstanleys, were passionate Protestants – extremists and fundamentalists in the language of today. But the moment these bourgeois rebels came to power, in the Netherlands and England, they became participants in what Marx called “the primitive accumulation of capital” and thus vicious colonists and slavers. Oliver Cromwell, the revolutionary and regicide in England, became Cromwell the oppressor in Ireland (where his name still lives in infamy), and specifically the oppressor of the Catholic peasantry. Dutch protestant burghers could be the heroes of Europe in the Dutch Revolt but villains in Africa with apartheid. The strongly reactionary role of the Catholic church continued in Europe, especially southern Europe, and saw it give active support for Franco in Spain and strike deals with Mussolini and Hitler. It still continues in attenuated form in the main conservative parties in Italy, Spain and southern Germany today. But the countries in Europe where Catholicism and religion in general remained strongest were Ireland and Poland where the church was able, very moderately but powerfully, to identify itself with opposition to national oppression.
Any socialist looking back to the 17th century will identify immediately with the Protestant rebels and against the Catholic monarchs and emperors. Any socialist looking at Ireland in 1916 or Belfast in the 1970s will identify with the “Catholic” Nationalists, not the “Protestant” Unionists. Any socialist who saw the rise of Solidarnosc in Poland as a conflict between the “backward” Catholics of Gdansk and the “progressive” atheist Communists of the Soviet state ended up on the side of the imperialist oppressor. The same applies today to the Tibet/China conflict and, above all, to the “war on terror” and the struggles in the Middle East.
Many other cases can be adduced to reinforce this argument. Where would a socialist be who decided their political attitude to Malcolm X on the basis of his reactionary religious beliefs as a member of the Nation of Islam, to Bob Marley on the basis of his belief in the divinity of that old tyrant Haile Selassie or even to Hugo Chavez on the basis of his self-proclaimed Catholicism and admiration of the pope? Unfortunately some would-be socialists who have no difficulty grasping this in relation to Chavez or Marley, under the pressure of intense bourgeois propaganda are unable to apply the same approach when the religion in question is Islam. To put the matter as starkly as possible: from the standpoint of Marxism and international socialism an illiterate, conservative, superstitious Muslim Palestinian peasant who supports Hamas is more progressive than an educated liberal atheist Israeli who supports Zionism (even critically).
It also follows that Marxist socialists do not accept the idea that any of the major religions is inherently, or in terms of its doctrines, more or less progressive than any of the others. For a religion to become “major”, that is to survive over centuries in many locations and different social orders, it is a precondition that its doctrines be capable of almost infinite selection, interpretation and adaptation. Once again, what is decisive is not doctrine but social base in the specific social situation. Thus in the US we find a right wing racist imperialist Christianity in the Moral Majority or the Mormons and a left wing anti-racist anti-war Christian tradition in Martin Luther King. In South Africa there was a pro-apartheid Christianity and an anti-apartheid Christianity; in Latin America there has been a right wing, pro-oligarchy, pro-dictator Catholicism and a leftist “theology of liberation” Catholicism; and, of course, there are a multitude of different, often sharply conflicting, versions of Islam.
The main argument used to justify the notion of Islam as an especially backward religion is, of course, the attitudes to women and homosexuality prevalent in Muslim countries. Those who put this argument need to be reminded that much the same attitudes were prevalent in Western societies until very recently and are still present in the teachings of many Christian churches. But the fundamental flaw in this argument takes us back to the basics of Marxist materialism – the secret of the Muslim Holy Family lies in the earthly Muslim family. It is not Muslim religious consciousness that determines the position of women in Muslim society, but the real position of women that shapes Muslim religious beliefs. Islam was born in the Arabian peninsular, spreading west across North Africa and east across Central Asia. For centuries this great belt has been largely poor, underdeveloped and rural, and to a considerable extent remains so today. Other societies, from Ireland to China, with similar levels of development and similar social structures but different religions, exhibit similar oppression of women and gays.
Finally, there is the question of the relationship of the revolutionary party to religious workers. Any such party operating in a country where religion remains strong among the mass of the population, which is much of the world, must reckon with, indeed count on, the fact that the revolution will be made by workers of whom many will still be religious. The vast mass of workers will be liberated from their religious illusions not by arguments, pamphlets or books, but by participation in the revolutionary struggle, and beyond, in the building of socialism. In such a situation it is incumbent on the party to ensure that religious differences, or differences between the religious and the non-religious, do not obstruct the unity of working class struggle. Moreover, insofar as the party becomes a truly mass party, leading the class in its workplaces and communities, it will inevitably find in its ranks a layer of workers who remain religious or semi-religious. To reject such workers because of their religious illusions would be sectarian and non-materialist. It would be to share the religious/idealist mistake of regarding religion as the most important element in consciousness and consciousness as more important than practice. At the same time, the party must not become a religious party, or party whose policy, strategy or tactics are shaped by religious considerations. Revolutionary victory requires that the party should be guided by the theory that expresses the collective interests and struggle of the working class, namely Marxism. Therefore the party must ensure that on this matter it educates and influences its religious members rather than vice versa.
One revolutionary party working in such a situation was the Bolshevik Party, and its leading theorist, Lenin, wrote on these matters with insight and clarity in his 1909 article The Attitude of the Workers’ Party to Religion. Here are a few extracts:
Marxism is materialism. As such, it is as relentlessly hostile to religion as was the materialism of the 18th century Encyclopaedists or the materialism of Feuerbach ... But the dialectical materialism of Marx and Engels goes further ... for it applies the materialist philosophy to the domain of history ... .. It says: We must know how to combat religion, and in order to do so we must explain the source of faith and religion among the masses in a materialist way. The combating of religion cannot be confined to abstract ideological preaching, and it must not be reduced to such preaching. It must be linked up with the concrete practice of the class movement, which aims at eliminating the social roots of religion.
Why does religion retain its hold? ... Because of the ignorance of the people, replies the bourgeois progressivist, the radical or the bourgeois materialist. And so: “Down with religion and long live atheism; the dissemination of atheist views is our chief task!” The Marxist says that this is not true, that it is a superficial view ... It does not explain the roots of religion profoundly enough; it explains them, not in a materialist but in an idealist way ... The deepest root of religion today is the socially downtrodden condition of the working masses and their apparently complete helplessness in face of the blind forces of capitalism
Does this mean that educational books against religion are harmful or unnecessary? No, nothing of the kind. It means that Social Democracy’s atheist propaganda must be subordinated to its basic task – the development of the class struggle of the exploited masses against the exploiters.
The proletariat in a particular region ... is divided, let us assume, into an advanced section of fairly class conscious Social Democrats [the name used by socialist groups in Russia], who are of course atheists, and rather backward workers ... who believe in god, go to church, or are even under the direct influence of the local priest ... Let us assume furthermore that the economic struggle in this locality has resulted in a strike. It is the duty of a Marxist to place the success of the strike movement above everything else, vigorously to counteract the division of the workers in this struggle into atheists and Christians, vigorously to oppose any such division. Atheist propaganda in such circumstances may be both unnecessary and harmful – not from the philistine fear of scaring away the backward sections, of losing a seat in the elections, and so on, but out of consideration for the real progress of the class struggle, which in the conditions of modern capitalist society will convert Christian workers to Social Democracy and to atheism a hundred times better than bald atheist propaganda.
We must not only admit workers who preserve their belief in God into the Social Democratic party, but must deliberately set out to recruit them; we are absolutely opposed to giving the slightest offence to their religious convictions, but we recruit them in order to educate them in the spirit of our programme, and not in order to permit an active struggle against it. [26]
What these extracts confirm is what this whole article has argued, namely that handling correctly the issue of religion, so vital in the present political situation, is not just a matter of ad hoc judgments or tactics, still less of electoral opportunism, but of understanding the most basic ideas of Marxist dialectical materialism.
* * *
Notes
1. Boulangé, 2004.
2. Engels, 1989, pp. 366–367.
3. Engels, 1989, p. 382.
4. Marx and Engels, 1991, p. 42.
5. Marx and Engels, 1991, p. 47.
6. Marx and Engels, 1848.
7. Marx, 1977.
8. Engels, 1883.
9. Trotsky, 1964, p. 361 (my emphasis).
10. Marx, 1970.
11. “The abolition of religion as the illusory happiness of the people is the demand for their real happiness”; “The criticism of religion is ... the criticism of that vale of tears of which religion is the halo”; “Criticism has plucked the imaginary flowers on the chain not in order that man shall continue to bear that chain without fantasy or consolation, but so that he shall throw off the chain and pluck the living flower”; “The criticism of heaven turns into the criticism of earth”; etc.
12. Marx’s emphasis.
13. This rather obscure text has been particularly controversial because it has been cited as evidence of Marx’s anti-Semitism. John Rose discusses this in detail in his article in this issue of International Socialism. See also Draper, 1977; Bhattacharyya, 2006.
14. All available in Marx and Engels, 1957.
15. Marx, 1845.
16. Dawkins, 1998.
17. Dawkins himself seems to hold this view or something like it – see Dawkins, 2007, pp. 346–347.
18. Richard Dawkins, Religion’s Misguided Missiles, Guardian, 15 September 2001.
19. It is not easy to grasp how far Hitchens has gone. Again I quote from him on YouTube, debating with Reverend Al Sharpton: “You see, I don’t love our enemies, and I don’t love people who do love them. I hate our enemies and think they should be killed ... And I’m absolutely sure there should be no other country that has a budget that threatens ours, and I’m not sentimental about it.” And by “our enemies” and “our budget” he means the enemies and budget of US imperialism.
20. Eagleton, 2006.
21. Eagleton, 2006.
22. Marx and Engels, 1957.
23. Lenin, 1965.
24. Siegel, 1986.
25. Crouch, 2006.
26. Lenin, 1973.


References
Bhattacharyya, Anindya, 2006, Marx and Religion, Socialist Worker, 4 March 2006.
Boulangé, Antoine, 2004, The Hijab, Racism and the State, International Socialism 2 : 102 (Spring 2004).
Crouch, Dave, 2006, The Bolsheviks and Islam, International Socialism 2 : 110 (Spring 2006).
Dawkins, Richard, 1998, The Improbability of God, Free Inquiry, volume 18, number 4 (autumn 1998).
Dawkins, Richard, 2007, The God Delusion (Black Swan).
Draper, Hal, 1977, Marx and the Economic-Jew Stereotype, in Karl Marx’s Theory of Revolution, Volume One: State and Bureaucracy (Monthly Review).
Eagleton, Terry, 2006, Lunging, Flailing, Mispunching, London Review of Books, 19 October 2006.
Engels, Frederick, 1883, Speech at Marx’s graveside, from Der Sozialdemokrat, 22 March 1883.
Engels, Frederick, 1989 [1886], Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy, in Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works, volume three (Progress), alternative version online: www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1886/ludwig-feuerbach/.
Lenin, Vladimir, 1965 [1905], Socialism and Religion, in Collected Works, volume ten (Progress).
Lenin, Vladimir, 1973 [1909], The Attitude of the Workers’ Party to Religion, in Collected Works, volume 15 (Progress).
Marx, Karl, 1845, Theses on Feuerbach, translation online: www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1845/theses/.
Marx, Karl, 1970 [1844], Introduction to a Contribution to the Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right (Cambridge University).
Marx, Karl, 1977 [1859], Preface to a Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (Progress).
Marx, Karl, and Frederick Engels, 1957, On Religion (Progress).
Marx, Karl, and Frederick Engels, 1848, Manifesto of the Communist Party, alternative translation online: http://ebooks.adelaide.edu.au/m/marx/karl/m39c/.
Marx, Karl, and Frederick Engels, 1991 [1845], The German Ideology (Lawrence & Wishart).
Siegel, Paul, 1986, The Meek and the Militant – Religion and Power Across the World (Zed), sections available online: www.marxists.de/religion/siegel-en/.
Trotsky, Leon, 1964, The Age of Permanent Revolution (New York).
 







LEON TROTSKY was a revolutionary socialist throughout his politically active life – leader of the Red Army in Russia in 1917, Marxist theoretician, historian and leader of the Left Opposition in Russia against Stalin’s tyranny. On the left he has been held up by some as the custodian of revolutionary socialism after the death of Lenin. By others he was vilified as a counter-revolutionary.
At Marxism 85 this summer John Molyneux of the SWP and Monty Johnstone of the Communist Party discussed the relevance of Trotsky today. Here we reprint their introductions to the debate.




* * *

John Molyneux
TROTSKY’S life of over 40 years of struggle covered the most momentous years of the twentieth century, if not the most momentous years of the whole of history. His achievements mean that I can only cover the bare essentials.
The first essential is the question of Stalinism. On all the central facts of the nature of the Stalinist regime – the role of the KGB, the suppression of workers’ rights, the Moscow trial frame-ups – Trotsky has been vindicated by all the historical evidence. This will not be argued against by Monty Johnstone. (I might say that he and his Eurocommunist friends are about 50 years too late in recognising it!)
Trotsky’s central political conclusion from his critique of Stalinism was that to remove Stalinism, and for the USSR to progress towards socialism, would require a workers’ revolution. This has also been vindicated by history and experience.
The reform movement within the USSR has failed to bring more than the most mild liberalisation. And the experience of Eastern Europe, from Hungary to Czechoslovakia and most recently to Poland, makes it clear that the Stalinist state will use the most extreme repression against any movement which challenges its power.
Therefore we’re talking about progress towards workers’ democracy and from there to full socialism only through revolution, as did Trotsky.
Monty Johnstone has argued that all we can realistically hope for is a young person, preferably Gorbachev, and a programme of reform from above. We in the Trotskyist tradition argue that what we hope for and will see is a mass movement of workers to liberate themselves in the USSR as we saw in Poland – and that this time it will be successful.
But the main point is that Stalinism not only destroyed workers’ power in USSR but also discredited and distorted socialism on a world scale by the image it offered to workers of socialism. The fact, therefore, that Stalinism was resisted on a principled Marxist basis by Trotsky, one of the revolution’s pre-eminent leaders, is of tremendous historical significance.
Of course, Trotsky’s critique of Stalinism and his struggle against it is only one aspect of Trotsky’s revolutionary value.
In my opinion, his greatest contribution – greater even than his organisational leadership of the October revolution and his leadership of the Red Army – was the fact that he maintained an all-round defence and development of genuine revolutionary Marxism in the 1930s.
This period, to quote Isaac Deutscher, was ‘hell black night’. Victor Serge described it as ‘Midnight in the Century’. It was a period in which the pressures to capitulate to Stalinism on the one hand, to social democracy on the other, were enormous. And Trotsky was basically alone in defending the basics of Marxism and Leninism in that period.
 
WHAT WERE the fundamental principles of Marxism that Trotsky defended? First, the core, the key role of the working class as the agents of socialist change. For Trotsky that was the starting point.
It was the principle he adopted when at the age of 18 he separated himself off from the Narodniks and became a Marxist in 1897.
It was the heart of his theory of permanent revolution that he developed in 1905–6 – the notion that the working class could take power not only in the advanced countries but also in backward Russia and later also in what we call today the third world.
It was at the heart of his theory of the struggle against fascism – how to beat fascism by uniting the working class. It was at the heart of Trotsky’s transitional programme of 1938 which, despite its mistakes, showed that only the working class can solve the crisis of capitalism, only the working class can solve the crisis of humanity.
Is this idea relevant today? Some argue that it is an outdated view. If you look around the world today you see a working class growing, living and struggling. You see it in the far east in South Korea, in the far west in South America, in the far north in the general strike in Denmark, in the far south in South Africa. The working class is not on the way out – it remains the agent of socialist change.
Meanwhile, all attempts to create socialism with forces other than the working class have failed miserably.
That is why we disagree with Trotsky on his analysis of the Soviet Union. Trotsky’s view of it as a degenerated workers’ state was based on the criteria of the nationalisation of the means of production and a planned economy. What subsequent historical events have shown is that if you stick with those criteria alone you are led progressively away from the view that only the working class can make a socialist revolution.
You are led to believe that other social forces can substitute for the working class.
We in the SWP argue that it was necessary to break from the letter of Trotsky on that question in order to remain faithful to the real spirit of Trotsky’s political writing and activity – the centrality of the working class.
The second fundamental principle of Marxism that Trotsky defended was internationalism. This is true through his theory of permanent revolution which took as its starting point the development of Russia as part of the combined and uneven development of the world economy; through his revolutionary opposition to the First World War; through his participation in the early years of the Communist International when he drafted its manifestos; through his opposition to the theory of socialism in one country from 1924 onwards; and through his struggle for the Fourth International. Trotsky, more than any other Marxist since Lenin, embodies this principle of internationalism.
But Trotsky’s internationalism was never simply a moral standpoint. It always had a materialist foundation. It was based like Marxism on the fact of a capitalist world economy.
Is that internationalism relevant today? It is more relevant than ever.
Capital is more international. The interconnections of the different economies are closer, more developed than they ever were before.
Any notion of socialism in one country, The British Road to Socialism, or any other national road to socialism, is more of a pipe dream, more of a reactionary Utopia than ever in the past.
Conversely, the internationalisation of capitalism means the possibilities of spreading the revolution from one country to another are similarly enhanced. Therefore Trotsky’s internationalism is vindicated.
The third fundamental principle – revolution rather than reform. The necessity to smash the existing capitalist state rather than to take it over and use it. This principle was established by Marx after the civil war in France as a result of the experience of the Paris Commune. It was rediscovered and reinforced by Lenin in his great work, State and Revolution. It was the principle upon which the British CP, like every other CP in the Communist International was founded. Trotsky always defended that principle.
Is this idea relevant today? Look at the experience of the miners’ strike. Look at the force which the state was prepared to use to beat the miners. And that was on the question of whether some pits would close. What would they be prepared to use if the issue was not the closure of pits, but the closure of capitalism? Would they sit back and allow a parliamentary road to socialism, a peaceful road? The question answers itself, and therefore Trotsky is vindicated on that question too.
On the question of reformism, Trotsky is the author of one of the most brilliant and devastating attacks on the tradition of British reformism and British labourism that has been written in the twentieth century.
If people had read his writing on Britain in the 1920s, on the likes of Ramsay MacDonald or George Lansbury, I think we would have had much less surprise with the behaviour of Neil Kinnock or Ken Livingstone.
The fourth principle – the revolutionary party, Lenin’s great contribution to Marxism. Trotsky was wrong on this question prior to the revolution, but in 1917 he learnt his lessons well and from that period on, he never deviated from the essential role of the revolutionary party. Without a revolutionary party there can be no victory for the socialist revolution.
Above all, following Lenin, Trotsky defended the independence of the revolutionary party from all reformist, middle class, bourgeois parties and social forces. He defended it in relation to Britain at the time of the general strike when the British Communist Party was led into a position of dependence on the trade union leaders as a result of the Anglo/Soviet Trade Union Committee.
He defended the independence of the revolutionary party in relation to China in 1925–7. He defended it again on the question of the independence of the whole working class movement from bourgeois forces in the period of the Popular Front in the 1930s.
 
THE ASPECT of Trotsky’s thought which has the most immediate relevance to British politics now is his critique of the whole idea of cross-class alliances against the right wing. In relation to the Popular Front in Spain and France in the 1930s, Trotsky argued that an alliance of all democratic forces, all progressive bourgeois forces with the working class against fascism would – fare from strengthening the working class and weakening the fascists – simply succeed in holding back the working class and enabling the fascists and the right wing to win. He wrote:
‘The theoreticians of the popular front do not essentially go beyond the first rule of arithmetic, that is, addition. “Communists” and socialists and anarchists and liberals add up to a total which is greater than their respective isolated numbers. Such is all their wisdom. However, arithmetic alone does not suffice here. One needs as well at least mechanics. The law of the parallelogram of forces applies to politics as well. In such a parallelogram we know that the resultant is shorter, the more the component forces diverge from each other. When political allies tend to pull in opposite directions, the resultant may prove equal to zero.’
He goes on to say:
‘The political alliance between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie, whose interests on basic questions in the present epoch diverge at an angle of 180 degrees, as a general rule is capable only of paralysing the revolutionary force of the proletariat.’
In other words, the price of establishing an alliance of the working class on the one hand, and sections of the middle class and political parties linked with the bourgeoisie on the other hand is always a dampening down, a holding back, a restraining of the fighting strength of the working class.
An alliance which is meant in theory to isolate the ruling class ends up delivering the working class to that ruling class on a plate. That was Trotsky’s analysis of Spain in 1936, and it proved right then. It is still relevant today.
In fact, Trotsky’s words fit the thinking of large sections of the left of the Labour Party and the CP like a glove. It certainly fits Neil Kinnock. Kinnock’s thinking does not go beyond arithmetic – the arithmetic of counting votes and seats in parliament. It fits the CP whose arithmetic does not go beyond the counting up of movements.
The political price of such an alliance is also the same – the price of an alliance with Kinnock is stabbing the miners in the back and abandoning the struggle against rate-capping. The price of the Broad Democratic Alliance is reduced to the claim that the miners picketed too much and too vigorously. Always the price is that the working class must hold back and moderate its struggle. If Eric Hobsbawm has his way the price may well be Dr David Owen – which is too high a price for any of us to pay.
To conclude. Trotsky, in the 40 years of his life as a revolutionary, made many mistakes. We, in the SWP, have not been reluctant to point out, to disclose and expose those mistakes. But those mistakes pale without any doubt into insignificance when one compares them with his extraordinary achievements – the achievement of maintaining and developing revolutionary Marxism.
Trotsky is not only relevant for revolutionaries today, he is in fact indispensable.
 
* * *

Monty Johnstone
THERE IS no doubt that Trotsky was one of the major socialist figures of the 20th century. His life and works should be studied critically from the standpoint of Marxism. This was the framework within which Trotsky worked and fought from his first years in the Marxist socialist workers’ movement, in 1897 until he was murdered by an agent of Stalin in Mexico in 1940.
When assessing Trotsky it is necessary to get away both from the demonology of Stalinism and the Moscow trial frame-ups, which persists in certain small circles around the world, as well as from the uncritical cultism of the bulk of his followers.
It should be said that the SWP did take the first steps of getting away from uncritical Trotsky cultism when they disputed Trotsky’s characterisation of the Soviet Union. It is only unfortunate that they were wrong on that point!
I want to start by going to the crux of the disagreements between us – the conception of revolution to which most of his supporters and semi-supporters attach the greatest significance.
The trouble is that while he was a very great revolutionary leader, he saw the strategy for Western revolutions through the prism of the October revolution, believing that Western Europe would, of necessity, take the same road as Russia did in the soviet insurrection.
Even when in the 1930s the new phenomenon of fascism threatened to atomise the working class movement (as he recognised in his correct criticisms of the Comintern’s line in the Third Period), his conception of the alliances needed to defeat fascism was frozen in the experience of 1917 and in the line of the first four congresses of the International to which he urged a return.
He stressed, quite rightly, the need for a workers’ united front, but he failed to understand that the emergence of fascism, with its threat to the very basis of democratic liberties that had been won over a century by the working class, necessitated broadening that unity in order to prevent a victory of fascism – broadening it into a people’s front around the unity of the working class as the core of such a unity.
And he misrepresented the efforts of the working class movement, which succeeded in the case of France and Spain for a certain period, in developing a working unity with anti-fascist sections of the petit bourgeoisie, of the peasantry, and of the bourgeoisie itself. Trotsky designated this as an alliance with the bourgeoisie. In fact, in the Transitional Programme of the Fourth International he makes the extraordinary statement: ‘ “People’s fronts” on the one hand – fascism on the other: these are the last political resources of imperialism in the struggle against the proletarian revolution.’
To equate fascism, which seeks to destroy the very basis of the democratic liberties won under capitalism, with the popular front, which sought to defend them, seems to me to be utterly and totally unrealistic and irresponsible. In fact, when you are faced with the danger of fascism, as they were in Spain in the 1930s you want to split the class enemy and, under the leadership of the working class, ally with those sections of the middle strata, and even of the bourgeoisie itself, which are prepared to oppose fascism.
The simple fact is that you would have had a right wing government in France and Spain in 1936 had there not been a popular front which had united the workers’ parties with the left wing Republican parties. The victory of the popular front unleashed an enormous revolutionary enthusiasm which carried forward the whole momentum to the left – something which Trotsky totally failed to recognise.
The weakness in Trotsky was well summed up by Krupskaya in 1924 when she wrote:
‘When Comrade Trotsky speaks of Bulgaria or Germany, he concerns himself but little with the correct estimation of the moment. If we regard events through Comrade Trotsky’s spectacles, it appears exceedingly simple to guide events.
‘The capacity for a deeper, more subtle, Marxist analysis in all its national specificities was never Trotsky’s strong point.’
Trotsky’s writings on Spain 12 years later provide a most eloquent confirmation of Krupskaya’s words.
On 30 July 1936 Trotsky produced his simple formula guaranteed to bring results within a day.
He wrote:
‘The Spanish revolution can even take the army away from its reactionary officers. To accomplish this, it is only necessary to seriously and courageously advance the programme of socialist revolution ... The fascist army could not resist the influence of such a programme for 24 hours; the soldiers would tie their officers hand and foot and turn them over to the nearest headquarters of the workers’ militia.’
Just two weeks later he was to write to the representative of the Trotskyist movement in Barcelona: ‘The level of information reaching me from Spain stands at zero’! He could thus not make what Lenin emphasised was the essential thing for every Marxist revolutionary – a concrete analysis of a concrete situation. He was proceeding from assumptions derived from the situation in the October revolution of 1917 and assuming that policies based on what happened then would be appropriate under totally different conditions – fighting fascism in Spain.
And it was from the same position of isolation and ignorance (which was certainly not his fault) that he proclaimed on 9 June 1936 that ‘the French revolution has begun’ and he claimed to know the way it could be won on the basis of the slogan ‘Soviets Everywhere’.
Trotsky’s analysis rested, in the case of his positions taken in the 1930s on a sort of extremism, voluntarism, which admittedly was accentuated by the conditions he was in. But there was a deeper basis for this sort of voluntarism, which goes back to Trotsky’s outlook before the First World War and which Trotsky only temporarily overcame with the more realistic positions taken with Lenin in the early years of the Communist International. Trotsky, at the end of his life, would refer to the ‘fatalistic optimism’ responsible for his opposition to the Bolshevik party before 1917. He assumed that the masses would find their way to revolution without the hard graft of building up a centralised working class party. There was in Trotsky a strong element of economism – an assumption that the development of capitalism would inevitably lead the working class to take these positions.
There was also (Trotsky was not alone in this) a failure to understand the importance of other movements, not class-based movements – feminism, anti-racism, ethnic, community and peace movements of the greatest possible breadth.
 
ON THE question of the party, John Molyneux said that Trotsky moved after 1917 to an absolutely correct Leninist position. I don’t believe this is true at all. Although the form of his fatalistic optimism changed after 1917, it is reflected in a different way in the Transitional Programme of the Fourth International of 1938, in which he assumed that spontaneously ‘the multi-millioned masses again and again enter the road of revolution’.
When such revolutions failed, Trotsky deduced that ‘each time they are blocked by their own conservative bureaucratic machines,’ including the CPs. He concluded: ‘The historical crisis of mankind is reduced to the crisis of revolutionary leadership.’
It seems to me that anyone who analyses the real working class – in Britain today, with all its class struggles, must recognise that there is not a socialist consciousness. Socialist consciousness needs to be developed and worked for by a revolutionary party. We need to understand that conditions in Western European countries with a developed civil society are different from the conditions in Tsarist Russia.
It’s a question of moving towards revolution, but it’s a question of moving towards it in ways which correspond to the realistic opportunities that exist in Western Europe, which are quite different from those which existed in Russia. Neither Trotsky, nor his followers, nor his semi-, or three-quarter followers in the SWP, adequately understand this.
I agree that there is much in Trotsky’s critique of Stalinism which is important and valuable. But at the same time that critique was put within a framework which was incorrect in terms of the understanding of the dynamic of development. The idea that it is impossible to go forward in countries like Russia except by some kind of political revolution fails to understand the dynamic of development in countries which produced, for example in Czechoslovakia in 1968, the Prague Spring. This was not a political revolution in the Trotskyist sense. It was an example of the working people, led by the CP, insisting that the revolution which they’d made after the war matched its practice to its theory giving a great extension of democracy combined with the existing socialist ownership of the means of production. It seems to me that is the kind of perspective which was not recognised by Trotsky and the whole process of de-Stalinisation could not take the form that Trotsky envisaged.
However, I do believe that his criticisms of Stalin gave important elements that we can learn from. These include his emphasis on criticising the nationalistic elements which manifested themselves in Stalinism – his deep commitment to internationalism. Unfortunately these took forms which failed to analyse the specificity of the national within the international framework.
This is shown by John when he dismisses The British Road to Socialism – as though there were some kind of contradiction between attempting to outline a strategy of advance within a given country in keeping with the specific historical conditions of that country, and the internationalist perspective of socialism which is a crucial part of our whole socialist heritage.
 
FINALLY, on the positive side I do believe that the evolution of Trotsky’s views in the 1930s on socialist pluralism are of importance and of relevance to Marxism today. The October revolution and its Bolshevik leaders did not have any intention of establishing a one-party system in Russia.
However, in the period from 1921 when you had the banning, under particular historical conditions, of other political parties, Trotsky was the person who defended this with the most brutal frankness.
Nonetheless subsequent events and experiences in the USSR in the 1930s led him to adopt, to his credit, a new analysis. In his pamphlet, Stalinism and Bolshevism, of 1937, he wrote:
‘As far as the prohibition of the other soviet parties is concerned, it did not flow from any “theory” of Bolshevism but was a measure of the dictatorship in a backward and devastated country.’
In The Revolution Betrayed he strongly criticised Stalin’s conception of a one-party system as a necessary feature of socialism and he replied (20 years before this approach was taken by the CP when it amended its programme after the 20th Congress):
‘In reality classes are heterogenous; they are torn by inner antagonisms and arrive at the solution of common problems not otherwise than through an inner struggle of tendencies, groups and parties.’
In this and other articles he showed himself in this respect to be a sort of early ‘Eurocommunist’.
Trotsky’s heritage is a rich and varied one which combines both strengths and weaknesses. My impression is that the politics we have all suffered over recent years have tended to make more people prepared to approach matters in the spirit of trying to get a balanced view. And seeing that it is not a question of taking all of Trotsky or of rejecting all of Trotsky, but approaching matters from the point of view of a more Marxist approach and seeing what is positive and also, from the point of view of Marxism, what is negative.
 



ONE OF the problems of revolutionary socialists is that like any other minority group in society we tend to evolve a language of our own, using words, phrases and concepts that either are not used or arc used differently in everyday speech.
In general we should be on our guard against this. We are in the business of relating to the working class and talking in jargon frequently blocks communication and alienates people who are not initiated into our circle.
Nevertheless there are certain jargon terms that we do actually need. This is because they designate phenomena and help us to understand and analyse problems which are of no concern to the ‘general public’ or to the bourgeoisie because they do not share our purpose of overthrowing capitalism.
 
One step ahead
The Marxist concept of surplus value is one example in point, ultra-leftism another. In these cases we have no alternative but to make sure that we explain their precise meaning.
With ultra-leftism we can begin by noting that while the term is hardly common parlance it is quite widely used on the left and in the labour movement, often loosely and inaccurately.
To the right wing Labourite, it is a term of abuse that covers practically everyone with a strong commitment to socialism. To both Stalinists and Eurocommunists it refers to all those who contemplate revolution rather than the parliamentary road. To Militant supporters it is often applied to all socialists who are not in the Labour Party. Yet the concept of ultra-leftism was mainly developed and analysed by a revolutionary Marxist, Lenin, who would certainly be regarded as ultra-left by all the groups just mentioned.
So what is the Marxist meaning of ultra-leftism? It is, perhaps, best explained in relation to the fundamental strategic task facing revolutionary socialists, that of transforming the elemental working class struggle within capitalism into a political struggle for the overthrow of capitalism ie a struggle for state power.
The accomplishment of this task involves revolutionaries in a continuous effort to combine firm adherence to Marxist principles – i.e. the historic interests of the class as a whole – with the closest possible contact with, and involvement in, the mass workers’ movement.
Marxist leadership means being ahead of the mass of workers, not capitulating to their illusions and prejudices, but only one step ahead not so far ahead as to be completely out of sight. Lenin graphically expressed what this involves.
‘It is not enough to be a revolutionary and an advocate of socialism in general. It is necessary to know at every moment how to find the particular link in the chain which must be grasped with all one’s strength in order to keep the whole chain in place and prepare to move on resolutely to the next link.’
Ultra-leftism, then can be defined as the failure or refusal, in the name of abstract ‘left’ principles, to establish and maintain the necessary links with, and involvement in, the mass movement. It means, to use Lenin’s terms, not finding the next link in the chain and so losing hold of the chain as a whole.
It means would-be revolutionaries substituting their own subjective wishes for an assessment of the objective balance of class forces and thereby needlessly widening the gap between the conscious revolutionaries and the rest of the working class.
Within this general rubric ultra-leftism comes in many shapes and sizes. There is the extreme case of anarchism which seeks to leap straight to a classless, stateless society without any transitional period.
There is the ultra-leftism of terrorism which tries to substitute the violent actions of individuals for the mass revolutionary violence of the working class.
There is the old blackboard socialism of the Socialist Party of Great Britain which argues that since we oppose the wages system we should also oppose strikes for higher wages.
 
Political judgement
Of greater interest and most concern to us today is what might be called ‘Marxist’ or ‘Communist’ ultra-leftism which rather than being a completely separate political tendency like anarchism is rather a leftist deviation which often arises within the mainstream of the Marxist movement.
Again it can take a variety of forms and there is no shortage of historical examples, from Willich and Schapper, Marx’s associates in the Communist League – who, after the defeat of the 1848 Revolution, wanted to raise an exile army and march on Germany – through to the insurgent workers and soldiers of Petrograd who wanted to seize power in July 1917 before the revolutionary situation had matured in the country as a whole.
However there is no doubt that the most historically significant development of ultra-leftism came in the early years of the Communist International between 1917 and 1921.
There was at this time a veritable ultra-left international’ within or on the margins of the Comintern. Its leading figures included Bordiga in Italy, Gorter and Pannekoek in Holland, and Sylvia Pankhurst in Britain. What this trend represented was an alliance, or coincidence, between the extremely dogmatic and abstract views of certain intellectuals and the instinctive attitudes of a layer of young, inexperienced and newly radicalised revolutionary workers who had not yet learned to think strategically and tactically.
The characteristic positions of this tendency were refusal to participate in reactionary led trade unions with the aim of forming ‘pure’ revolutionary trade unions, and refusal to participate in any way in parliamentary elections or to support the mass reformist parties against the open parties of capital – all this in the name of a policy of ‘no manoeuvres, no compromises.’
Against these arguments Lenin wrote one of his most important pamphlets Left Wing Communism – An Infantile Disorder which subjected the ideas of the ultra-lefts to devastating criticism.
It was necessary he insisted to remain in the trade unions and ‘carry on communist work within them at all costs’ and that ‘whilst you lack the strength to do away with bourgeois parliaments and every other type of reactionary institution you must work within them’. To do otherwise was simply to abandon the backward workers to the mercies of the treacherous reformist leaders.
‘The task devolving on Communists is to convince the backward elements, to work among them, and not to fence themselves off from them with artificial and childishly ‘Left’ slogans.’
Lenin’s arguments carried the day and the positions of the Left Communists were rejected by the Comintern. As a serious tendency the lefts did not last long – they could not survive the ebbing of the direct revolutionary wave that had given them their basis. Despite this a strand of ultra-leftism remained present within the Comintern, even in its leadership, and was particularly strong in Germany.
 
The offensive
This expressed itself in the disastrous March Action in Germany in 1921 when the leaders of the German Communist Party attempted to provoke artificially a revolutionary situation when this flatly contradicted the mood of the mass of the working class. The result was fighting between Communist and non-Communist workers, a catastrophic fall in the membership of the KPD and an easy victory for the ruling class.
To justify their actions these ultra-lefts developed a ‘theory of the offensive’ which maintained that it was the duty of revolutionaries always to be on the offensive, always to march forward and that the proletarian vanguard had to ‘galvanise’ and ‘stimulate’ the rest of the class by demonstrative actions.
Lenin, together with Trotsky, had to take up the cudgels again to explain that a revolutionary party had to be able to retreat in good order as well as attack. The direct struggle for power could be attempted only when Communists had gained the support of the majority of the working class – support which had to be painstakingly won in the course of many defensive as well as offensive struggles for partial and particular demands which affected the basic living conditions of the working class.
These arguments formed a prelude to the adoption, in 1922, of the tactic of the united front with the reformist parties which was designed to simultaneously unify the working class for its defensive battles against the ruling class offensive and to expose the reformists as incapable of waging a consistent struggle for even the most elementary demands.
One further form of ultra-leftism is what can be called bureaucratic ultra-leftism. This is where a bureaucratic leadership, having ceased to be accountable and responsible to its members, issues radical seeming slogans and orders to give itself a left image while taking no account of the practical realities faced by the rank and file, or the risks run by them.
Bureaucratic ultra-leftism, stemming from the bureaucratic degeneration of the Russian Revolution, began to get a grip on the Comintern through the person of Zinoviev after the defeat of the German Revolution in 1923. It later went on to assume monstrous proportions during the Stalinist ‘Third Period’ when united action against the rising Nazis was rejected on the grounds that the Social Democrats were ‘social fascists’ and when orders went out to split the trade unions and form separate red trade unions.
These were exactly the sort of policies that Lenin had condemned in Left Wing Communism though the basis had changed from naivety to cynicism, and thus it was left to Trotsky, now in exile, to supply the Marxist critique.
If it is the period of the Comintern which supplies us with the classic examples of ultra-leftism, what then is the relevance of this experience today?
 
Tiny sects
First of all, it must be said that ultra-leftism is not at all the major problem facing the British left at the moment. The radicalisation of the late sixties produced a number of distinctly ultra-left formations (the IMG, the WRP, the Maoist organisations etc.) which were able to exert a certain influence on left politics but the overwhelming majority of these former ultra-lefts have either abandoned politics or drifted rightwards into the Labour Party.
What remains are a few tiny sects that most readers of our magazine do not even come into contact with. The WRP is still there, still calling for a general strike, but it is a broken reed, and we have seen the emergence of the RCP (though the ultra-left image was severely damaged by its support for a ballot in the miners’ strike).
There is Workers Power who evidently thought the miners support groups could be transformed into Soviets.
Anyone who wants, out of curiosity, to examine a case of extreme simon-pure ultra-leftism could search out the International Communist Current. This infinitesimally small sect regards itself as the descendent of early Comintern ultra-lefts (Bordiga etc.)and is so far to the ‘left’ that it refuses to take sides between the ANC and Botha in South Africa and the SWP and the National Front in Britain.
But the triviality of these examples only reinforces the point that the main danger at the moment is not ultra-leftism but the pressure to move to the right – to capitulate to Kinnockism.
Nevertheless ultra-leftism is not a problem we can afford to disregard completely. The SWP, despite our recent growth, remains a small organisation without a mass base in the working class. Consequently there is the danger that we may fall into ultra-leftism through ignorance of, and lack of experience in, the mass movement.
Moreover, in our current and necessary determination to combat the drift to the right we cannot avoid bending the stick to the left but we must not bend it so far that we cut ourselves completely adrift from the actual struggles that are taking place. This only makes it easier for the reformists and ex-revolutionaries to get away with their sell-outs.
 



Chris Harman’s Women’s Liberation and revolutionary socialism (International Socialism 2:23) is in many respects an excellent summary of the Marxist case on the woman question. It provides an effective demolition of idealist theories of women’s oppression, of radical feminist separatism, of the ‘two modes of production’ and the consequent notion of an ‘independent’ revolutionary women’s organisation parallel to the party. It demonstrates clearly the necessity of socialist revolution for women’s revolution and with it the necessity of a united male/female working class struggle to achieve that revolution.
However on one specific question, the question of whether working class men benefit from the oppression of women, Harman is seriously mistaken. The mistake is serious because it has important political consequences, consequences for the way in which revolutionaries relate to the struggles of women workers. Nor is it an isolated or chance error for Harman, on this question, repeats the argument first presented by Lindsey German in Theories of Patriarchy (International Socialism 2:12, pp. 39–41), and the same argument is also to be found in Tony Cliff’s Class Struggle and Women’s Liberation. If, in this critique, I concentrate on Harman rather than German and Cliff it is because his article makes the most systematic attempt to defend the ‘men don’t benefit’ position.
‘In fact’, writes Harman, ‘the benefits working class men get from the oppression of women are marginal indeed.’ (p. 26) The first question we must ask in assessing this proposition is ‘marginal in relation to what?’ Clearly the advantages a male engineering worker has over his wife are ‘marginal’ compared with the advantages the Duke of Westminster and his wife have over both of them. Class not sex is the fundamental division in our society. Equally it is true, as Harman argues, that the benefits such a worker derives from the subordinate position of his wife would be far outweighed by the benefits he would derive from a socialist society in which his wife was liberated. Both socialism and women’s liberation (neither of which is possible without the other) are in the overall historical interests of both working class men and working class women.
However neither of these points exhausts the problem. The fact that the male worker’s benefits are marginal compared to those of the ruling class or to the potential benefits of socialism does not mean that they don’t exist. Nor does it mean that these benefits have only a marginal effect on the social being of working class men and women, on the relationships between them, or on their behaviour in the class struggle within capitalism. This is the fundamental point which is missed out and obscured in the Harman analysis, but which revolutionaries cannot afford to ignore in their approach to women workers.
It is a point that can be illustrated by means of an analogy with the situation in Northern Ireland. The benefits Protestant workers derive from the oppression of the Catholic minority are certainly marginal compared with those of the Orange and British ruling classes or with the advantages of socialism. Nonetheless those marginal privileges have played a major part in securing the loyalty of most Protestant workers to British imperialism for most of the last sixty years. [1] The analogy is not exact of course (I am not saying that working class men generally side with capital against working class women), but it does show that ‘small’ privileges within the working class can have a very significant influence on class unity. Trotsky in his writings on Women and the Family makes a similar analogy between the questions of national liberation and women’s liberation.
Vladimir Ilyich taught us to value the working class parties according to their attitude ... toward the oppressed nations ... Why? Because if you take, say, the English worker, it is much easier to arouse in him the feeling of solidarity with his whole class – he will take part in strikes and will even arrive at revolution – but to make him raise himself to solidarity with a yellow-skinned Chinese coolie, to treat him as a brother in exploitation, will prove much more difficult since here it is necessary to break through a shell of national arrogance which has been built up over centuries. And just so, comrades, has the shell of family prejudices in the attitudes of the head of the family toward women and child – and woman is the coolie of the family – this shell has been laid down over millenia, and not centuries. [2]
Let us pursue this question of benefits further. ‘The benefits’, writes Harman, ‘really come down to the question of housework.’ (p. 26) [3] But is this something marginal? Is it not, together with child rearing, ‘the material root of working class women’s oppression under capitalism today ... which restricts the working class woman’s contact with the world outside the home and makes her dependent on working class men’(pp. 7–8)?
In order to minimise the benefits the male worker receives from his wife’s housework Harman resorts to the device of making a distinction between work done directly for the husband and work done for the children. The former we are told ‘could not be more than an hour or two a day ... not a huge gain for the male worker’ (p. 27); only the burden of childrearing is ‘unbearable’, and this doesn’t count because ‘labour devoted to bringing up children cannot be treated as something given by the wife to the husband. It is rather, something which the wife provides to the system satisfying its need to renew the labour force’.
There are many objections to this argument. Why could this direct servicing to the husband not be more than ‘an hour or two a day’? I’m sure that in many working class families it is considerably more. Is it really not a major gain for the husband that he does not have to shop, cook, wash up, tidy up, vacuum, wash clothes etc. after his 8–10 hours in the factory? Many a bitter workers’ struggle has been fought over much less than an hour or two on the working day. Harman tells us that this is ‘a burden for a woman who has to do this work for two people after a day’s paid labour’, so why is it not an important gain for the worker not to have to do it?
More importantly the distinction between the two forms of women’s labour, labour for the husband and labour for children, is false in practice and in theory.
It is false in practice because actually wives cook, clean, wash etc. for their husbands and children simultaneously. It is false in theory because both kinds of labour are services to the system and to men. When a wife cooks for her husband she is doing something for her husband and reproducing or ‘refreshing’ his labour power for the system. When she takes virtually the whole responsibility for child rearing she is both producing the next generation of labour power for the system and doing something for her husband by relieving him of the necessity of doing his share of this work.
To appreciate the benefit the male worker receives from this unequal division of labour in the home, as it is experienced by workers and as it influences their behaviour in the class struggle, one must ask what he would lose if that division of labour were equalised under capitalism as it is today: i.e. with no 24-hour nurseries or neighbourhood restaurants. The answer is that he would lose a considerable amount of time, freedom and energy to participate in social activities outside the home.
For the average worker this is largely a matter of a restriction in going to the pub, football and other sports and hobbies – all of which (whatever we may think of them) are experienced as a major counterweight to the forty or more hours of alienated wage slavery. For the class conscious worker (and this must be of particular concern to us) it means a substantial restriction on his trade union and political activities.
From here we must go on to ask how the unequal division of labour in the home is maintained day after day, year after year. There is no law which compels women to do the vast bulk of housework and child rearing. To a considerable extent of course it is maintained directly by the system through its socialisation of women into the housewife role, and, even more importantly, through its payment of higher wages to male workers which makes them usually the family’s main breadwinner. But it is also maintained by the system through male workers who refuse to do an equal share of housework or, worse, insist that their wives do all of it. [4]
This brings us to a point which, from a Marxist point of view, is even more fundamental than the quantitative argument about how much male workers benefit from women’s oppression, namely that within the working class family the male worker is the oppressor and the woman the oppressed. [5]
Harman’s article partially recognises this and partially covers it up. It argues (p. 25) that the real cause of women’s oppression is not individual men but the needs of capital accumulation, but that these needs require as an enforcing agency, people who will oppress others, and that many men are involved in the oppression of women. However Harman then counterposes to the Anna Paczuska & Lynn James list of male oppressors (wife beaters, rapists, pimps, pornographers) the fact that not all men are involved in these activities and a list of other elements of women’s oppression, ‘the denial of the right of abortion, unequal pay etc.’, which are enforced not by individual men but by the state and the employer. The point is that neither list includes the fundamental element of women’s oppression, the housewife/mother role which almost all working class men are to some extent involved in enforcing on almost all working class women.
The situation, therefore, is that although the basic and decisive division in society is between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat there is nonetheless a certain division, between men and women, within the working class. This division is powerfully reinforced by the dominant sexist ideology but it is not merely a matter of ideology. One reason why sexist ideology is so powerful is because it connects with the immediate (though not the long term) interests of male workers. This immediate interest of male workers in male dominance stands in contradiction to their historical interests in the unification of the class and constitutes an obstacle to the achievement of that unification.
The problem with the Harman/Cliff/German position is that in minimising or denying the material roots of the sexual division in the working class it underestimates the obstacle that exists to achieving class unity and therefore underestimates the conscious intervention required by the revolutionary party to overcome that obstacle.
In fact this is an obstacle that can be overcome only in struggle. Struggle against the ruling class in which it can be demonstrated that sexism weakens the unity of the class, and struggle within the class to ensure that ‘unity’ is not realised at the expense of women. In these struggles women workers themselves will have to come forward (and undoubtedly will come forward) as champions of their own interests – not against male workers but to prevent their interests being neglected, ignored and forgotten. It is the task of the revolutionary party to assist, indeed to lead, working class women in this process and this will necessarily require special efforts and special methods of agitation and propaganda. (At present the SWP makes no such special efforts but they are perfectly in accord with the Marxist tradition. [6])
Moreover just as women workers will have to take the initiative to bring to the fore the women’s aspect of the class struggle so women revolutionaries will have to take the initiative within the revolutionary party. Even the most revolutionary men are not exempt from the influence of the short term benefit men derive from the oppression of women. Hence it cannot be assumed, or taken for granted, that the revolutionary party will ‘automatically’ highlight the interests of women workers. On the contrary the history of the Marxist movement shows that Marxists too have an unfortunate tendency to ‘forget’ the woman question. Cliff himself records how Marx spoke of the Paris Commune introducing ‘universal’ suffrage, ‘not noticing that half the adult population – women were excluded’ and that Lenin repeated the mistake. [7] Kollontai also, as she notes in her autobiography, had to overcome the reluctance and resistance of male Bolsheviks when she began to organise women workers. Indeed the Trotskyist movement as a whole (including the Socialist Review group and the International Socialists – our predecessors) ‘forgot’ the question of women’s liberation throughout the period from the Second World War to the end of the 1960s, that is until it was imposed on us by the rise in the women’s movement, first in America and then in Britain. [8]
The Harman analysis submerges all this. In his eagerness to combat any tendency to petty bourgeois feminist separatism he goes too far, reaching the point where any specific orientation to women workers and their particular needs is ruled out. In conditions of downturn where the party is to a considerable extent concentrating on propaganda this is damaging, but not as damaging as it might be.
In conditions of upturn, where thousands of working class women are being drawn into the struggle and therefore challenging all the disadvantages the sexual division of labour in the home imposes on them, it will be disastrous.
In conditions of upturn we will start to hear from no end of working class women how their husbands have become shop stewards, conveners, trades council delegates and party members while they couldn’t even get to a union meeting. Let’s make sure now that we don’t have an analysis that stops us listening.

Notes
1. There is a certain parallel between the current SWP position on women and the position of the Militant tendency on Northern Ireland. Militant denies there are any significant differences in the oppression of Catholic and Protestant workers and consequently do not take up the national question and refuse even critical support for the IRA and Sinn Fein – a position the SWP has always firmly rejected.
2. L. Trotsky, Women and the Family.
3. This follows a decidedly odd statement that ‘Nor can it really be argued they gain from the treatment of women’s bodies as commodities — the only men who can benefit in this way are the men with the wealth to buy and sell commodities’. (p. 26) Surely it cannot have escaped Chris’s attention that all men and women, working class or otherwise, have the wealth to buy and sell commodities. That is how we all live in a capitalist society. Nor can he mean that only ruling class men have the wealth to buy pornography, go to strip clubs, or hire the services of prostitutes since this is obviously not true. This is a minor point as far as the main argument is concerned but it is symptomatic that Harman, normally such a rigorous and exact thinker, should here employ such loose reasoning.
4. The mechanisms of this enforcement range from overt refusal and insistence, backed by economic power and even physical force, (which is certainly the case in many working class families), though a pathetic ‘inability’ to acquire the skills involved, a persistent reluctance and dragging of the feet (which forces the wife into the role of ‘nag’), to the ultimate argument that the man’s external activities are more important than the demands of the home.
5. This is the meaning of the well-known quotation from Engels, Eleanor Marx and others that ‘within the family the man is the bourgeois, the woman the proletarian’.
6. See for example Clara Zetkin’s speech to the Fourth Congress of the Communist International on Organising Working Women (International Socialism 96). In this speech Zetkin asserts: ‘One thing has become apparent; we require special organs to carry on the Communist work of organisation and education among women and make it part of the life of the Party ... To accomplish our purpose it is necessary to set up party organs, Womens’ Secretariats, Womens’ Departments, or whatever we may call them to carry on this work.’ Zetkin then goes on to contrast the situation in the Bulgarian and German CPs where there are Womens’ Secretariats and ‘the Communist Women’s movement has become one of the strong points of the general life of the Party’ to that in Poland and Britain where the CPs have ‘refused or postponed the setting up of a special body for systematic agitation among women’.
7. See T. Cliff, Class Struggle and Women’s Liberation, pp. 43 and 245 (fn). Cliff calls Marx’s mistake ‘astonishing’ and writes of ‘one of the strangest paradoxes of the Commune: that working class women played a massive role in a revolution which did not even allow them to vote’. Perhaps the analysis in this article enables us to understand why Marx’s oversight is not so ‘astonishing’ and the paradoxes of the Commune not so strange.
8. The explanation for our collective silence on women’s liberation for a generation or more now current in the SWP is that it is due to Stalinism which erased the genuine Marxist tradition on women. Of course Stalinism did this but this does not explain why Stalinism had so much more success in silencing us on this question than it did on say socialism in one country or workers’ democracy. Unfortunately it has to be admitted that it was only the self-activity of women outside the party followed by that of women inside the party that compelled the Trotskyist movement to confront its own theory and practice.



The attempt to produce a socialist or Marxist response to contemporary visual art or to any particular examples of it, such as to Damien Hirst, to the Sensation exhibition or to the Turner Prize, runs immediately into the problem of the legitimacy, or rather the lack of legitimacy, of modern art. This is the fact that much, if not all, of modern art (painting, sculpture and similar visual production since around 1900) is regarded as a dubious or perhaps downright fraudulent activity by a substantial proportion of at least four groups of people: (1) the general public, i.e. the working class; (2) the tabloid press and related media journalists (newscasters, current affairs pundits, etc.); (3) a section of the ‘educated/cultural’ middle class; (4) the philistine bourgeoisie proper. The result is that the history of modern art is punctuated by numerous ‘art scandals’ in which sections of the press, the media and the public either get upset or pretend to get upset about the latest artistic ‘outrage’, be it Jackson ‘Jack the Dripper’ Pollock or Carl André’s ‘bricks’ (Equivalent VIII) or Marcus Harvey’s Myra. It is also that the media response to every new development in modern art is almost invariably conducted under the repetitive rubric of ‘Is it art?’
Art academics and art world professionals seldom address the ‘Is it art?’ question. On the one hand they have such a strong vested interest in the answer that even raising the question is seen as bad form – a concession to philistinism. On the other hand their tendency to talk only to each other within their ivory towers enables them to cheerfully disregard what most ‘ordinary’ people think of as a matter of little consequence. For Marxists, however, the consciousness of the working class is a matter of vital importance. Precisely because we regard the working class as the agent of its own emancipation, what workers think – about politics above all, but also about religion, philosophy, culture etc. – does count. We fight to raise the consciousness of the class, to expand its horizons, to develop its individual and collective personalities. If many or most workers are influenced by philistine prejudices regarding modern art or art in general this damages their personalities and, albeit indirectly, their struggle. It is therefore our duty to combat those prejudices. [1] On the other hand, Marxists’ opposition to bourgeois ideology as a whole and scepticism about passing intellectual and academic fads-genetic determinism and postmodernism, for example-ensures that we cannot simply take it for granted that what the director of the Tate Gallery tells us is good art must be so. The ‘Is it art?’ question is therefore a real question and not one whose answer can be simply assumed in advance. Moreover a historical materialist approach suggests that the fact of widespread hostility to modern art has itself to be interrogated and explained with the anticipation that such an enquiry will tell us something significant about the position of art in our society.
 
The peculiarity of modern art
The crisis of legitimacy I am talking about has applied at one time or another to all the arts in the 20th century – to the poetry of T.S. Eliot and Ezra Pound, the novels of James Joyce, the plays of Samuel Beckett, the music of Schoenberg and so on. However, it is also clear that the crisis is most severe, i.e. the scepticism is most extreme, widespread and long lasting, in relation to visual art. The television panel discussion of the Booker Prize in 1997 criticised the shortlist and denounced the winner; it did not attack the modern novel as such. The television debate on the Turner Prize, however, even though plainly designed to promote the prize and the Tate Gallery, felt obliged to include two individuals – Janet Daley and Roger Scruton – deeply antagonistic to much of contemporary art. What explains this state of affairs?
The first factor is clearly the nature of the modernist transformation of painting and sculpture as compared with that experienced by other art forms such as music and literature. It was both more rapid and more radical. In 1907 Picasso painted Les Desmoiselles D’Avignon. In retrospect we can see that the painting had many antecedents. [2] Nevertheless it constituted a dramatic break with the 500 year old tradition of oil painting initiated by the early Renaissance at the very dawn of the bourgeois era. This break had several aspects to it: (1) the drastic foreshortening of the picture plane and thus the abandonment of the practice, pioneered by Uccello, Mantegna and others in the 15th century, of creating an illusion of three dimensional perspective and depth within the picture frame; (2) an abandonment of the even older tradition, initiated by Cimabue, Giotto and Masaccio, of three dimensional ‘plastic’ modelling of figures through light and shade, in favour of slabs of flat surface; (3) an abrupt discarding of the techniques so painstakingly acquired by artists such as Van Eyck and Holbein, Titian and Rubens, of precise naturalistic rendering of furs, silks, laces, flesh tones, metals, glass and numerous other surfaces; (4) a sharp assault, especially, but not only, through the use of African masks, on the norms of female beauty embodied in virtually every representation of the female nude from Botticelli’s Venus to Renoir.
So shocking was Les Demoiselles D’Avignon that it offended even Picasso’s avant-garde artist friends and remained face to the wall in his studio, unexhibited until 1937. [3] However, the painting opened the way to, or, in John Berger’s phrase, ‘provoked’, Cubism [4] which passed rapidly through its analytic and synthetic phases. [5] In the footsteps of Cubism came Futurism, Vorticism, Rayonism, Suprematism, Dadaism and abstract art. Within ten years of Les Desmoiselles we have both Duchamp’s Fountain [6] and Malevich’s White Square on White. Add another six or seven years and we have also Constructivism, De Stijl (including the emergence of Mondrian’s trademark style) and Surrealism. Thus in the space of little more than a decade, visual art goes through such a revolution that painters and sculptors are producing work which would simply have been unrecognisable as art in any previous period. The gap between the painting of Constable and Turner on the one hand and that of Mondrian, Pollock or Rothko on the other, or between the sculpture of Rodin and the three dimensional work of Duchamp, Beuys or Robert Smithson is much wider than the gap between the music of Beethoven or Tchaikovsky and the music of Schoenberg or Birtwistle, or the gap between Dickens and Joyce or Keats and Ginsberg. [7] The first factor explaining the extremism of this modernisation is clearly the invention of photography (and even more so of cinema, television and video) which deprived visual art of what, for centuries, had been one of its principal functions – the naturalistic representation of the appearance of persons and things. [8] Prior to the mid-19th century the only way in which the likeness of an individual or his/her clothes and possessions, or a visual image of Jesus or Mary, or the appearance of a palace or garden, or civic ceremony, could be recorded for posterity or made available to people unable to see them with their own eyes was through the art of the painter, sculptor, engraver etc. Suddenly, in historical terms, the camera placed the ability to achieve a more or less exact likeness in the hands of millions of people at minimal cost and with minimal skill. No other art form suffered a comparable mechanical usurpation of its core function and skills and consequently no other art form was compelled to reorient itself so radically.
Another factor involved was a socio-political shift in regard to the representation of the ruling class that took place in the first half of the 19th century. As John Berger showed in his Ways of Seeing, the main subject matter of European oil painting – its daily bread and butter from the 15th century onwards – has been the ruling classes and their possessions (clothes, land, horses, wives, mistresses, children, etc.). Somewhere between the Great French Revolution and the revolutions of 1848 there is a change both within the ruling class itself and within the stratum of the middle class that produces most artists. On the one hand, the rich and powerful become coy. Gradually they lose the desire to be visibly personally glorified – perhaps it makes them feel too exposed as tempting objects of expropriation. It shows in their clothes and it changes their attitude to art. [9] Rockefeller, Getty, Guggenheim and Saatchi want the reflected glory of owning great art collections but they do not seem interested in hagiographic portraits of themselves. Similarly the artists lose interest in painting the ruling classes. The result is that David’s Napoleon is probably the last important painting glorifying a ruler. [10] Goya painted the Spanish royal family, of course, but with devastating satire; Géricault painted inmates of the local mental asylum; Manet painted the prostitute ‘Olympia’, the barmaid at the Folies Bergère, and only the execution of the Emperor Maximilian, and Van Gogh painted peasants and postmen.
Art, deprived of one of its main social functions and of much of its traditional subject matter, transformed itself almost beyond recognition and in so doing lost much of the cultural credit it had accumulated over centuries. However, this is not the only factor involved in modern art’s special crisis of legitimacy. There is also the peculiar way in which the art market works that is distinct from the operation of the literary market or the music market or the cultural market generally. Despite the hopes and expectations of Walter Benjamin, the art market, and with it the art world, is dominated by the individual or institutional ownership of individual ‘unique’ works of art. This has a series of complex effects on the nature of the art world and on the production and consumption of contemporary art. Art works are surprisingly expensive to produce, requiring costly materials, studio and other storage space and exhibition space. This is true of the traditional oil painting, especially if it is large. It is even more true of sculpture and current installation work – Damien Hirst’s Shark [11] is rumoured to have cost £80,000 to construct. [12] They are even more expensive to buy. Anyone who thinks a ticket for Covent Garden is extortionate should try buying a work of art. Not a famous ‘old master’ (which rarely come on the market and fetch millions when they do); not a Matisse or a Picasso (which range from many millions for the major works to about £250,000 for some offhand piece); not a Pollock, a Rothko or a Lichtenstein (also probably over the million mark) but a painting by a contemporary British artist with something of a national reputation, say a Calum Innes or a Gary Hume, both runners up in previous Turner Prize competitions. You are still looking at around £10,000 – i.e. a price completely out of reach of all but the spectacularly rich.
One consequence of this is that both the art market and the art world are dominated by an extraordinarily small number of rich and powerful individuals – a few immensely wealthy collectors and patrons, of whom Charles Saatchi is currently the most important in Britain, and the managers of a few key institutions, such as the Tate Gallery in London or the Museum of Modern Art and the Whitney Museum in New York. The other significant players are those big corporations who decide to invest in art such as the Japanese company that paid over £27 million for a Van Gogh Sunflowers [13] and state institutions and local authorities who have significant commissions in their gift. For Marxists it is a truism that under capitalism the bourgeoisie dominates culture but in visual art the elitism is much more pronounced than in other art forms. In neither literature nor music could one individual buy themselves influence comparable to that wielded by Saatchi today or by Peggy Guggenheim in the 1950s, and Alfred Barr Jr at MOMA in the 1930s and 1940s. In other art forms, with the exception of the special case of architecture [14], the logic of the market links financial reward with some degree of mass popularity such as numbers of books or records sold, numbers of seats sold for performances etc., while both rewards and popularity are distinct from critical acclaim. In painting and sculpture mass popularity is almost irrelevant; both financial and critical success depend on appealing to the tiny elite of art world makers and shakers.
Thus while there is a general working class and petty bourgeois antagonism to so called high culture, it is more intense in the sphere of visual art. This is particularly the case because the artistic value of paintings and sculptures is always posed by the media and the art world in terms of their monetary value. No one asks how much Hamlet or The Waste Land or Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony are ‘worth’; the question is absurd. Yet it is precisely this question that always comes to the fore with works of visual art and it cannot fail to arouse public resentment. In a world where hunger and poverty, homelessness and unemployment are rife, it is both inevitable and right that ‘ordinary’ people object to spending millions or hundreds of thousands on works of art that serve no obvious practical function. When the money spent is public money and the art it is spent on seems incomprehensible (because of the modernisation process discussed earlier) the objections are likely to be fierce. The question of money pollutes the art world and undermines its public legitimacy.
Another factor in modern art’s crisis of legitimacy, which is both a consequence and cause of public alienation from art, is the virtual absence of what might be called popular art culture. When we speak of high culture and popular culture in relation to literature, it is clear that on the one hand there is the literary canon, old and new, from Chaucer to Beckett as it were, and on the other hand, there are popular writers from Agatha Christie to Jeffery Archer. There are also innumerable figures who sit somewhere in the spectrum between high and low – Kipling and Tolkien, Le Carré and Walsh. Also between the highbrow literary novelist and poet and pulp fiction there lie several sub-genres – science fiction, the spy novel, the whodunit etc., each with a passionate popular following and each capable of producing work of some literary merit. In music the vibrancy of the popular is even more pronounced. Between Mahler and the Spice Girls stands everything from Gilbert and Sullivan to jazz and flamenco. [15] In art there is no equivalent. There are illustrators, cartoonists, Sunday painters and painters of animals and Jade ladies for sale in Woolworths but no one, including the people who buy this stuff, takes any great interest in it as art, or holds it in high esteem. High modern art therefore stands in a kind of splendid isolation with no buffer between it and public scepticism.
This analysis, hopefully both historical and material, shows that the legitimacy crisis of modern art is neither an accident nor a conspiracy but a historically conditioned phenomenon produced by the combination of the loss of its long standing practical functions and its economically positioned elitism and isolation. [16] It is an analysis which is a necessary preliminary to answering the ‘Is it art?’ question but is not in itself an answer to it, and it is to this question that we must now turn.
 
But is it art?
How one answers or tries to answer this question/objection depends on what one takes it to mean. It can be interpreted in a number of different ways. First it can be a claim that some/much/all modern art is a deliberate confidence trick. Second it can be taken absolutely literally as a claim that some/much/all ‘modern art’ is misnamed because it lacks the characteristics necessary for it to qualify as art. Third it can be a claim that whether or not it technically qualifies as art it is more or less worthless because it lacks skill. Fourth it can be that the problem with modern art is that it is difficult, too difficult for ‘ordinary’ people to understand. Let us explore each of these interpretations of the question.
It has to be acknowledged straight away that fraud, deception, confidence trickery, in the strict legal senses of these terms not only exist in the world of visual art but are much more common here than in any other art form. There are certainly hundreds, probably thousands, of fake Picassos, Matisses, Monets, Mirós etc., swimming around in the art market and adorning the walls of the rich, and not a few hanging in major collections. There are two obvious reasons for this. The first is the nature of the art market that I have discussed already   its focus on the ownership of individual unique objects. The second is the still dominant cult of the individual artistic genius, which makes the monetary, and to an extent the critical, ‘value’ of an artwork the product of the ‘genius’ and not its merits as a painting or sculpture. [17]
Nevertheless, the idea that modern art as a whole or even predominantly is a confidence trick clearly doesn’t stand up. After all, who is supposed to be tricking whom? If it is meant to be the artists tricking the public then the exercise is a conspicuous failure: most of the public have remained resolutely unfooled and most of the artists fail to make any money. If the artists are tricking the rich patrons then not only does this suggest remarkable naivety on the part of the Rockefellers, Gettys and Saatchis but also raises the question of how they manage to do so well out of being conned. Anyone ‘conned’ into buying Pollock or Rothko, Lichtenstein or Warhol, must have cursed all the way to the bank.
But if modern art is not a conscious and deliberate deception this does not mean it cannot be a collective delusion. Perhaps, just as millions of people believe in gods which don’t exist, and millions believed that Russia was socialist when it wasn’t, other millions or thousands have fallen for the illusion that strange, meaningless objects are works of art. However, the problem with saying that certain objects are not art is that it implies a clear definition or conception of what art is. If an explorer or a naturalist comes across a new creature they can usually establish if it is a mammal because there is a generally agreed and quite precise definition of what constitutes a mammal, reptile, bird etc. [18] Does such a definition exist for ‘art’?
Certainly not in the minds of most journalists and members of the public who protest that Damien Hirst’s shark or Carl André’s bricks or whatever are not art. Rather what exist in their minds tend to be assumptions or prejudices which have not been subject to critical examination and in fact will not stand up to such examination. For example, there is a quite common assumption that art should involve naturalistic representation or ‘imitation’ of objects in the real world. However, apply this criterion rigorously and look what gets excluded and included. ‘Out’ would be not only a lot of Picasso, Braque, Mondrian, Pollock, Miró, Moore and Brancusi, but also African art, Muslim art, Australian Aboriginal art and even Giotto. ‘In’ would be not only Constable, Turner, Holbein, Van Eyck and Velázquez but also the Sunday paintings of Winston Churchill and Prince Charles and, ironically, the ready-mades of Marcel Duchamp, the screen prints of Warhol and Hirst’s pickled animals. Moreover there is the problem of music, one of the three fundamental art forms and undoubtedly the most popular, which is hardly at all about the representation or imitation of ‘reality’. If it is acceptable for a composer or musician to use an arrangement of notes to express and communicate emotions, why should not an artist like Kandinsky or Rothko use an arrangement of colours and forms for the same purpose?
There are many other such assumptions that are more or less widely held: that art should be ‘beautiful’ or ‘pretty’ – ‘as pretty as a picture’ [19]; that paintings should be made of oils or watercolours and sculpture of stone or bronze, not other materials; that paintings should employ single point perspective. On investigation most of these assumptions turn out simply to be superficial generalisations drawn from the established practice of European art from about 1400 to 1900.
However, probably the most commonly aired objection to modern art is that it lacks ‘skill’ – that ‘my four year old child could do that’, as it is often put. This charge needs quite careful discussion because modern art is so variable in this respect. On the one hand, there are many modern artists where the claim that they lack skill can be made only on the basis of ignorance. Picasso is an obvious example. A child prodigy, he was exceptionally skilled in traditional representational painting in his teens. By his early twenties (the ‘Blue Period’, 1901–1904) he had already produced naturalistic work that would earn him a significant place in art history. His Analytical Cubist works such as Seated Nude of 1910 in the Tate Gallery or Man with a Guitar of 1911 in the Paris Musée Picasso are paintings of profound technical skill and Picasso retained an astounding technical facility throughout his life. Then there is the case of Jackson Pollock. Pollock also began as a figurative and Social Realist artist in the 1930s arriving at his characteristic Abstract Expressionist or action painting only in 1947–1948. In these works Pollock gave up easel painting with brushes in favour of dripping and flicking paint from a stick onto huge canvases laid out on the floor. At first glance these paintings could be dismissed as a chaotic mess, a product of random spraying of the paint, lacking all control or skill – but only at first glance. Closer inspection of individual works, comparison of one work with another, and viewing of the famous film of Pollock at work all confirm that the artist had achieved a very high level of control of the drip technique and that each painting has a very definite and specific overall effect. Pollock’s skill is not the same as Dürer’s in rendering the fur of a hare or Titian’s in painting red hair but it is still skill in the handling of paint.
On the other hand there are modern artists who clearly involve skill in their work but it is not skill in handling paint or carving stone, modelling clay or casting bronze. Take for example, Rachel Whiteread, winner of the Turner Prize in 1993, who makes casts (usually in plaster) of the insides of domestic objects ranging from hot water bottles and baths to rooms and a whole house. To make a cast of the inside of a room or a house strikes me as a really difficult thing to do. I certainly would have no idea how to begin doing it and I imagine that innumerable technical problems would crop up on the way. Can you control the outcome? How do you get the cast out? How do you move it? How do you store it? And so on. But, of course, the skills involved are not those conventionally associated with art. The same applies to an artist using video such as the Palestinian exile Mona Hatoum. To make Corps étranger, Hatoum used an endoscope to film the passages inside her body and then projected the resulting video onto the floor within a cylindrical structure which the viewer has to enter to see the work. Once again all sorts of technical skills are involved but not traditional art skills.
Finally there are a very small number of cases where the element of technical or craft skill deployed is so small as to be effectively non-existent. The most extreme examples are the ready-mades of Marcel Duchamp – Bottle Rack (1914), Bicycle Wheel (1913) and the aforementioned Fountain (1917) [20] – and the brick sculptures of Carl André – Lever (1966) which consists of 137 firebricks laid side by side across the floor in a single row at right angles to the wall and Equivalent I–VIII (1966) which consists of eight permutations of a basic unit of 120 sand-lime bricks laid on the floor of a single gallery. [21] To many people the absence of craft skills in these works is proof that they cannot be art. But in fact, André’s bricks and Duchamp’s ready-mades retain one crucial skill that they share with Hatoum and Whiteread, Pollock and Picasso, and, indeed, with Michelangelo: the intellectual skill to conceive of the work. This intellectual skill may have several different elements: the understanding or perhaps intuition (and, indeed, courage) to see that a pile of bricks or whatever could be moving or beautiful; the aesthetic skill to arrange the bricks etc. in a form that would be moving or beautiful [22]; the intellectual understanding of art, art history, society etc. to conceive how a particular intervention such as exhibiting a urinal or line of bricks could make a meaningful point or raise significant questions. [23] This argument does not establish that these works are ‘good’ or ‘important’ art but it does answer the claim that they are not art of any sort because they are ‘only’ a bottle rack or bricks.
So far I have been considering and rejecting the arguments and assumptions underpinning the ‘Is it art?’ approach of the media etc. But is it not possible to find within the realms of the art world and art theory or else to construct a positive definition of art that can enable us, in principle at least, to decide these questions?
 
The definition of art
There are many in the art world who would either deny the possibility of producing a definition of art or, even more damningly, proclaim that it was not an interesting question. Significantly Peter and Linda Murray’s Dictionary of Art and Artists (Penguin 1973) contains definitions of everything from Action Painting to Vorticism but no entry for ‘art’ as such, while Charles Harrison and Paul Wood’s monumental Art in Theory (1900–1990), which contains over 300 extracts of writing on art from Cézanne to Serra, includes only one text which addresses the task of defining art. This denial is disingenuous. In practice art world people whether they are artists, dealers, curators or critics make distinctions all the time between art works and non-art works. [24] Consequently the failure to establish a definition of art means that the criteria on which these distinctions are made remain unarticulated and unexamined.
In so far as any definition does have currency in the art world it is that ‘art is whatever artists do’ or more precisely ‘art is what artists do and call art’ (since no one claims that every action by an artist is art). This is also, as far as I can see, the ‘real’ position of most of those who purport to reject the question. It is a definition which has arisen out of the experience of modern art with its constant innovations and transformations and particularly in response to the practice of Duchamp and his successors. In appearance this definition is radical and open, able to cope with and accept all new developments. In reality, however, it is a deeply conservative and elitist position – indeed it embodies the elitism of the art world already referred to. If art is what artists do, what makes someone an artist? The obvious answer that an artist is someone who makes art is ruled out because it renders the first definition circular. This leaves only two possible replies: that some special individuals are born artists (which is akin to the doctrine that the ruling classes are born to rule), or that artists are those people whom the art world, i.e. its dominant institutions, recognises as artists. This definition therefore is a case of self validation by a self-perpetuating elite. [25]
If this definition must be rejected it nevertheless has the merit of not attempting a definition in terms of common qualities inhering in the art works. Such an attempt will fail because of the enormous heterogeneity of such objects, because artists have and will set about transgressing any imposed limits, and because art has a generic meaning covering a wide variety of forms of creative practice (music, poetry, drama, etc.) which do not produce commensurable ‘objects’ but nonetheless have a clear social affinity. The element of truth in the ‘art is what artists do’ definition is that it points in the direction of the nature of artistic labour. This can be followed up in a Marxist way using the approach developed by Marx for the analysis of capital and commodities.
Marx insisted that while capital could take the form of machinery or money neither machinery nor money were capital as such. They only became capital within certain social relations of production:
A negro is a negro. He only becomes a slave in certain relations. A cotton spinning jenny is a machine for spinning cotton. It becomes capital only in certain relations. [26]
Equally the products of human labour are not in themselves commodities. They become commodities only in the context of the social relation that is the market. The analysis of the commodity requires, therefore, the analysis of that social relation and, in particular, of the nature of the human labour that produces the commodity and underlies the market relation:
Whence, then, arises the enigmatical character of the product of labour, so soon as it assumes the form of commodities? Clearly from this form itself ...
A commodity is therefore a mysterious thing, simply because in it the social character of men’s labour appears to them as an objective character stamped upon the product of that labour: because the relation of the producers to the sum total of their own labour is presented to them as a social relation, existing not between themselves but between the products of their labour ...
This fetishism of commodities has its origin, as the foregoing analysis has already shown, in the peculiar social character of the labour that produces them. [27]
If we apply this approach to art we can say that paint or other marks on a flat surface, arrangements of words on paper, sequences of sounds in the air etc., only became art in certain social relations. The question ‘What is art?’ then becomes, what is the peculiar social character of the labour that produces what we call art? The answer to this question is that ‘art’ is the product of non-alienated labour.
This is clearly a contentious and contested claim and I cannot enter a full defence of it here. [28] I will restrict myself to a few comments of clarification and justification. By non-alienated labour I do not mean labour that exists ‘outside’ of capitalism (which is increasingly non-existent), or labour that does not produce commodities (the massive commodification of art under capitalism is obvious), or even labour that people enjoy (some people ‘enjoy’ some alienated labour and some non-alienated labour is not enjoyable). [29] Still less do I mean that ‘artists’ are not alienated or that their work does not reflect and express alienation – alienation affects everyone in capitalist society. What I mean is labour that remains under the control and direction of the producer.
According to Marx in the 1844 Manuscripts the essence of alienated labour lies in the relationship of the worker to his/her work, to the productive activity itself:
Thus, when we ask what is the important relationship of labour, we are concerned with the relationship of the worker to production.
So far we have considered the alienation of the worker only from one aspect: namely, his relationship with the products of his labour. However, alienation appears not merely in the result but also in the process of production within productive activity itself. How could the worker stand in an alien relationship to the product of his activity if he did not alienate himself in the act of production itself? ...
What constitutes the alienation of labour? First, that the work is external to the worker, that it is not part of his nature; and that, consequently, he does not fulfil himself in his work but denies himself, has a feeling of misery rather than well-being, does not develop freely his mental and physical energies but is physically exhausted and mentally debased. The worker, therefore, feels himself at home only during his leisure time, whereas at work he feels homeless. His work is not voluntary but imposed, forced labour. It is not the satisfaction of a need, but only a means for satisfying other needs. Its alien character is clearly shown by the fact that as soon as there is no physical or other compulsion it is avoided like the plague. External labour, labour in which man alienates himself, is a labour of self-sacrifice, of mortification. Finally, the external character of work for the worker is shown by the fact that it is not his own work but work for someone else, that in work he does not belong to himself but to another person. [30]
Artistic labour differs from this in that, even when the work is to fulfil a commission or to produce a commodity to be sold, the productive activity itself remains the possession of the artist and in that work he/she belongs to herself, not to another person. In contrast to alienated labour, artistic labour is a development and expression, not a denial and distortion of the producer’s physical and mental energies. It requires money to sustain it but it is not simply a means of earning money.
The very young Marx expressed this idea in the context of defending the freedom of the press in 1842:
A writer must of course earn a living to exist and be able to write, but he must in no sense exist and write so as to earn a living. When Beranger sings: ‘I only live to make my songs. If you rob me of my place, Monsignor, I will make songs in order to live.’ There is an ironic avowal in this threat: the poet falls from his domain as soon as his poetry becomes but a means. In no sense does the writer regard his works as a means. They are ends in themselves. [31]
The much older Marx makes the same point in the context of discussing productive labour in Theories of Surplus Value:
Milton produced Paradise Lost for the same reason that silkworms produce silk. It was an activity of his nature. Later he sold the product for £5. But the literary proletarian of Leipzig who fabricates books (for example, Compendia of Economics) under the direction of his publisher is a productive labourer; for his product is from the outset subsumed under capital and comes into being only for the purpose of increasing that capital. [32]
Trotsky is, I believe, expressing the same underlying idea, though in less precise, less scientific language, when he writes that ‘spiritual creativeness demands freedom’ [33] and, ‘Art is basically a function of the nerves and demands complete sincerity’ [34], and, ‘Art, like science, not only does not seek orders, but by its very essence, cannot tolerate them’ [35] – propositions on which he bases his insistence that the revolutionary party should not aspire to command art either before or after the conquest of power.
There are two obvious objections to the argument made so far. The first is that many works of art are in fact made with large amounts of alienated, wage labour, for example films. The second is that many works of non-alienated labour are not art, for example Lenin’s State and Revolution or do-it-yourself work around the house.
My answer to the first objection is that most works of art involve a combination of alienated and non-alienated labour: think of the quarry workers who cut Michelangelo’s marble, the session musicians at a recording, the paper makers, typesetters and printers necessary for the poet’s slim volume and so on. However, it is the non-alienated labour that gives the work its artistic character. The poetry book is not possible without the labour of the printer but it is the labour of poet that makes the slim volume ‘art’, while the telephone directory is not art. The same applies to films, concerts, plays, operas, architecture etc. and all those collective art forms that make extensive use of alienated labour from extras and ushers, to ticket collectors and building workers. In each case what makes them art is the non-alienated labour contributed by directors, composers, soloists, designers, architects etc. [36]
The second objection is clearly valid in its own terms. I would meet it by acknowledging that only a particular kind of non-alienated labour produces art, namely labour in which there is a unity of form and content or, to be more precise, where the form is the content. Lenin’s writing of The State and Revolution was undoubtedly unalienated labour but it was labour in which the content – the exposition and development of the Marxist theory of the state – far outweighed in significance the form – the specific words employed to convey the meaning. State and Revolution in English or in French is essentially the same work as in the Russian original, provided the translation is competent nothing fundamental is lost. It is quite otherwise with the poetry of Mayakovsky. A translation of a poem is not at all the same as the original because in poetry the exact words count: the meaning of a poem consists not merely of the sum total of the dictionary definitions of the words used but also of all those words’ connotations, their sounds and their rhythm. When Mr Smith builds for himself a garden wall it is again unalienated labour but the exact form of the wall is secondary to its practical function – making an effective division between Mr Smith’s garden and Mr Jones’s, or whatever. But when Carl André forms 960 bricks into Equivalent I–VIII there is no practical function but the shape, colour and precise positioning of every brick is what makes it the work it is. [37]
This analysis of art as unalienated labour that unites form and content solves a number of problems. First, it resolves the paradox that on the one hand art is evidently a historically universal activity more or less coextensive with the history of the human species; while on the other hand, ‘art’ as a separate activity and especially ‘artist’ as a recognised social role emerge and become distinct only from the Renaissance onwards. Of course, human beings have always engaged in non-alienated labour, making music, painting pictures, carving wood etc., but it is only with the rise of capitalism and the concomitant intensification of alienated labour that art and therefore the artist become sharply differentiated from and counterposed to ordinary social labour.
Second, it enables us to understand Marx’s statement that ‘capitalist production is hostile to certain branches of spiritual production, for example, art and poetry’. [38] Clearly there is a serious problem in trying to argue that the bourgeoisie as a class is hostile to art. From the Medicis to the Saatchis, from Mrs and Mrs Andrews to Nelson Rockefeller, sections of the bourgeoisie have patronised art and basked in its reflected glory. Moreover capitalist states and governments have generally shown a fairly keen awareness of the significance of art for their overall ideological hegemony. Nor can it plausibly be claimed that the bourgeois epoch has been artistically impoverished compared to the feudal epoch nor other epochs in history. But Marx speaks neither of the bourgeoisie nor the bourgeois epoch but of capitalist production. Capitalist production is production on the basis of alienated labour. In so far as artistic production becomes incorporated within capitalist production, in so far as capital assumes complete control over the process of production of art, that production ceases to be artistic and ceases to produce art. When Orson Welles made Citizen Kane he made a work of art; when he made a sherry commercial, he did not. [39] It is this objective antagonism between unalienated and alienated labour that lies at the root of the subjective antagonism of artists towards capital and capitalism, which is a recurring trope in the bourgeois epoch and not just a romantic or bohemian myth.
This definition also makes it possible to resolve in summary and fairly sweeping fashion the whole repetitive ‘Is it art?’ debate. The answer is yes. Whether it is Malevich’s White Square on White, Pollock’s One 1950, Whiteread’s House or Hirst’s Mother and Child Divided, it is all art because it all meets the criteria of unalienated labour striving for unity of form and content. This does not, however, make it good or great art, which is a different question.
 
Is modern art difficult?
Before turning directly to the relative merits of modern and contemporary art I want to discuss a claim often made about modern art which has important implications for its legitimacy; namely, that it is ‘difficult’. Interestingly this claim is made both by critics and defenders of modern art. On the one hand it is said that understanding modern art requires specialist knowledge and study and this makes it elitist and inaccessible to the masses. Art, it is argued, ought to communicate with ‘ordinary’ or ‘working class’ people. On the other hand it is argued that the best modern art is indeed difficult but it is precisely its difficulty that makes it good. It is not the fault of modern art that it is difficult or that the masses are insufficiently educated to understand it: it has to be difficult in order to deal with complex challenging issues and to advance art. There are also right wing and left wing variants of both these arguments. There is a right wing populism exemplified by the tabloids which denounces the ‘intellectualism’ of modern art as part of its general attack on the ‘liberal’ intelligentsia. There is a left populism, often espoused by the Communist Parties in the 1930s, which demands art – usually naturalist art – accessible to the workers. There is a right wing elitism that views the masses as more or less congenitally incapable of scaling the sublime heights of great art and a left elitism which attributes the indifference of the masses towards art to their cultural impoverishment by class society and capitalism. [40]
In so far as these as the categories exhaust the options, I would place myself in the ‘left elitist’ camp with Luxemburg and Trotsky but I want to challenge the assumption that modern art is in some special way difficult. The question is quite complicated because works of art can be ‘difficult’ in different ways. Difficulty can be culturally relative. To someone who reads only English a novel in French is impossibly ‘difficult’ even if it is written by Barbara Cartland. This kind of difficulty is one of the factors making Chaucer or Shakespeare ‘difficult’ for modern readers. Similar to this is what we might call the ‘difficulty of the new’. T.S. Eliot observes that ‘difficulty may be due just to novelty: we know the ridicule accorded in turn to Wordsworth, Shelley and Keats, Tennyson and Browning’ [41] and certainly contemporary critics found Manet difficult [42], not to speak of the Impressionists who now seem so easy and natural. Then there is genuine intellectual difficulty in the sense that Hegel’s Logic and parts of Marx’s Capital are difficult or theoretical physics is difficult or the difficulty of Eliot’s The Waste Land with its quotations in half a dozen languages and its references to Ovid, Ecclesiastes, The Golden Bough, Dante, the Upanishads and so on. Finally there is the distinction which has to be made in this context between ‘understanding’ and ‘appreciation’ which though they may often be linked are not always so and are by no means identical. [43]
With these considerations in mind we can consider the relative ‘difficulty’ and ‘accessibility’ of traditional and modern art. In reality much traditional art requires very considerable, and sometimes quite esoteric, knowledge to be understood. Thus most medieval art and much from the early modern period assumes a knowledge of the Bible (or of classical mythology) which is not held by most people today. For example one cannot understand Rembrandt’s Bathsheba – even in the literal sense of knowing what is being depicted – unless one knows the relevant Bible story. It also makes a significant difference to know that the model for Bathsheba was Heindricke Stoeffels, the woman Rembrandt loved and lived with for the last 20 years of his life, but that knowledge is only available from study. Moreover much art of this period uses a complex iconography, in which particular objects have very specific meanings, knowledge of which has long since passed out of the common culture and is now very much the preserve of specialist scholars. An example of a famous painting whose meaning can only be fully grasped on the basis of a knowledge of its iconography is Hans Holbein’s The Ambassadors with its disguised ‘memento mori’ or reminder of death.
In contrast there are many works of modern art that can be appreciated with little or no knowledge or study. As I write I am looking at a reproduction of a painting by Miró called Blue III. It is a very simple painting. It consists of a field of blue which covers the whole canvas. Towards the bottom right corner there is a smallish flat black ovoid. Running from near the bottom left corner to near the top right corner is a meandering thin black line, like a piece of string or thread of cotton. At the top of the black line is a small red oval blob. That’s it. Now it so happens I know next to nothing about this painting. It was painted in 1961 but other than that I don’t know its history. I have not read any theoretical analyses or ‘interpretations’ of it and cannot offer any interpretation of my own apart from the fairly obvious observations that the blue is suggestive of the sky and the line and red blob of a kite. If the painting has a deeper ‘intellectual’ meaning, I don’t know what it is. And yet looking at this painting gives me great pleasure. It evokes feelings of delight, of playfulness and of the joy of life. I could analyse, at least to some extent, how and why the painting evokes these feelings but the analysis would be secondary. I do not have to do, or be able to do, the analysis to experience the feelings. To avoid misunderstanding I should stress that I am not claiming that my response to Blue III is ‘pure’ or ‘innocent’ or not socially conditioned or uninfluenced by knowing that Miró is ‘famous’ or by my general knowledge of art history or anything like that, but only that the Miró is not intrinsically more ‘difficult’ than a Rembrandt or Holbein. Perhaps the most important ‘knowledge’ I need to enjoy and be moved by the Miró is the knowledge that a non-representational painting can be a valid work of art and can evoke such a response.
Another example is provided by Picasso’s Guernica. Clearly an understanding of this painting is facilitated and enhanced by the information that it was a response to and protest against the bombing of the historic Basque city in 1937 by the Luftwaffe during the Spanish Civil War and that this was the first instance of aerial bombing of civilians and so on. [44] Nevertheless, it is a fact which I have established through ‘experiments’ with students that the painting ‘speaks’ and conveys at least some of its ‘meaning’ (outrage at the horror and suffering of war) to people who have no knowledge of its specific history. Certainly it conveys its meaning to the non-specialist as effectively as or more effectively than many an acknowledged ‘old master’ – provided, of course, that the non-specialist concerned is not possessed of the fixed conviction that the ‘meaning’ of painting consists primarily or solely in naturalistic imitation. [45]
One way in which works of modern art are sometimes said to be ‘difficult’ is that they are contributions to or interventions in the ongoing ‘story of art’ and therefore cannot be understood unless one knows the story so far, that is unless one is familiar with the history of art. There is an important element of truth in this in at least two ways: (1) every new modern art movement, every significant new work, exists in dialectical tension with the work that preceded it (Surrealism grows out of the failure of Dadaism, Cubism develops in opposition to Fauvism etc.); (2) specific works frequently ‘quote’ or ‘reference’ other specific works from the past (for example, Mark Wallinger’s horse paintings in the Sensation exhibition reference the horse paintings of George Stubbs in the 18th century). Doubtless it helps to have the knowledge of art history to pick up on these relationships. But this is in no way a characteristic peculiar to either modern or visual art. The history of painting in the Renaissance can be told through successive representations of the Madonna and Child by Cimabue, Giotto, Masaccio, Leonardo, Raphael etc. Manet’s Olympia references Titian’s Venus of Urbino, and Seurat’s The Bathers both develops and challenges Impressionism while echoing the frescos of Piero della Francesca. The poetry of Keats wrestles with the legacy of Milton and Shakespeare and his most famous sonnet is inspired by a 17th century translation of Homer. [46] Even that most popular of cultural forms, post-war pop and rock music, operates and develops in the same way, as does Marxist theory.
But is this trait more prevalent in modern art than in traditional art or other art forms and is it more than just part of what modern art works are doing? If the answer to this is yes, it would make modern art not so much difficult as shallow, superficial and sterile. [47] It would reduce modern art to a series of illustrations of essays in a hermetically sealed art history ‘discourse’ with nothing significant to say about or to its times. A work of art no matter how much it develops out of or against a tradition must stand in its own right and work visually on its own account if it is to be taken seriously.
I believe the better examples of modern art do precisely this and the evidence I would cite is the relative popularity of modern art. Obviously modern art is not popular in the sense that football or EastEnders are popular, but it is popular in the sense of appealing to a substantial constituency of people, a constituency much wider than the art world elite, pretentious bourgeois, or people with expert knowledge. In February of this year I went to a lecture by Christo and Jeanne-Claude (famous for ‘wrapping’ the Reichstag and the Pont Neuf) at South Downs College just outside Havant. Tickets at £10 a time were sold out well in advance and something like 700 people attended. That is a significant audience. Walk into any bookshop and you will see large numbers of art books including modern art books, many in cheap editions (like the Taschen editions which include Ernst, Grosz, Duchamp, Klee, Miró, Mondrian and Rivera). This is true not only of Dillons, Foyle’s and the like, but of The Works which specialises in cheap remaindered books in Portsmouth’s central shopping precinct.
Then there is the evidence of gallery and exhibition attendance. Over the last five years (1993–1997) attendance at the Tate Gallery has averaged 1,944,177 per year with a peak of 2,226,399 in 1994. Over a similar period (1992–1996) the Tate Gallery, Liverpool, averaged 534,422 per year and the Tate Gallery, St Ives, averaged 164,046. [48] Interest in modern art is confirmed by attendance at particular exhibitions: over 300,000 at Sensation and 157,754 at Braque:The Late Works – both at the Royal Academy in 1997, compared with only 98,756 at the more traditional Summer Exhibition; at the Tate Gallery 408, 688 for Cézanne in 1996, 296,648 for Picasso in 1994, and 114,275 for Mondrian in 1997, but only 169,412 for Constable in 1991; and at the Hayward Gallery 111,525 for Howard Hodgkin and Beyond Reason: Art & Psychosis in 1996–97, and 101,092 for Objects of Desire: The Modern Still Life.
All in all this amounts to a very considerable audience for modern art, larger, I believe, than the audience for modern poetry [49] or serious modern theatre or contemporary classical music. But what kinds of people make up this audience? According to the Tate Gallery’s visitor research they are in terms of age and gender broadly representative of the nation with a slight bias towards women and people under 35. There is also an entirely predictable strong bias towards the middle class – 88 percent of visitors are ABC1s and only 11 percent C2DEs when these categories constitute 49 percent and 51 percent respectively of the population. However, by Marxist class criteria C2DEs represent only the manual working class, while a significant proportion of Bs and C1s are white collar workers rather than middle class and in any case these figures suggest at least 100,000 manual workers visiting the Tate Gallery each year-a statistic which certainly gives food for thought.
Finally there is the vague, impressionistic evidence provided by the use of modern art images and styles in mainstream culture-in adverts, music videos, graphics, textiles and everyday design. Persil ran an advertising campaign featuring ‘Mrs Picasso’s Washing’. Stella Artois had a joke ad, ‘Is it art ... or is it Artois?’ A little while ago there were Mondrian cigarette lighters all over the place and L’Oreal aerosols and sprays were all themed la Mondrian. The sleeve of Sergeant Pepper – perhaps the most popular album of all time – was designed by modern artist Peter Blake. In some ways this is the most important evidence of all – despite its lack of precision – for it shows modern art doing its work affecting, influencing, developing the visual culture, the aesthetics, of the society as a whole. It shows modern art operating on how people see things often without them even knowing it and it confirms in practice what I have argued at various points in this essay: namely that the obstacle to the popular appreciation of modern art is often neither the art itself nor the inherent incapacity of the public but the elitist social ambience and construction of the art world combined with dogmatic but outdated conceptions of what art should look like.
 
Is art in decline?
I raise this question because even if it is accepted that ‘modern art’ and indeed current art is genuine art which needs to be taken seriously there is still a quite widespread view that it constitutes a decline from some previous high point or higher plateau. What is more, this is not just a conservative view held by the likes of Roger Scruton or Peter Fuller, it is a position common, perhaps even dominant, among Marxist or Marxist influenced writing on art.
From the outset we should be clear about the considerable care required in formulating this question so that it can be answered meaningfully and the enormous difficulty involved in offering any kind of serious response to it based on empirical judgement. What time scale are we operating on and what are we comparing with what? Are we comparing the art of the 1990s with the art of the 1980s, the 1970s or some previous decade? Or are we comparing the art of the second half of the 20th century with the art of the first half of the century? Or the 20th century with the 19th century or with some other previous century or with all other previous centuries? Are we talking about the art of one country, of Europe, of the so called ‘West’ or of the world?
There are pitfalls every step of the way. It is obviously unreasonable to compare the art of this year or this decade with the art of a whole century or period in the past. Yet psychologically it is very easy to fall into this and what is more to select as the point of comparison a particularly outstanding period. No, Damien Hirst and the ‘Young Brit Art’ of today don’t match up to Michelangelo or the Quattrocento but how do they compare to, say, Italian painting of the 1890s or British sculpture of the 1790s? [50] The matter is complicated by the fact that different art forms do not develop evenly within particular countries and visual art does not develop evenly across different countries even within Europe. Thus Elizabethan/Jacobean England is an exceptionally rich period in terms of literature (Shakespeare, Marlowe, Jonson, Donne, Webster, Spenser etc.) but produces nothing remotely comparable in painting and sculpture. Seventeenth century Holland gives us Rembrandt, Hals, Ruysdael, Vermeer, Hobbema and others in painting but neither literature nor sculpture of world historical importance. In the second half of the 19th century everything really vital and important in visual art seems to be concentrated in France (Courbet, Manet, Monet, Pissarro, Sisley, Renoir, Degas, Cézanne, Seurat, Gauguin, Van Gogh, Redon etc.) but this is not true of other art forms – think of Russian literature. Then there is the question of art outside North America and Europe. Who really knows what is happening now or has been happening in the last decade or so in the visual art of Latin America, Africa, the Middle East and South East Asia and who would feel confident to make aesthetic judgements about it all? And if it were possible to pronounce with assurance that the art of the 1980s and 1990s was on a downward curve worldwide from the 1960s and 1970s (or some similar proposition), could one be sure that the trend would continue into the next millennium or is it just about to bottom out? There is also an important cultural/psychological factor which is likely to affect all our judgments. The acknowledged great artists of the past, the Giottos and Raphaels, the Titians and Velázquezes, have been accumulating cultural credit for centuries. For centuries they have been bywords for genius featuring in anecdotes by Vasari, the metaphors of Marx, the aphorisms of Picasso [51] and so on. It is very difficult to rank a contemporary artist still alive, perhaps still young, their work uncompleted, alongside the established giants of the past.
But if it is virtually impossible to produce a sustainable empirical judgement on this question, can it nevertheless be answered theoretically? Is it possible on general theoretical grounds, i.e. on the basis of a theory of overall historical development, to assert that art is, or is likely to be, or must be undergoing a process of decline? This is a question which seems to sit up and beg for a ready made Marxist answer: art reflects society (in the final analysis); capitalism is a society in crisis and decay (in the final analysis); bourgeois art is therefore decadent and in decline (in the final analysis). To this apparent syllogism it is possible though not mandatory to append the claim that modernism is the expression or epitome of bourgeois decadence.
This, in its crudest, most dogmatic and sectarian form was the position of Stalinism in its Zhdanovite phase and, in infinitely more cultured and sophisticated form, of Lukács who was operating, albeit critically, within the Stalinist camp. However, many Marxists have been drawn by the argument. Here is Plekhanov, writing before modernism really to into its stride:
I said and (I would like to think) demonstrated in my lecture that contemporary art was in decline ... by the word ‘decline’ I mean, comme de raison, the whole process, and not any particular episodes. This process is not yet complete, just as the social process of the collapse of the bourgeois order is not yet complete. It would be strange to think therefore, that present day bourgeois ideologists are utterly incapable of producing any kind of outstanding work at all. It stands to reason that, even at this stage, such works are possible. But the chances of their appearance are being drastically reduced. What is more, even outstanding works bear the imprint of the period of decadence. [52]
This is Francis Klingender, of the Artists’ International Association and author of Art and the Industrial Revolution, in 1935:
The development of modern art from impressionism to abstract form.. embodies the ever more frantic flight from content, i.e. from social reality, from all reality whatever, of the retrogressive capitalist class ... Far from achieving the emancipation of art the destruction of content necessarily leads to the destruction also of form-a climax epically symbolized in the white square painted on a white canvas of square shape by the supremacist Malevich. In its final decay the capitalist class destroys its art as it destroys its science. [53]
And here is Trotsky writing in 1938:
... a declining capitalism already finds itself completely incapable of offering the minimum conditions for the development of tendencies in art which correspond, however little, to our epoch. It fears superstitiously every new word, for it is no longer a matter of corrections and reforms for capitalism but of life and death.. The artistic schools of the last few decades – Cubism, Futurism, Dadaism, Surrealism – follow each other without reaching a complete development. Art, which is the most complex part of culture, the most sensitive and at the same time the least protected, suffers most from the decline and decay of bourgeois society ...
To find a solution to this impasse through art itself is impossible. It is a crisis which concerns all cultures, beginning at its economic base and ending on the highest spheres of ideology. Art can neither escape the crisis nor partition itself off. Art cannot save itself. It will rot away inevitably – as Grecian art rotted beneath the ruins of a culture founded on slavery – unless present-day society is able to rebuild itself. [54]
Without doubt, there is a powerful argument here, which cannot fail to strike a chord with any socialist sensitive to the symptoms of decay to be seen at every turn in the life of 20th century capitalism. Nevertheless, when the argument or rather the arguments are examined, flaws and problems immediately arise.
Lukacs famously counterposed the totalising realism of Balzac and Tolstoy to the angst ridden fragmentation of Kafka, Joyce and Beckett. But even if one accepts Lukács’s literary judgements (which I do not) this schema simply will not transfer to painting and sculpture. Far from 1848 appearing as the end of a great epoch of ‘progressive’ bourgeois realist painting it rather marks the start of a rich seam that produces Courbet, Manet, Monet, Sisley, Pissarro, Renoir, Lautrec, Cassatt, Morisot, Degas, Seurat, Van Gogh, Gauguin, Redon, Cézanne, Rousseau, Picasso and Matisse. Any notion of decline is even less applicable to sculpture. Rodin in the late 19th century was probably the most important European sculptor since Michelangelo, and the first half of the 20th century, with Brancusi, Moore, Kollwitz, Epstein, Picasso, Calder, Hepworth, Gabo, Giacometti and others, must count as a sculptural golden age compared with the virtual desert of the 17th, 18th and early 19th centuries. Nor will Klingender’s notion of the development from Impressionism to abstraction as a ‘frantic flight from content, i.e. from social reality’ stand up. Seurat’s Bathers is a key step on the road to abstraction but it is not at all a move away from content or social reality (just the opposite in fact). In slightly different ways the same could be said of Van Gogh and Cézanne and, especially, of Cubism. [55] Trotsky’s 1938 argument is different in that it doesn’t share Lukács’s or Klingender’s condemnation of modernism, but the categorical nature of his pronouncements (’Art cannot save itself ... it will rot away inevitably’) is clearly a product of his general catastrophist outlook at this time. If the crisis of capitalism had developed as Trotsky expected [56] then art most certainly would have rotted away because all culture and civilisation would have collapsed, but it did not.
As well as these ad hoc objections there is a theoretical problem. The equation of decaying capitalism and bourgeoisie in decline with decadent declining art assumes a more mechanical relationship between base and this element of the superstructure than is warranted. In an earlier article in this journal I argued that art is an aspect of the superstructure least strictly determined by the economic base [57], and Marx states:
It is well known that certain periods of highest development of art stand in no direct connection with the general development of society, nor with the material basis and the skeleton structure of its organisation. [58]
Moreover when we examine the actual relation between the bourgeoisie and modern art we find that although the bourgeoisie certainly controls the art market and the art world it does not itself produce the art. The overwhelming majority of modern artists are not bourgeois but petty bourgeois. [59] What is more, they are petty bourgeois in revolt against the normal, alienated conditions of bourgeois and petty bourgeois life. As Trotsky says, ‘Every new tendency in art has begun with rebellion’. [60] As rebellious petty bourgeois artists are inevitably influenced by oppositional ideologies and impulses from both right and left, with the influence of the left by and large outweighing that of the right. Nor is it the case that the bourgeois patrons of art in the 20th century have bought and promoted only art which embodied the ideological positions of the bourgeoisie. On the contrary, as Trotsky notes [61], the bourgeoisie has taken pride in buying up and ‘incorporating’ art which challenges dominant bourgeois positions at certain points in time -f or example, Guernica or even art which is sincerely anti-capitalist in its intentions and message, such as the work of Léger.
For all these reasons we must conclude that the historical decline of capitalism (provided it does not reach the acute phase of ‘the mutual destruction of the contending classes’ or the outright destruction of civilisation through world or nuclear war) does not necessarily lead to the decline of art. Perhaps Bertolt Brecht should have the last word on this particular point [62]:



MOTTO
In the dark times
Will there also be singing?
Yes, there will also be singing
About the dark times.



There is, however, another and very different Marxist argument for contemporary art being in decline: that of Perry Anderson in Modernity and Revolution, his critical review of Marshall Barman’s All That is Solid Melts into Air. Anderson pays fulsome tribute to the literary and artistic achievements of modernism in the early decades of the century and identifies the decline of art with the exhaustion of the European modernist impulse. Underlying this contention is a very precise conjunctural explanation of the advent of modernism:
In my view, ‘modernism’ can best be understood as a cultural field triangulated by three decisive coordinates. The first ... was the codification of a highly formalised academicism in the visual and other arts, which itself was institutionalised within official regimes of states and society still massively pervaded, often dominated, by aristocratic or landowning classes ... The second coordinate is ... the still incipient, hence essentially novel, emergence within these societies of the key technologies or inventions of the second industrial revolution: telephone, radio, automobile, aircraft and so on ... The third coordinate ... I would argue, was the imaginative proximity of social revolution. [63]
It was the combination of these three factors which provided modernism with its artistic charge but, Anderson argues, the Second World War brought this period to a definitive close. The old aristocracies were decisively displaced and bourgeois democracy established. Fascism arrived in force and ‘the image or hope of revolution faded away in the West’:
The onset of the Cold War, and the Sovietisation of Eastern Europe cancelled any realistic prospect of a socialist overthrow of advanced capitalism, for a whole historical period. The ambiguity of aristocracy, the absurdity of academicism, the gaiety of the first cars or movies, the palpability of a socialist alternative, were all now gone ... The post-war avant-gardes were to be essentially defined against this quite new backdrop. It is not necessary to judge them from a Lukácsian tribunal to note the obvious: little of the literature, painting, music or architecture of this period can stand comparison with that of the antecedent epoch. [64]
Anderson’s analysis, as always, is erudite and elegant but (leaving aside the question of its historical accuracy regarding the genesis of modernism) as a perspective on the current and impending state of art it is open to major objections. One of the most important of these, the question of the ‘Third World’, Anderson is aware of but dismisses far too easily. He acknowledges that ‘in the Third World generally, a kind of shadow configuration of what once prevailed in the First World does exist today’, nods briefly in the direction of ‘socialist revolution ... already realised in Cuba or Nicaragua, Angola or Vietnam’ [65], cursorily mentions the ‘genuine masterpieces’ of Marquez, Rushdie and Turkish film maker Yilmiz Güney, and then peremptorily dismisses the whole scenario in two sentences:
Works such as these, however, are not timeless expressions of an ever-expanding process of modernisation, but emerge in quite delimited constellations, in societies still at definite historical crossroads. The Third World furnishes no fountain of eternal youth to modernism. [66]
This is all highly unsatisfactory. The term ‘shadow configuration’ is dubious to put it mildly; the ‘socialist revolutions’ are non-existent (and serve only to confuse matters here); no art works are ‘timeless expressions’ and all ‘emerge in quite delimited constellations’, and the art of the so called ‘Third World’ cannot be seen as either succeeding or failing in prolonging European modernism-we are talking about the large majority of the world’s population and nations here. Above all one wants to say, ‘What about ...?’ What about the films of Satyajit Ray or of Akira Kurosawa and other Japanese film makers? What about the new cinema of Africa and Latin America? What about the sculptors of Zimbabwe? What about the poetry of Pablo Neruda? What about Césaire and Senghor and the poets of néritude? The ‘what abouts’ continue to the limits of the reader’s tolerance and the writer’s knowledge.
The second major objection to Anderson’s perspective points to an omission, a piece of historical amnesia, that is, on the face of it, astonishing. Anderson claims that ‘hope of revolution faded away ... for a whole historical period’ and forgets ... the 1960s (or more precisely the great upturn in struggle internationally that began in the 1960s and lasted till 1974). It is, of course, open to argument whether revolution was actually possible in May 1968 or in Chile in 1972–1973 or in Portugal in 1974 but not whether the ‘image or hope’ of revolution was ‘in the air’, or whether it had inspirational cultural effects. The ‘what abouts’ start again – Allen Ginsberg, Robert Lowell, Bob Dylan, John Coltrane, Joseph Beuys (and, as it happens, our old friend, Carl André of the bricks). For some reason Anderson remembers only Jean-Luc Godard.
Of course the explanation for this biographically amazing forgetfulness is Anderson’s profound political miserabilism and pessimism which make him write off even the hope of workers’ revolution both backwards and forwards, for the recallable past and the foreseeable future. This pessimism (and a certain high intellectual elitism) also makes him virtually deaf and blind to all those impulses and forces arising from below (’the signs in the street’ as Berman calls them), which range from black power, women’s liberation and flying pickets to punk, grunge and New Age travelling, and are crucial to both contemporary revolutionary politics and contemporary and future cultural creativity.
There is, therefore, no compelling reason to accept Anderson’s ‘closed horizon’ and grim outlook for the arts. Perhaps he is right that in Europe ‘little of the literature, painting, music or architecture of this period can stand comparison with that of the antecedent epoch’ but even that limited judgement is not as ‘obvious’ as Anderson claims (there’s Beckett, Camus, Pinter, Grass, Prevert, Solzhenitzyn, Bacon, Kiefer, Tippett, Fried, Lessing, Fo, Greene and god knows who else to take into account) and it certainly doesn’t apply to film (Bergman, Rossellini, Visconti, Fellini, Antonioni, Pasolini, Truffaut, Resnais, Godard, Wajda, Fassbinder, Tarkovsky, Losey, Loach etc.) or, by definition, to television and video. Nor does it work at all for the United States where the post-war artistic achievement puts the pre-war arts in the shade in at least two areas: poetry (Ginsberg, Ferhinghetti and the Beats, Lowell, Frost, Plath, Rich) and above all the visual arts (Pollock, de Kooning, Rothko, Stella, Still, Newman, Rauschenberg, Johns, Warhol, Lichtenstein, Basquiat, Smith, Smithson, Serra, Kelly, Bourgeois, Judd, André etc.) and perhaps in three areas if we include modern jazz from Parker to Marsalis. If Anderson’s theoretical foundation is flawed and his empirical judgement about the immediate past is, at the very least, open to question then we have no need at all to accept his foreclosure of prospects and possibilities in the immediate and not so immediate future even if capitalism is not overthrown in the next period.
To reject the argument, whether posed in Lukácsian, general Marxist or Andersonian terms, that art is in overall or inevitable decline is not to assert the opposite, that it is irresistibly in the ascendant. It is simply to suggest that at the present time there are too many variables, too many uncertainties to arrive at any definitive judgement. The perspective is open for both the arts as a whole and for the particular case of visual art. However, the corollary of this open perspective is that the record of human creativity being what it is we can reasonably expect to encounter late 20th and early 21st century masterpieces just as there are masterpieces from every century and half century since Giotto and the beginning of the Renaissance.
 
Conclusion
This article has been an attempt to tackle a series of questions that arise prior to the consideration of particular works of modern art, the most pressing of which was its legitimacy as ‘art’ at all. In the course of the discussion I have argued: (1) that the legitimacy crisis of modern art is not an accident or a conspiracy (despite the efforts of the media) or the fault of artists but is a historically and economically conditioned phenomenon; (2) that the arguments against modernist art’s status as genuine art will not withstand critical examination and that by the best available Marxist definition of art the works of Picasso, Duchamp, André, Hirst et al. are certainly art; (3) that it is a mistake to see modern art as especially obscure, inaccessible or unpopular; (4) that there are no good grounds for seeing modern art as in inexorable decline or incapable of producing great work today, tomorrow and the next day. Where then does this leave us standing, as it were, in front of the visual art of today?
It leaves us valuing art but hating the capitalist structure of the art world, its elitism, snobbery and commercialism. It leaves us defending art for its rebelliousness, its creativity and its human values while recognising that art as a privileged sphere of these qualities is the other side of the coin of a society which denies the vast majority creativity and humanity in their daily work and lives. It leaves us fighting to change that society and the art world it produces so that the art of the present and past can be appropriated by and accessible to all and so that in the future the art of the future will become the productive work of the future and the productive work will become the art. It leaves us facing the art of today not without preconceptions but without prejudice, responding to it with all the human faculties we can mobilise and understanding that at its best it retains the capacity to enrich and sustain us as human beings fighting for a better world.

Notes
1. This is only a restatement in relation to modern art of the classical Marxist position on the working class and traditional bourgeois art and culture as a whole. Thus Trotsky speaks of recommending Shakespeare and Pushkin to the workers. See L. Trotsky, On Literature and Art (New York 1977), pp. 67–69.
2. Cézanne and Gauguin were obviously direct influences and behind them we can trace Manet, Ingres, Goya and Velázquez. But this in no way diminishes Picasso’s startling originality.
3. The shock of Les Demoiselles was not only caused by the formal innovations listed here but also by its ‘content’, its brutal depiction of the prostitute/client relationship (with all its implications for general sexual and social relations between men and women), and in this respect the painting remains genuinely shocking to this day.
4. See J. Berger, Success and Failure of Picasso (Harmondsworth 1965), p. 75.
5. Analytic Cubism, which lasted only three or four years (1910–1912), developed quickly to the point where traces of the depicted object(s) almost (but not quite) disappeared. Synthetic Cubism imported ‘real’ materials – oil cloth, newsprint etc. – into the painting thus violating another tradition maintained since the Renaissance of the unity of materials in a work.
6. A ‘ready made’ upside down urinal signed ‘R. Mutt’.
7. There are isolated exceptions – Kurt Schwitters’ ‘sound poems’, John Cage’s 4'33" of silence – but they have remained marginal to their respective art forms and do not change the general picture.
8. Though never, of course, its only function. Considerable caution must be exercised in the attribution of naturalistic representation to a tradition that ranges from Leonardo’s Virgin of the Rocks to Hieronymus Bosch’s Garden of Earthly Delights and Goya’s nightmarish Disparates.
9. Anyone familiar with the Marxist tradition on cultural theory will detect the echo of Lukács here, but it will be evident I am not arguing a Lukácsian position here.
10. Society portraiture continues of course, as does a certain amount of art as state propaganda, but its quality and significance as art diminish dramatically. There is no artistically important painting of Napoleon III, Gladstone, Disraeli, Bismarck, Hitler or Stalin. (There was one portrait of Churchill – by Graham Sutherland – that could claim some serious artistic merit but this was destroyed by the Churchill family.)
11. The Physical Impossibility of Death in the Mind of the Living, to give it its full title.
12. Moreover this is a work which is too large for storage in any ordinary house and which involves considerable maintenance costs.
13. Which, in a delicious irony, it turns out is probably a fake.
14. Modern architecture, of course, has its own problem of legitimacy and public hostility.
15. See F. Garcia Lorca, Theory and Function of the Duende, in Obras Completas 3 (Barcelona 1997).
16. I must stress that this analysis has only addressed the question of why the crisis of legitimacy in modern visual art is especially acute. It has not addressed the wider problem of the general split between high culture and popular culture and working class philistinism which requires a much larger analysis of relations between class, exploitation, alienation and culture in capitalist society.
17. The most famous art faker of the century was van Meegeren who forged Vermeers.
18. Of course a Marxist and dialectician understands that all definitions are static concepts imposed on living, changing reality and that in the final analysis all definitions fray at the edges – there are always exceptions, transitional and marginal cases (like the coelacanth in biology). This does not change the fact that definitions are useful and necessary for human knowledge. ‘Knowledge in general begins with distinguishing between things’, L. Trotsky, On Literature and Art, op. cit., p. 64.
19. Think also of John Keats’s lines: ‘Beauty is truth, truth beauty/That is all ye know on earth and all ye need to know.’
20. It is only these ready-mades which show an absence of craft skill. In Duchamp’s other work, for example his Cubist/Futurist painting Nude Descending a Staircase (1911) and his ‘sculpture’ The Large Glass or The Bride Stripped Bare by Her Bachelors, Even (1915–1923), there is a very high level of technical skill.
21. It was the last of this integrated series. Equivalent VIII which, extracted from the total installation, became the infamous Bricks in the Tate.
22. I should say here that, personally, I do find André’s brick sculptures ‘beautiful’. For an art historian who shares this view see P. Wood, On Different Silences, Museum of Modern Art Papers, vol. 2 (Oxford 1996). However, I am not arguing that art has to be beautiful to be art, nor does the reader have to have my particular response to this work to accept my general arguments here.
23. Marcel Duchamp was an outstanding chess player who represented France in the Chess Olympics. In some ways his Fountain can be likened to a daring chess move in which he had calculated in advance the various possible responses of the art institutions, critics, journalists, public, etc.
24. A friend of mine visiting the Objects of Desire exhibition at the Hayward Gallery touched Duchamp’s Bicycle Wheel to see if it would spin and was immediately remonstrated with by the attendant. This despite the fact that the original Bicycle Wheel ready made (like the original Bottle Rack and Fountain) has been lost and what was being shown was a replica – a kind of authentic fake.
25. It is also reminiscent of Althusser’s position that the proof of theory lay not in practice but within theory itself.
26. K. Marx, Wage Labour and Capital (Moscow 1978), p. 28. Also, ‘Capital is not a thing, but rather a definite social production relation belonging to a definite historical formation of society’, Capital, vol. 3 (Moscow 1966), p. 814.
27. K. Marx, Capital, vol. 1 (Moscow 1970), pp. 76–77.
28. For a much fuller discussion of this idea from a position similar – though not identical to mine – see A. Sanchez Vázquez, Art and Society: Essays in Marxist Aesthetics (London 1979), especially Part II: The Fate of Art Under Capitalism.
29. ‘Art is man’s expression of his joy in labour,’ writes William Morris in Art, Labour and Socialism, cited M. Solomon (ed.), Marxism and Art (Brighton 1979), p. 85. Morris was broadly heading in the same direction as me, but without the advantage of having read Marx’s 1844 Manuscripts.
30. K. Marx, Early Writings (London 1963), pp. 124–125.
31. K. Marx, Debating the Freedom of the Press, in L. Baxandall and S. Morowski (eds.), Marx and Engels on Literature and Art (New York 1974).
32. Cited in M. Solomon (ed.), op. cit., p. 75.
33. L. Trotsky, On Literature and Art, op. cit., p. 96.
34. Ibid., p. 106.
35. Ibid., p. 114.
36. This argument raises the question of the so called ‘interpretive’ as opposed to ‘creative’ artist – the actor, musician, dancer, etc. These are transitional cases and normal usage of the term art in relation to such roles reflects this. Like all transitional cases they range from one end of the spectrum to the other – from the minimally artistic ‘extra’ or dancer in the chorus, to the highly artistic leading actor, prima ballerina, virtuoso violin soloist.
37. Once again there are transitional and intermediate cases: the work of theory like Marx’s Capital or Trotsky’s History of the Russian Revolution that has significant ‘artistic’ elements in its composition; the lovingly tended garden or carefully prepared meal that is a ‘work of art’.
38. K. Marx, Theories of Surplus Value (Moscow 1963), Part I, p. 285.
39. By the same token the works in the Saatchi Gallery in St John’s Wood are art but the advertisements produced by Saatchi & Saatchi are not.
40. Ortegay Gasset, T.S. Eliot and Ayn Rand represent versions of this right wing elitism. Adorno is the extreme example of left elitism. Clement Greenberg, the most influential art critic of the 1940s, 1950s and early 1960s, travelled from left elitism in Avant Garde and Kitsch in 1939 (called ‘Eliotic Trotskyism’ by T.J. Clarke) to right elitism in the 1950s and in his 1961 article Modernist Painting; Luxemburg and Trotsky could also be seen as in the left elitist category because of their insistence on the impossibility of an independent working class culture under capitalism, but this is really an abuse of the term elitist.
41. T.S. Eliot, The Use of Poetry and the Use of Criticism (London 1964), p. 150.
42. See T.J. Clark, Preliminaries to a Possible Treatment of Olympia in 1865, Screen, vol. 21, no. 1 (Spring 1980).
43. I leave aside here the fact that what it means to understand a work of art (especially visual art) is neither simple nor self evident.
44. It is worth noting that this useful information is not in any way the specialist knowledge of the art expert but was front page news at the time Guernica was painted. Moreover Guernica is very unusual in Picasso’s vast oeuvre in needing this kind of factual explanation.
45. At the time the opinion was aired that the Republican cause would have been better served by a more ‘accessible’ Socialist Realist work but I can think of no Socialist Realist painting on any subject whatsoever that has had anything approaching the impact of Guernica.
46. The poem is called On First Looking into Chapman’s Homer.
47. See John Berger’s critique of Picasso’s paintings that are based on paintings by other artists in Success and Failure of Picasso, op. cit., pp. 94–98, 183–186.
48. These and all other figures for attendance at the Tate were supplied by Joanna Stevenson of the Tate Gallery Information Office. Figures for the Hayward were supplied by Kate Harman from the Hayward Gallery and figures for the Royal Academy came from the press.
49. Attendance at the Sensation exhibition ran at approximately 20,000 a week; at Objects of Desire at approximately 8,000 a week. In the week ending 14 February 1998, Helen Fielding’s Bridget Jones’s Diary stood at number one in the paperback bestsellers list with a weekly sale of 22,371 and Ted Hughes’s Tales from Ovid, the highest ranking poetry, stood at number 12 with a weekly sale of 6,680.
50. I have to confess I don’t know any Italian painting of the 1890s or British sculpture of the 1790s. Undoubtedly there are people who know lots about both but they are as likely to be antique dealers as art critics or historians.
51. Thus we have the tale of Giotto drawing a perfect circle freehand, we have Raphaelesque Madonnas, we have Titian hair, we have Marx proclaiming that ‘anyone in whom there is a potential Raphael should be able to develop without hindrance’ [Marx and Engels, On Literature and Art (Moscow 1976), p. 177] and we have Picasso saying, ‘When I was a child I could draw like Raphael. I have spent the rest of my life trying to draw like a child.’
52. G. Plekhanov, Art and Social Life (1912), in P. Davison, R. Meyersohn and E. Shils (eds.), Literary Taste, Culture and Mass Communication, vol. 3 (Cambridge 1978), p. 63.
53. F. Klingender, Content and Form in Art, in C. Harrison and P. Wood, Art in Theory 1900–1990 (London 1992), pp. 422–423.
54. L. Trotsky, On Literature and Art, op. cit., pp. 105–106.
55. See John Berger’s analysis of Cubism in Success and Failure of Picasso, op. cit., pp. 48–70.
56. See L. Trotsky, The Death Agony of Capitalism and the Tasks of the Fourth International, in The Transitional Programme for Socialist Revolution (New York 1977).
57. J. Molyneux, Is Marxism Deterministic?, International Socialism 68, p. 55.
58. K. Marx, Introduction to a Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, cited in M. Solomon (ed.), op. cit., p. 63.
59. I mean petty bourgeois in the strict Marxist sense of their objective role in the productive process of society and their relationship to the means of production. With very few exceptions artists are small producers who own their own means of production and sell not their labour power but the products of their labour.
60. L. Trotsky, On Literature and Art, op. cit., p. 104.
61. See ibid., pp. 104–105.
62. B. Brecht, Poems 1913–1956 (London 1979), p. 320.
63. P. Anderson, Modernity and Revolution, New Left Review 144.
64. Ibid.
65. Ibid.
66. Ibid.
 



The British art world is cock-a-hoop. It is convinced that in what has become known as Young British Art (YBA) it has found the answer to its dreams. Young, new, energetic, dynamic, cocky, cockney, rebellious (but not too rebellious, not Marxist or communist or anything old fashioned like that) sexy, successful, scandalous (in just the way that attracts the media and draws the crowds) and above all profitable and British – everything they ever wanted from an art movement and were afraid even to hope for. Already two books have been published specifically to celebrate ‘the world of YBA’: Blimey! From Bohemian to Britpop: The London Artworld from Francis Bacon to Damien Hirst by Matthew Collings is ironic, hip, cool, a postmodern hagiography; Moving Targets: A User’s Guide to British Art Now by Luisa Buck is just a hagiography. Its opening paragraph sums up the tone and message of the book and also the current mood of the art world:
More than at any other time in its history, British art is booming. For several years critics, curators and collectors from across the globe have been converging on the UK – especially London and Glasgow – to admire, to purchase and to select from Britain’s artistic boldest and best. At home, a fully fledged mythology has grown up around the phenomenon of the Young British Artist as an uncouth entrepreneurial species that emerged fully formed from Goldsmiths’ College in south London with Damien Hirst at its head to fly in the face of orthodoxy and the art establishment. [1]
Everything about this passage and about the phenomenon as a whole seems designed to make socialist hackles rise. There is the crude nationalism reminiscent of the American chauvinism that accompanied the promotion of Abstract Expressionism in the 1950s (including its sponsorship by the CIA). [2] There is the unabashed commercialism of the language – note ‘booming’, ‘to admire, to purchase’ and ‘uncouth entrepreneurial species’ – straight out of the Thatcherite 1980s, which, of course, is where a lot of YBA comes from (the Goldsmiths’ year of 1988). [3] There is the conscious emphasis on media hype, played to perfection round the Myra Hindley painting (of which more later). Above all there is the looming figure of Charles Saatchi, patron of Damien Hirst, owner of by far the largest collection of YBA (at the Saatchi Gallery in St John’s Wood), supplier of all the works in the ‘Sensation’ exhibition at the Royal Academy in autumn 1997 and supposedly ‘the Lorenzo de Medici of our times’. In many ways YBA fits exactly the scenario outlined by Trotsky in Art and Politics in our Epoch:
Bourgeois society showed its strength throughout long periods of history in the fact that combining repression and encouragement, boycott and flattery, it was able to control and assimilate every ‘rebel’ movement in art and raise it to the level of official ‘recognition’. But each time this ‘recognition’ betokened, when all is said and done, the approach of trouble. It was then that from the left wing of the academic school or below it – i.e. from the ranks of a new generation of bohemian artists – a fresher revolt would surge up to attain in its turn, after a decent interval, the steps of the academy. [4]
The only difference is that YBAs have omitted the decent interval. Nevertheless, socialists cannot just write a minus where the bourgeoisie writes a plus. In politics simply inverting the judgements of the bourgeoisie soon lets one down and in the sphere of art (as in science) it is completely hopeless. In its time the bourgeoisie has patronised Michelangelo and Rembrandt, Hogarth and David, Picasso and Pollock – all in their different ways great artists. The extremely backward Spanish monarchy managed to maintain Velázquez and Goya, and Diego Rivera was commissioned in turn by the San Francisco Pacific Stock Exchange, Edsel B. Ford (son of Henry) and John D. Rockefeller. [5] In general the bourgeoisie as a class is aware of the power of art and culture and, desirous of maintaining its hegemony in this sphere as in others, ‘delegates’ some of its number to specialise in this area. The latter – the likes of Sir Kenneth Clark and Lord Gowrie, Peggy Guggenheim and Charles Saatchi – seek, in their own way, to promote and embrace the best art, past and present. Which is not to say their taste can be trusted. In the second half of the 19th century the establishment and the bourgeoisie condemned or ignored, by turn, Courbet, Manet, the Impressionists, Seurat, Van Gogh and Cézanne. The bourgeoisie also at times endorses the bogus (Dali), inflates the mediocre (the Pre-Raphaelites) and rewards the downright awful (Landseer). We cannot, therefore, respond to the YBA phenomenon ‘on principle’. There is no alternative to confronting the actual art and judging it on its merits. In this article I attempt to do this via consideration of the art and artists represented in the Royal Academy Sensation exhibition.
The exhibition consisted of 110 works by 42 different artists and this in itself creates a problem for a review like this. It is impossible to respond to and comment meaningfully on all of them, either works or artists. At the same time there is a difficulty in responding to the show as a totality. Sensation was not a collaborative effort, it was a selection from a collection, and therefore one cannot simply generalise or tar everything with the same brush. The Louvre contains paintings by Raphael, Rembrandt and Louis Le Nain. They are neither similar in style nor equal in merit. Max Ernst, Joan Miró and Salvador Dali are all known as Surrealists. This does not make a judgement of one hold true for the others. Nevertheless, some kind of holistic response to the experience of Sensation seems both necessary and inevitable. I shall proceed by first discussing the work and artists I consider particularly significant (negatively and positively) and then by making some general comments.
Unfortunately it is necessary to begin by dealing with Marcus Harvey’s Myra, the giant reproduction of the familiar newspaper image of Myra Hindley constructed out of children’s handprints. This was the sign under which the exhibition was marketed, its logo, its shop window display, its loss leader. Whether or not this was the conscious intention from the outset, and whether there was actual conspiracy with the media, is hard to judge but this was how it worked out, and very successfully too. Everyone (artist, tabloids, curator, parents of Hindley’s victims, outraged old Royal Academicians etc.) played their required parts and the result was the record 300,000 plus attendance (which at seven quid a time is a lot of filthy lucre). I say unfortunately because as art, as a painting, Myra doesn’t amount to much. Politically it is important to reject the media’s hypocrisy about this image and the absurd inflation of its power. In so far as this particular image of Hindley possesses iconic power in our culture it is the media’s constant use of it, not Harvey, that created it. When The Mirror denounced the painting as a ‘disgrace’ it plastered it all over its front page thus projecting it into 2 million homes. In other words, the fuss is not about the image itself but about making it into ‘art’, or calling it ‘art’. Does this mean paintings of monstrous people cannot be art or morally speaking ought not to be art? [6] Where does that leave Holbein’s Henry VIII portraits or John Heartfield’s photomontages of Hitler and Goering? However, defending the ‘right’ of the Academy to show Myra is not the same as proclaiming its great artistic merits. Technically there is nothing specially original, interesting or excellent about its conception or execution. In so far as it makes a point, it is that the image of Myra Hindley is made out of the bodies of murdered children – this is the function of constructing the image from children’s handprints. But we know this already and the painting does not make the point with any particular power.
What really gives the game away as far as Marcus Harvey is concerned is his other work in the show: Proud of his Wife and Dudley, Like What You See? Then Call Me, two crudely sexist nudes in which art imitates pornography. Of course it is ‘knowing’ and ‘ironic’ so that’s supposed to make it alright. It doesn’t. The catalogue tells us that these paintings ‘simultaneously contain and exceed their salacious imagery’. [7] They don’t. From John Berger’s Ways of Seeing onwards Marxist and feminist critics of the representation of the female nude by the likes of Titian, Velázquez, and Ingres rejected the defence that these were ‘great artists’ and ‘wonderful handlers of paint’. Titian and Co. were indeed great artists and superb handlers of paint but this did not change the fact that their representations of women were sexist or that because they were sexist they were inferior as art to those exceptional works such as Rembrandt’s Bathsheba that managed to rise above the ‘women as sex object’ tradition. The catalogue tries to justify Harvey in terms of his ‘vibrant splashy brushstrokes’ and ‘expressionistic fervour’. But is Harvey’s handling of paint better than Titian’s or Velázquez’s? I think not.
However, when it comes to being offensive, and I mean genuinely offensive to human values, not shocking the bourgeois, Harvey’s ‘readers’ wives’ cannot hold a candle to Jake and Dinos Chapman. The Chapman brothers’ Great Deeds Against the Dead is a lifesize fibreglass reconstruction of an etching of the same name by Goya from the series known as The Disasters of War. These etchings depict scenes of appalling brutality from the revolt of the Spanish peasantry against the Napoleonic army of occupation. They show piles of dead bodies, people being garrotted, mutilated and hacked to bits. Great Deeds Against the Dead presents us with two figures tied to the front joint and back of a tree trunk and castrated and a third figure hanging upside down over a branch of the tree, castrated, arms cut off and decapitated – the amputated arms also hang from the branch and the severed head is impaled on a smaller branch.
My objection to the Chapmans’ piece, and I object to it vehemently, is not based on the subject matter it depicts. That is identical to the subject matter depicted by Goya and the Goya etchings are among the greatest works in the history of art: it is impossible to see them without being physically stunned by their utterly authentic presentation of the horror of war and, at the same time, moved by their profound humanity. Nearly 200 years on they retain – and thank god they do – all their power to shock but they contain (the word is appropriate) not an ounce of sensationalism. In contrast, the Chapman brothers have produced a piece of plastic kitsch in which the torture is drained of its terror and the art drained of its humanity. They have indeed committed ‘great deeds against the dead’.
With Zygotic Acceleration, Biogenetic, De-Sublimated Libidinal Model (Enlarged × 1000) also by the Chapmans, it is not the dead but the living we have to worry about. Once again we have fibreglass mannequin type figures, this time children, about a dozen in all, melded together into an outward facing ring. Lacking sexual organs in the genital area, some of their noses are transformed into penises, some of their mouths into vaginas and anuses. The image as a whole is blatantly paedophiliac. This raises the question of whether the charge that a work of art is paedophiliac is in itself enough to condemn it? No doubt this would produce vigorous debate but let me put the question a slightly different way so as not to stray too far from this particular work. How might those wishing to defend Zygotic Acceleration respond to the charge that it is paedophiliac?
They might ask what’s wrong with paedophilia. To my knowledge, no one has said this openly, but if they did, that would be a different debate. I intend to assume here that the sexual use of pre-pubertal children by adults is seriously damaging to children and that we condemn it. They might say that this is only an image, not the reality. This is true and we must remember it (I am not calling for the Chapman brothers to be prosecuted for child abuse) but the accusation is that this image appeals to and encourages paedophile tastes just as other images might appeal to and encourage racism or violence against women.
They might say that the charge is false, and that Zygotic Acceleration is not paedophiliac. This defence is not convincing. The mannequins are plainly children. The absence of breasts and normal genitalia, the ‘innocent’ expressions on their faces, their haircuts and the oversized trainers on their feet all reinforce this. Yet the transformation of their noses into penises and their mouths into anuses and vaginas immediately sexualises them; in particular, the rendering of the mouths as open orifices and the fact that one figure is bent over at the waist while another is upside down so that its anus/mouth and penis/nose are at genital level all suggests sexual access.
Then there would be what might be called the ‘postmodern’ defence, that the work is so obviously paedophiliac that it must be ironic. Along these lines it could be argued that the trainers signify commodification and therefore Zygotic Acceleration critiques the commodification of paedophiliac images. Clearly I am no expert on the conscious and unconscious motivations of the Chapmans but it seems probable that something like this was their intention. Unfortunately there is no necessary correspondence between intention and outcome in art. I am by no means convinced that it is even possible to play ironically with titillating paedophiliac visual material and in this particular case one is forced to conclude that, in a work which itself was and is bound to be commodified, the paedophiliac element of the mannequins overwhelms the commodity critique of the trainers. [8] Irony is always risky (Johnny Speight intended Alf Garnett’s racism to be taken ironically but Alf became the racists’ hero) and here, if irony was the intention, the work has been captured by that which it tries to ironise.
The curators and producers of the catalogue have been particularly dishonest on this question. On the one hand the catalogue makes no reference to this work’s paedophiliac tendency – it fails even to acknowledge the existence of the accusation – covering up the issue in language that is simultaneously pretentious and disingenuous, speaking of ‘genderless, self-reproducing manifestations of excess libidinal energy gone awry’. [9] On the other hand Zygotic Acceleration was placed in a room for over 18s only. Given this was an exhibition with Great Deeds Against the Dead, Myra and the readers’ wives paintings on open view, there can only have been one reason for this restriction: an unacknowledged recognition that the work is paedophiliac or likely to be perceived as such.
Finally the paedophilia might be acknowledged and admitted as a problem but the work is still defended on the grounds of mitigating circumstances: either that it offered important insights into the nature of paedophilia or that paedophilia was only one element in an otherwise valuable work [10], or that despite its content it was especially skilful or well made. [11] But none of these arguments work for Zygotic Acceleration. As for being well made, one has only to look at Ron Mueck’s Dead Dad (also in Sensation) to see what can be done with these kind of materials and how shoddy the Chapmans’ piece is. Nor does it offer any special insight into paedophilia (other than possibly the aforementioned point that paedophilia can be commodified) or into anything besides paedophilia. It simply is paedophiliac and that makes it into something quite rare – a thoroughly meretricious work of art.
But if the Chapman brothers plumb the depths there is also a substantial amount of serious, high quality, perhaps even major art in Sensation: notably the work of Damien Hirst and Rachel Whiteread. With eight pieces on show Damien Hirst is the best represented artist in Sensation and as he is the central figure in the YBA movement this is fitting. Of the eight, two are paintings and six are the three dimensional ‘sculptures’ or ‘installations’ for which he has become famous. The paintings are, in my opinion, not of much consequence: Argininosuccinic Acid is a large multicoloured dot painting which is pretty but offers little beyond what has been achieved in much 20th century geometric abstraction; beautiful, kiss my fucking ass painting is a circular canvas on which bright primary colours have been spun but it doesn’t even manage to be pretty. The 3D pieces are a different kettle of fish – at the very least they are an original and major provocation.
Much of the provocation and much of the ‘scandal’ attaching to Hirst derives from the materials he uses: the bodies of dead animals. In modern art there is a history to this question of materials. For about 500 years virtually all art was made from the same limited range of materials: tempera, oil paints, watercolours, bronze, marble, etc. Explicitly or implicitly these materials came to be regarded as inherently artistic and other materials as inherently non-artistic (just as certain subjects were regarded as fit for art and other subjects as unfit). The first breach in this convention was made by Picasso in his ‘synthetic cubist’ phase in 1912 when he introduced pieces of oilcloth, newsprint and wallpaper into his paintings. Picasso took the process further in his transformative sculptures like the bull’s head made of handlebars and bicycle seat, and the monkey made of toy cars. So did Duchamp with his bottle rack and urinal ‘ready mades’ and his complex Large Glass ‘sculpture’. Later came sculptors who used iron, steel, aluminium, plaster, bricks, fluorescent lights and so on, and Rauschenberg who combined painting with screen printing, photography, and objects found in the streets, including a motor tyre and stuffed goat. However, even against this ‘anything goes’ background Hirst’s use of a large shark and cut up cows was a dramatic innovation.
In general in art, formal innovations occur not just for their own sake but because the artist has something new to say which requires the formal innovation for it to be said. Hirst’s use of real dead animals is an example of this. Its purpose, I think, is to force a face to face confrontation with the brute fact of death on a blasé modern audience for whom images of death are superabundant while its reality becomes ever more removed and hidden. Short of exhibiting an actual human corpse this was about as far as Hirst could go.
In order to progress a little further in explaining how Hirst’s art works I want to employ the concept of the ‘objective correlative’, developed by T.S. Eliot:
The only way of expressing emotion in the form of art is by finding an ‘objective correlative’; in other words, a set of objects, a situation, a chain of events which shall be the formula of that particular emotion; such that when the external facts, which must terminate in sensory experience, are given, the emotion is immediately evoked. [12]
This seems to me exactly what Hirst is doing: constructing an object (using, as we have noted, unusual and original materials) which will be the objective correlative of certain thoughts and emotions, of certain ‘felt ideas’. Thus the huge shark piece works as the ‘objective correlative’ of death in at least four ways: (1) it is an actual dead shark; (2) the shark is a powerful cultural signifier of the fear and threat of death; (3) the curvature in the glass of the tank containing the shark reinforces point 2 by making the shark appear to move threateningly in the direction of the viewer; and (4) the title of the work, The Physical Impossibility of Death in the Mind of Someone Living, works in tension with the piece itself and with the taboo on ‘death’ in our culture. Thus the one object serves as an objective correlative for the fact, fear, threat and taboo of death.
In A Thousand Years with its cow’s head, breeding maggots, flies and insect-o-cutor we have a work that is even more transgressive in its materials – not only dead flesh but living creatures that are killed before one’s eyes – and which incorporates a new element, smell (or rather stench). Here we have represented not just death but a whole life-death cycle, a mini-ecosystem complete with breeding, feeding and human intervention. If it is a spectacle which evokes disgust and nausea, then that too is part of its statement. It asks us to examine our responses. Away from the Flock – a white lamb with black face and feet suspended in a white steel and glass tank – serves as objective correlative for rather different ideas and emotions. The work itself interacts with its title (titles usually play an important role with Hirst) to represent and evoke separation, isolation, loneliness and abandonment, especially as these might pertain to a child. As such it generates an acute pathos. Isolated Elements Swimming in the Same Direction for the Purpose of Understanding works with a related theme but to different emotional effect. It consists of a large glass cabinet containing six shelves and on each shelf is placed a row of six or seven perspex cases each containing a suspended fish, all ‘swimming’ head to tail. We are presented here with an embodiment of individuals as part of a conformist collective yet all isolated and hermetically sealed from one another (a ‘series’ not a ‘fixed group’ in the old language of Sartre). Of course it might be objected, à la Lukács, that this is a profoundly false view of life. In the final analysis I would agree, but it is also the case that this is an important element of human experience in this alienated society and that here Hirst has succeeded in giving powerful visual expression to this experience. The construction, it should be said, is very beautifully composed in terms of its ordering of forms and colours, possessing some of the visual qualities of a Mondrian or Klee. Emotionally it induce not pathos or sympathy but an almost terrifying chill.
Mother and Child Divided was not in this show but I want to comment on it here (in preference to the cut up cow and pig works in Sensation) because I think it is Hirst’s most important work to date and because it brings together a number of the themes from the other works. It consists of a bisected cow and a bisected calf. Each half of the cow is placed in its own glass tank and the tanks are adjacent to one another but with enough space to walk between the tanks and observe close up the insides of the cow. The same is done with the halves of the calf but the two calf halves are placed several yards away from the cow. Of all Hirst’s pieces this is the one that seems to have made the biggest impact on the public consciousness and this in itself testifies to the power of its conception. [13] However, what is most impressive about it is the way in which it functions as objective correlative for a range of different almost conflicting ideas and emotions. First there is the confrontation with death and dead flesh. Then there is the ‘shock’ of the violence of the bisection (shock like the shock of Goya, not the Chapmans) and disgust and distaste at the exposure of the innards. But this works in tension with the knowledge that this is how we treat animals and this is what we eat as food. One does not need to be an animal rights supporter or vegetarian to feel the force of this, just as one does not need to be a pacifist to respond to Wilfred Owen: Hirst is merely insisting we face facts. Finally the title (again) and the placing of the cow/mother and calf/child evokes the pathos, despair and separation anxiety of Away from the Flock and Isolated Elements Swimming. Mother and Child Divided has the integration of thought and feeling and the combination of complexity with visual and emotional power that is characteristic of major art.
Two final comments on Hirst. First significant art, no matter how ‘new’ or ‘original’, always turns out to be the next step in an ongoing tradition. Nevertheless Hirst, on examination, is seen to be the point of confluence of a remarkable number of artistic streams. Most immediately there is the influence of Francis Bacon in the themes of framed and caged flesh (and also a distant echo of Rembrandt’s great painting of a beef carcass, The Slaughter House). In the use of ready made materials, in the making of art out of apparent anti-art moves, in the mix of playfulness and high seriousness, he is clearly the heir of Marcel Duchamp. The use of the glass case also looks back to Duchamp (The Bride Stripped Bare by her Bachelors, Even, aka The Large Glass) and the vitrines of Joseph Beuys. The white steel boxes expand the form pioneered by Sol LeWitt and the minimalists in the 1960s. [14] And in the self conscious deployment of hype there is the unmistakable legacy of Warhol.
Second, it is an art cliché that reproductions cannot compare with the original works. Often there is an element of myth involved here for the extent to which this is true varies greatly from artist to artist and work to work. In fact you can get a better idea of the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel from good reproductions than you can from the floor of the chapel. Gauguin, Miró and Mondrian reproduce excellently: Van Gogh (because of the texture of the paint) and Pollock (because of the texture and the importance of the size) much less well. Indeed with most paintings and some sculpture you get ‘a pretty good idea’ from quality modern reproductions. This is not the case with much of Hirst’s work. The curvature in the glass in the shark piece and its visual effects do not appear in photographs. The same is true of the flying and dying flies in A Thousand Years, not to speak of the smell, and you have actually to walk through the bisected cow and calf in Mother and Child Divided to experience its full effect. In short, Hirst demands to be seen first hand. Whether this is a good or bad thing is a debate for another occasion but it is a fact which must be taken into account in discussing his merits.
The same applies to Rachel Whiteread who makes casts in plaster and other materials of the insides and underneaths of things. Indeed it applies to her with particular poignancy for of her two most important works, House and the Judenplatz Holocaust Memorial in Vienna, to be called The Nameless Library – the former was destroyed and the latter never built. Whiteread had five works in Sensation, casts of: the underspaces of 100 chairs and stools, a kitchen sink, two baths and the inside of a Victorian room.
Before discussing these let us reflect a moment on Whiteread’s distinctive method – the casting of the negative space of an object – and consider its slightly uncanny nature. It is tempting to say that to make a cast of the inside or underneath of something is to make the invisible visible – before you couldn’t see it, now you can. Except that isn’t quite right. You might as well say that before you could see the space and now you cannot because it has been filled up, obliterated – the visible has been made invisible. The ‘things’ whose negative spaces Whiteread casts are (so far at least) domestic, familiar. So perhaps she makes the familiar unfamiliar, but perhaps one can become familiar with a tangible object in a way one cannot become familiar with a space. So the intangible is rendered tangible? Yes, except that in the gallery they won’t let you touch it. Christo, the Bulgarian artist famous for wrapping the Reichstag and the Pont Neuf, has argued that wrapping a building blots out the decorative details and brings out its underlying structure. Does making a cast do the same thing? Nearly, but not quite, since it is the structure in reverse. Can we compare the cast to a fossil? Yes, and it bears those associations, and yet an internal cast is an inverted fossil. So what is Whiteread’s art – just a play on words, a clever but soluble conundrum or a real enigma? The answer depends, I think, on how her technique is realised in specific works.
Untitled (One Hundred Spaces) consists of 100 resin castings in various colours of the spaces beneath different sized chairs and stools. It is visually attractive, arguably beautiful (in fact it is rather more beautiful in the catalogue photograph, where it is placed in a pure ice blue gallery space, than it was in the cluttered Academy) but in the end rather inconsequential. The ‘underneaths of chairs’ simply do not carry enough associations or meanings with sufficient emotional charge to give the work any real point or power. Untitled (Square Sink) works better in this respect – it is an object of genuine curiosity, at once highly modern and suggestive of the past, both recent and distant. Nevertheless it is still a relatively minor piece. The two bath pieces are on a higher level. Untitled (Bath) in white plaster with a glass top manages, almost effortlessly, to condense a multitude of ‘bath associations’: the enamel bath in the cold bathroom that once marked the English petty bourgeoisie (in contrast to the tin bath of the working class), signifier of narrow respectability, genteel impoverishment and austere aspiration; but also the sinister bath, the bath as site of murder, the bath in the Chamber of Horrors; and finally the white plaster suggests stone and the stone suggests sarcophagus. Untitled (Orange Bath) is remarkable in a different way. Made of rubber and polystyrene it is the nature of the material itself that comes to the fore. To the viewer it resembles a giant rubber eraser which might be bent or broken in two, or scratched with the fingernails or have its corners worn down through use. It is enormously intriguing and the attendants have to be constantly on the alert to inhibit the probing fingers of visitors.
However, it is in the large Ghost, the cast of the inside of a room, that Whiteread’s method really bears fruit. Ghost is not like the Hirst pieces where one can attribute fairly precise feelings and ideas to particular aspects of the works: it is an altogether more mysterious object. Nevertheless it has extraordinary presence. In the Academy its looming bulk made me feel pressed up against the gallery walls or perhaps it was pressed against the walls of the room that are no longer there – a kind of claustrophobia in reverse. In a way the title – Ghost – sums up the work. It is the trace of what has departed, the presence of an absence, the materialisation of memory. Indeed it is haunting, despite the all too obvious pun. But what is remarkable – the measure of Whiteread’s achievement – is that one can talk in these terms, the terms of ghostliness, about 1,000 cubic foot, apparently solid, white cube which also manages to look as if it were made of concrete.
The success of Ghost is what makes me so regret not having seen the original House in Grove Road, Bow, before it was demolished in 1994. [15] More or less everything I have said about the casting technique in general and about Ghost would probably have applied to House but my guess is that the poignancy of the work would have been greatly increased by its positioning alone in an otherwise bulldozed street in a traditional working class area. Even more regrettable is the non-construction of the proposed Holocaust Memorial in Judenplatz, Vienna. Tremendous aesthetic/political problems attend any attempt to memorialise the Holocaust. How can the work be adequate to that which it is meant to commemorate and if it is not how does it avoid being an insult? Clearly the Holocaust cannot be visually depicted or described as a totality – in naturalistic mode all that could be achieved would be the illustration of an instance, and is that good enough? If it is shocking it runs the risk of being insufficiently solemn, if it is solemn of being too undemanding. It is just possible, I think, that Whiteread would have overcome these problems. Her proposal was for a huge concrete cast of the inside of a library. In one way, therefore, it would have been a place of quiet dignity, redolent of study and reflection, of the preservation of civilized values in the time of barbarism and of the recording of history. Yet, following Ghost, it might also have had the same effect of filling that Viennese square to bursting, of pressing itself insistently on every visitor and every passer-by so that they could not have avoided the reminder and the challenge that it constituted. Which was just what was needed in Judenplatz in Vienna.*
I have now discussed the worst and the best of ‘Sensation’ and should make it clear that I think Hirst and Whiteread are not just the best of this show but probably the major artists of this generation. Nevertheless the exhibition contains a number of other works I want to mention. There are two outstanding individual pieces: Mat Collishaw’s Bullet Hole – a huge close up of a head wound mounted on 15 light boxes which is genuinely painful to look at, as it should be – and Marc Quinn’s Self – a frozen perspex cast of his head filled with his own blood which achieves an intense lyrical beauty. But I suspect that both of them may be one-offs. There are three women artists [16] – Jenny Saville, Sarah Lucas and Tracey Emin – all of whom make an immediate ‘sensational’ impact. It is easy to see the appeal of Saville’s huge nudes but they are painted in the style of Lucian Freud only not as well and the fat-is-a-feminist-issue type points they make are by now rather obvious and well worn. With mass media that preach puritanism and practise prurience Lucas’s up-front sexual pieces are bound to cause a minor stir. Some of her sexual symbolism (the cucumber, oranges, bucket and melons of Au Natural) is too unimaginative to take very seriously, but Two Fried Eggs and a Kebab (which neatly combines references to street slang and Magritte) is a witty and pointed challenge to sexist putdowns. Also there is Sod You Gits, made of large, blown up photocopies from the Sunday Sport which both exposes and somehow copes with the assault of alienated tabloid culture. [17] Tracey Emin’s Everyone I Have Ever Slept With, 1963–95, in which the names of her bedmates are stitched to the inside of a tent, is based on a powerful idea, both sad and grimly funny, but it lacks visual impact. Emin’s vulnerability is so evident that where her future is concerned one hopes for the best but fears the worst. In a different league is Palestinian exile Mona Hatoum who may well prove to be the third major figure alongside Hirst and Whiteread. Unfortunately Hatoum has only one piece here, Deep Throat, showing film of her throat in the middle of a plate at a place set on a table, and this is one of her weakest, least evocative works. [18]
Finally there are the photographs of Richard Billingham. These depict members of Billingham’s family – principally his parents – with apparently alarming candour in their daily life of drunkenness, squalor and TV dinners. The point about this work and the reason for leaving it until last is the way it forces one to choose: for or against. I don’t mean decide whether it is good, bad or indifferent or whether one likes it or even whether it is socially progressive. I mean one has to make a fundamental decision as to whether or not it is in good faith. In this case that means trying to decide on the nature of the relationship between the work and the subjects it depicts. Is it, fundamentally, a work of solidarity and sympathy or a work of exposure and exploitation? I repeat, this is a decision about the work, not the artist. The artist’s motives are doubtless relevant but not decisive; in the end the choice must be made on the evidence of one’s eyes, not the evidence of history or gossip. Personally, in this instance, I have decided against. I think Billingham has humiliated his parents by holding up working class life as an exhibit for the bourgeois gaze much as the inmates of Bedlam were exhibited to bourgeois visitors in the 18th century. [19] Could I be wrong and doing Billingham an injustice? Certainly I could – the dividing line is a fine one – but what I want to stress is that the work forces me to make the decision, at least implicitly, and in this it is representative of the Sensation exhibition as a whole. One has to make very much the same decision about the Chapman brothers’ work, about Harvey’s readers’ wives, about Hirst’s bisected animals and putrefying cow’s head, about Collishaw’s bullet wound and Mueck’s dead dad.
It could be objected that all serious art confronts one with choices and judgements. This is probably true but it is not usually this particular kind of choice. Faced with Seurat’s Bathers in 1884 the choice was, is it great art or is it irredeemably vulgar and commonplace? With Salvador Dali it is, are these really profound images from the human subconscious or are they artificial and fabricated? With Carl André’s Equivalent VIII (the infamous ‘bricks’) it is, can something so minimal be art, can it be meaningful and can it be beautiful? With Guernica in 1937 a number of questions arose. Does it work as a painting? Is it moving? In what way is it moving? Which side am I on in Spain? Does it help the anti-fascist cause? But not, is the painting in solidarity with those on the receiving end of the bombing or is it relishing and exploiting their suffering? Yet that is precisely the question posed by Billingham’s work and the dominant question posed by the exhibition as a whole.
Why? Why does this question arise in relation to this body of art more insistently than is generally the case in the history of art? Because the underlying theme of all the more striking work here, its common denominator, is alienation – the alienated individual in an alienated society. [20] This is the other side of the coin of the Thatcherite entrepreneurialism of the 1980s. It is smack and crack on estates in Hackney (where many of the YBAs live [d] and have/had their studios). It is poverty, the dole and a sense of collective powerlessness in the face of ‘a power which has become more and more enormous and, in the last instance, turns out to be the world market’. [21] It is personal rebellion in the absence of any felt connection to a wider force for social change.
In this situation art can go different ways. Hypothetically it could retreat into formalism and decoration (what Clement Greenberg in Avant Garde and Kitsch called ‘Alexandrianism’) but the history of art in the 20th century has more or less closed off that option. [22] It can embrace the alienation, wallow in it, internalise it and as a result produce art that is itself alienated in the extreme, alienated to the point of cruelty and collusion in cruelty – with a repudiation of all ties of human solidarity. Or, even in its alienation and isolation, it can battle through by exploring the depths of its condition ‘in the place of excrement’, [23] with intelligence and without surrender to produce work that in its own way is positive and life enhancing. Hence the polarisation in ‘Sensation’. The first option produces work that is the stuff of Lukács’ worst nightmares. The second produces work that can stand in the tradition of Kafka and Ginsberg, Goya and Picasso, Duchamp and Brancusi.
This then is the moment of Sensation. Soon it will pass (life has already moved on) but not before it has left its mark on our culture and on the history of art for both better and worse.
 
* Since this article was written it has been reported in the press that the Judenplatz memorial now will be constructed. However, whether or not it actually happens remains to be seen.

Notes
Thanks are due to Steve Edwards and John Roberts who both endured lengthy arguments with me about the contents of this article. They will not agree with it, unless I have persuaded them, but hopefully they will see in it how much I learned from the dialogue.
1. L. Buck, Moving Targets: A User’s Guide to British Art Now (London 1997), p. 7.
2. See E. Cockcroft, Abstract Expressionism, Weapon of the Cold War, in F. Frascina (ed.), Pollock and After (London 1985).
3. In 1988 Damien Hirst, in his second year at Goldsmith’s College, curated the Freeze exhibition which marks the origin of Young British Art.
4. L. Trotsky, On Literature and Art (London 1977), p. 105.
5. Until he insisted on including a portrait of Lenin in his proposed mural for the Rockefeller Centre!
6. People get into the most absurd confusions about subject matter and ‘art’. Can you make great art out of a man being slowly tortured to death? Yes! In fact it is probably the most common theme in the history of European art – the Crucifixion. Titian painted someone being hung upside down and flayed alive (The Flaying of Marsalis). Can you make art out of a pair of old boots? Both Van Gogh and Chaplin managed it. The question is not what the subject matter is but how it is painted or represented or used.
7. Royal Academy of Arts, Sensation – Young British Artists from the Saatchi Collection (London 1997), p. 198.
8. I am reminded of Vivienne Westwood and others associated with punk in 1976/77 attempting to ‘play’ with the swastika for shock value, attempts which socialists had to firmly oppose.
9. Royal Academy of Arts, op. cit., p. 194.
10. For example, such a defence might be offered in relation to the anti-Semitism in T.S. Eliot’s poem Gerontion.
11. All three of these arguments might be used to defend Nabokov’s Lolita.
12. T.S. Eliot, Selected Prose (Harmondsworth 1965), p. 102.
13. It is worth noting that those works of art which became exceptionally well known – like the Mona Lisa, The Hay Wain, Monet’s Water Lilies, Munch’s The Scream etc. – are often despised for this reason, but usually are powerful and important works in their own right.
14. For this point see D. Batchelor, Minimalism (London 1997), p. 95.
15. Bitter controversy surrounded the decision by the local authority to destroy House which had been erected on a temporary basis. Doubtless the decision was motivated by philistinism and it can easily be seen as an artistic tragedy (as well as a financial blunder). However, it seems to me that there is also a sense in which, just as Duchamp decided to regard the cracks received in transit by The Large Glass as part of the work, so the demolition of House is its fitting dialectical completion.
16. It is worth noting that, of the 42 artists represented, 11 are women – still a small minority but probably a higher proportion than would have been found in a supposedly representative survey of British art at any time in the past.
17. I have revised upwards my opinion of Lucas’s work as a result of a number of discussions with students, colleagues and comrades, especially Sarah Dryden, Paul Clarke, Jenny Walden and Alison Jones.
18. Far more powerful are Light Sentence and Corps Etranger by which Hatoum was represented in the Turner Prize show of 1995.
19. As depicted by Hogarth in the last of The Rake’s Progress series (but Hogarth shows and implicitly condemns the voyeurs).
20. It is possible, thanks to the shift to the right in academia in the 1980s that many of these artists do not know either the name or the analysis of the condition in which they are immersed.
21. K. Marx and F. Engels, The German Ideology (London 1985), p. 55.
22. Traces of this are to be seen in some of the work, such as that by Chris Ofili, Glen Brown and Jason Martin.
23. ‘But love has pitched his mansion in/The place of excrement/For nothing can be sole or whole/That has not been rent.’ W.B. Yeats, Crazy Jane Talks with the Bishop, Collected Poems (London 1982), p. 285.
 










Donny Gluckstein
A People’s History of the Second World War
Pluto Press, London 2012, £15.00
 
The Second World War Revisited
Donny Gluckstein has produced a fascinating and important Marxist analysis of the Second World War. As one might expect the starting point of the book is a critique of the dominant, i.e. ruling class, narrative of the War as an almost uniquely ‘good’ war waged by the Allies for freedom and democracy against the unspeakably evil Nazi regime and its allies. This view, which permeates and underpins not only mainstream history but also innumerable popular novels, newspaper articles, films, TV documentaries and so on, is systematically demolished by Gluckstein.
In a way it is easy for him to do this because, despite its ubiquity, it is a myth that will not withstand contact with numerous well-established facts: the fact that none of the western ‘democracies’ were willing to aid the anti-fascist struggle in Spain; the fact that Churchill openly declared his admiration for Mussolini and that he was fighting to defend the British Empire; the fact that America did not enter the war till it was attacked by Japan at Pearl Harbor (i.e. until its vital interests were threatened); the fact that America and Britain fire-bombed Dresden and Tokyo and nuked Hiroshima and Nagasaki but never attempted to bomb the railway lines to Auschwitz or to take any action to prevent the holocaust, although they were well aware of what was happening.
Nevertheless, in the course of making his case, Gluckstein provides numerous illuminating summaries of revealing (and shocking) episodes from the War which, if not unknown are certainly not widely known. For example in relation to India he records:
On 3 September 1939 Indians woke to discover they were at war. London did not bother to ask for approval, unlike Dominions such as Canada or Australia. When Churchill told the Commons that India has a great part to play in the worlds struggle for freedom that did not include independence for India’s 400 million, a population that exceeded the maximum number conquered by the Third Reich.
One consequence of the ‘struggle for freedom’ was the Bengal famine of 1943It consumed between 1.5 and 3.5 million lives despite civil servants describing the previous harvest as ‘a good one’. This continued an appalling record 12 major famines since colonisation began. In the 1860s an Indian economist had discovered the basic cause: a sum greater than the sub-continent’s land value was drained off annually to support British occupation and profits.
The 1943 famine was directly connected to India’s involvement in the Second World War, because after it began eleven times the usual number of soldiers were maintained at the country’s expense.,
Field Marshall Wavell [Viceroy of India] pointed out ‘the very different attitude towards feeding a starving population when there is starvation in Europe’. Churchill was unabashed – sending food amounted to ‘appeasement’ of the Congress Party. The official record notes that the Canadian PM had 100,000 tons of grain loaded on a ship bound for India but was ‘dissuaded by a strong personal appeal from Winston’ from sending it. [1]
Similarly in Vietnam in 1945, then ruled by De Gaulle’s Free French government in Paris via Governor-General Jean Decoux, a racist Petainist whose services were retained by De Gaulle when Vichy fell.
So the Free French government must take responsibility for Tonkin’s famine of 1945 – the French army shipped ten or more boatloads of rice out of the affected area every day. Estimates of the death toll reach up to two millions. [2]
In relation to Yugoslavia Gluckstein records how the Allies persistently supported Colonel Mikhailovich’s monarchist Chetniks against the real (Communist-led) partisans, despite the fact that the Chetniks spent more time fighting the partisans than they did resisting the Nazis. And in relation to Greece he tells how, when the Nazi occupation collapsed and most of the country was in the hands of the Communist led EAM/ELAS resistance, Churchill immediately sent British troops to intervene. Again here are some extracts from Gluckstein’s account.
George Papandreu, the Greek Prime Minister, wished to participate in this enterprise. He wrote to Churchill ‘Only the immediate appearance of impressive British forces in Greece will suffice to alter the situation’. The telegram was sent just three weeks after the formation of the ‘Government of National Unity’ with EAM members included as ministers!
However, such was their contempt for all Greeks that the British decided to carry off the coup alone. Churchill’s view was that ‘it was most desirable to strike out of the blue, the Greek government know nothing of this plan and on no account should be told anything.’
This was not a simple policing operation as claimed, but classic imperialism. The British wanted to dominate a foreign land Churchill told General Scobie: ‘Do not hesitate to fire at any armed male in Athens who assails the British authority Act as if you were in a conquered city where a local rebellion is in progress’
By the time the ‘December events’ were over there were 50,000 Greek dead and 2,000 British casualties. [3]
Gluckstein also shows how the Indonesian people, in order to win their national independence after centuries of colonisation, had to overcome successive assaults by Japanese, British and Dutch armed forces [4] and, very tellingly, how when Germany capitulated the Allied forces preferred cooperating with Nazis to handing power to the Antifas (anti-fascist organisations) that had sprung to life as the Nazi regime crumbled. He quotes an American GI there at the time.
The crime of it all is that we would take a little town, arrest the mayor and the other big shots and put the anti-fascist in charge of the town. We’d double back to that town three days later, the Americans had freed all the officials and put ’em back in power. And they threw this other guy aside. Invariably it happened. [5]
By an accumulation of such evidence Gluckstein builds an overwhelmingly convincing case that the British and US ruling classes (and the French as represented by De Gaulle) fought not out of anti-fascist principle, nor for ‘democracy’ or ‘freedom’, but for their own capitalist and imperialist interests, and this determined not only the fact that they went to war but also shaped the manner in which they waged it.
Nor does Gluckstein exempt the Soviet Union from this critique. Rather he argues that the Stalinist regime was just as imperialist as in its approach to the war and to smaller countries as Churchill and Roosevelt. A particularly clear example of this is provided by the Hitler-Stalin Pact. Again I will quote directly.
The Hitler-Stalin Pact of August 1939 [was] a deal whose secret protocols divided Poland between Germany and Russia. The Nazis had murdered many thousands of German communists. All this was brushed aside, the Soviet Union providing Hitler with vital raw materials in return for weapons. When the re-conquest of Poland commenced, the Russians left the Wehrmacht to carry on the fighting, thus minimising their own risks and masking their avarice. The Nazis were asked to indicate ‘as nearly as possible when they could count on the capture of Warsaw’ as this would be the signal for Russia to grab its share. Once the fighting was over, Stalin held 52 per cent of Polish territory, and Hitler 48 per cent. Both agreed they would tolerate ‘no Polish agitation which affects the territories of the other party’. [6]
As Gluckstein points out the Russian occupation of Eastern Poland did not match the utter savagery of the Nazis (that would have been a very hard task) but it was still brutal, including the massacre of several thousand Polish officers at Katyn and the deportation of 9 per cent of the population as forced labour.
This imperialist behaviour was also practiced in the Baltic states (Gluckstein devotes a section to Latvia) and in relation to whole of Eastern Europe at the end of the War. Gluckstein naturally records the infamous cynical carving up of Europe by Churchill and Stalin at their meeting in October 1944. [7]
 
The People’s War
However, this demonstration of the imperialist character of the struggle between the Allies and the Axis powers is only the one aspect of Gluckstein’s book. It is his central argument that this imperialist was accompanied by a ‘People’s War’ which ran parallel to it. ‘The events of the 1939 to 1945 period did not constitute a single combat against the Axis powers, but amounted to two distinct wars.’ [p. 5]
This People’s War develops from below and is a popular mobilisation against fascism, imperialism and oppression which generates demands for radical social change. It includes, in Gluckstein’s account, the anti-Nazi resistance movements in Occupied Europe, the popular anti-fascist mood among working people in Britain, the development of a fight against racism in the US army and wider society, the struggles against imperialism (British, Japanese, French, Dutch) in India, Vietnam, Indonesia and China.
Indeed the structure of the book is determined by its focus on those places where the ‘parallel wars’ are both manifest or come into conflict and one of its most attractive and useful features is the accounts it provides (brief, but as detailed as his limited space permitted) of the various resistance movements and their exceptionally difficult and heroic struggles. It is particularly interesting to learn, without having to consult specialist academic monographs, the guts of what occurred in seldom written about places such as Indonesia and Vietnam (during the World War, that is).
While there is no doubt at all about the reality and importance of the phenomena noted by Gluckstein namely the existence of popular anti-fascist mobilisations with fundamentally different motivations from the war aims of Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin there are, I think, significant problems in his conceptualisation of them as a ‘People’s War’ to which I will return. First I want to consider why he felt need to develop the concept.
The reason, in my opinion, is that simply designating the Second World War as an imperialist war, the same as or similar to the First World War, leads to a huge problem. In 1914 Lenin and all the socialists who remained true to internationalism (Luxemburg, Liebknecht, Trotsky, McLean, Connolly etc.) denounced the War and opposed their own governments. But how can applying the same analysis and position be reconciled with the need for resistance to fascism in general and the Nazis in particular, which I am sure every socialist feels in their bones. It is to deal with this difficulty that Gluckstein advances the notion of a People’s War and I completely sympathise with his motivation for so doing. Unfortunately it doesn’t really work.
 
First, Gluckstein doesn’t succeed in giving a clear definition of what he means by People’s War. He himself acknowledges it is ‘problematic as an idea and might appear insufficiently rigorous’ [8] and he is not able to distinguish it satisfactorily from national war or class war all wars have a class content and are, in some sense, manifestations of class struggle, and most national wars have a social dimension to them (certainly wars of national liberation do).
Second, his concept of ‘two distinct wars’ or ‘two parallel wars’ involves the notion of a single People’s War but it is not really plausible to describe the resistance struggles in Europe and the anti-imperialist struggles in Asia as part of a single war or the same war except in so far as they are aspects of the Second World War as a whole. Nor is it convincing to speak of distinct People’s War in Britain or the USA, where no separate armed forces or fighting takes place, except in the very broadest sense of the people’s war that is waged throughout the history of class society. In other words he tries to stretch the term too far and ends up shoe-horning struggles into it which don’t fit.
Third, Gluckstein refers on a number of occasions to the existence of ‘parallel wars’ but his own analysis shows that far from running in parallel these different struggles both intersect and, at times, sharply conflict with one another.
Donny writes, on the same page:
There was such a thing as the Second World War, so its underlying character can and should be investigated. And the discovery of parallel wars within it shows, to use the language of dialectics, that the Second World War represented a ‘unity of opposites’.
And
What was unique about the Second World War was that these tensions amounted to parallel wars rather than tensions within the same war. [9]
There is inconsistency here: a dialectical ‘unity of opposites’ exists within a single whole and is not the same as two distinct (parallel) wars.
Finally if I am right in surmising that Gluckstein developed the People’s War argument to deal with the difficulties involved in simply denouncing the whole Second World War as an imperialist war then this raises the question of what was (and is) the correct political line for socialists to take in relation to the war. Perhaps surprisingly Gluckstein does not deal directly with this question but I shall address it now.
 
The Socialist Attitude
At the time there were four main positions on the war taken by tendencies within the international working class movement: the position of the social democrats and reformists, the two positions taken by the Stalinist Communist Parties and the position of Trotsky and the Trotskyists.
The social democrats gave more or less uncritical support to the Allied side in the War. In the case of the British Labour Party they formed a coalition government with Churchill’s Tories and accepted the notion of a political truce during the war, including of course opposing strikes etc. However, since 1914, social democrats have pretty much always supported imperialist wars (Korea, Vietnam, Afghanistan, Iraq etc.) so this need not detain us here.
At the outbreak of the War in 1939, the Communist Parties took the position that it was an inter-imperialist war to which they were completely opposed. Then, after Hitler invaded Russia in June 1941, the CPs performed a complete about turn and became enthusiastic supporters of the Allied cause. In both cases their position was determined not by the interests of the working class or by independent Marxist analysis but by orders from Moscow on the basis of the interests of the Russian state. From 1939 to 1941, when Russia was allied to Germany in the Hitler-Stalin Pact, Anglo-French imperialism was treated as the main enemy and criticism of Nazi Germany was muted, but when Russia was at war with Germany, Germany and its allies became the enemy and criticism of British and French imperialism was abandoned.
Two further comments need to be made in relation to these positions. The initial anti-war position of 1939–41 was itself an about turn from the anti-fascist Popular Front strategy of 1934–39 and cut very much against the grain of rank-and-file Communists. It was only imposed from above with great difficulty. In contrast the post 1941 anti-fascist line was much more in accord with the instincts of Communist workers and in occupied Europe those Communists formed the core of the resistance movements in which they fought with great heroism. (It was this that laid the basis for the mass CPs in Italy, France etc. in the post war period.)
At the same time the fact that the turn was orchestrated and controlled by Moscow meant that in Britain the CP supported the Churchill Government, opposed all strikes, and denounced all left wing opposition and worker militancy as ‘Trotskyite fascism’. In occupied Europe it meant that the revolutionary potential in the resistance movements, the very real possibility of developing the struggle against fascist occupation into a struggle for socialism, was squandered and crushed – again on orders from Moscow.
The fourth, Trotskyist, position treated the Second World War as essentially a continuation of the First World War and opposed on the same grounds as a struggle for imperialist division and redivision of the world.
The present war, the second imperialist war, is not an accident; it does not result from the will of this or that dictator. It was predicted long ago. It derived its origin inexorably from the contradictions of international capitalist interests The immediate cause of the present war is the rivalry between the old wealthy colonial empires, Great Britain and France, and the belated imperialist plunderers, Germany and Italy.
Against the reactionary slogan of ‘national defense’ it is necessary to advance the slogan of the revolutionary destruction of the national state. To the madhouse of capitalist Europe it is necessary to counterpose the program of the Socialist United States of Europe as a stage on the road to the Socialist United States of the World. No less a lie is the slogan of a war for democracy against fascism. As if the workers have forgotten that the British government helped Hitler and his hangman’s crew gain power!
The imperialist democracies are in reality the greatest aristocracies in history. England, France, Holland, Belgium rest on the enslavement of colonial peoples. The democracy of the United States rests upon the seizure of the vast wealth of an entire continent. [10]
To this must be added that the Trotskyists were not neutral between Nazi Germany and the USSR. Because they considered that the USSR was still a workers state despite its Stalinist degeneration they gave it unconditional support in War. However, they argued that the successful defence of the USSR required the overthrow of the Stalin regime. Moreover, most Trotskyists supported and participated in the anti-fascist resistance movements (which mainly developed after Trotsky’s death).
For both Donny Gluckstein and the author of this review the Trotskyist tradition is our tradition and therefore out of the four positions outlined here it this one that forms our mutual initial point of reference. However it is precisely this ‘orthodox’ Trotskyist position that I think needs to be amended and revised.
The change I propose is that despite the fact, amply documented by Gluckstein, that the Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin governments and the ruling classes they represented (I do not accept the notion that Russia was still a workers’ state), fought the war for their own imperialist interests and not for democracy or anti-fascist principle, it was nevertheless in the interests of the working class internationally that Nazi Germany and its fascist allies were militarily defeated. To put the matter sharply and clearly I think that revolutionary socialists should not have been neutral on D-Day or at Stalingrad.
In support of this it should be noted that the position of neutrality or a ‘plague on both houses’ appears to have had no serious resonance with any of the working classes in any of the belligerent countries. Whereas in the First World War initial war fever steadily waned as the war developed and turned eventually into outright revolutionary opposition (in Russia and Germany), no such process occurred anywhere in the Second World War. On the contrary the large scale radicalisation that took place did so as part of pursuing the war against the Axis.
Moreover working class instincts and inclinations were objectively correct in this. Neither they at the time, nor we with hindsight, can be indifferent to the consequences of Nazi/fascist victory. It would have been an utter catastrophe for all the workers of Europe and very possibly the world. Fascism destroyed all independent working class organization in Italy, Germany and Spain. Had Hitler and co. won they would done the same everywhere else. The Nazis murdered 6 million Jews, 20 million or so Russians, up to 500,000 Roma, millions of Poles and so on. If they had won how many more would they have exterminated? It is true, as we have seen, that Roosevelt, Churchill and co were not fighting an anti-fascist war in the sense that they were motivated by opposition to fascism but objectively, whatever their motives, they were fighting fascist regimes and it is a simple fact that the victory of the Allies resulted in the demolition of the fascist regimes and the restoration, at least in Western Europe, of bourgeois democracy.
A further point relates to socialist participation in the resistance movements. Surely the correctness of this cannot be doubted. Certainly this is the implication of everything in Gluckstein’s book and Ernest Mandel is correct when he writes:
It is true that if the leadership of that mass resistance remained in the hands of bourgeois nationalists, of Stalinists or social democrats, it could eventually be sold out to the Western imperialists. It was the duty of the revolutionaries to prevent this from happening by trying to oust these fakers from the leadership of the movement. But it was impossible to prevent such a betrayal by abstaining from participating in that movement.
What lay behind [the resistance – JM]. It was the inhuman conditions which existed in the occupied countries. How can anyone doubt that? ... People did not fight because they were chauvinists. People were fighting because they were hungry, because they were over-exploited, because there were mass deportations of slave labour to Germany, because there was mass slaughter, because there were concentration camps, because there was no right to strike, because unions were banned, because communists, socialists and trade unionists were being put in prison.
... And you have to answer the question: was it a just struggle, or was it wrong to rise against this over-exploitation and oppression? Who can seriously argue that the working class of Western or Eastern Europe should have abstained or remained passive towards the horrors of Nazi oppression and Nazi occupation? That position is indefensible. [My emphasis – JM] [11]
But in no case not in France, not in Italy, not in Norway, nor in Poland or Greece or Yugoslavia were the resistance movements neutral between the Allies and the fascists. In every case they favoured Allied victory and for obvious reasons. If one takes the ‘pure’ anti-imperialist war position to its logical conclusion would it not have been necessary to argue inside the French Resistance (and in Britain) that the D-Day landings should be opposed on the grounds that they were an imperialist invasion and the American and British armies were just as much enemies of the French people as the Nazi occupiers?
To fill out my argument and to guard against possible misunderstanding or misrepresentation I want to stress that my position does not involve or imply any political support for the Roosevelt, Churchill or Stalin governments or any mitigation or limitation of the class struggle against them. On the contrary precisely the class and imperialist nature of these governments would have meant that socialists should have placed no confidence in their ability to wage a consistent anti-fascist war and that it was necessary for the working class to overthrow these governments and ruling classes in the interest of the class itself and the anti-fascist struggle. A revolutionary workers government in Britain, America or Russia would have been able to summon the whole working class internationally (including the German working class) to a revolutionary uprising and war against fascism.
This position would also have provided the foundation for every day concrete agitation and propaganda on a host of issues about the way the war was being fought from war profiteering and the privileges of the rich, to bomb shelters for the workers, to decent pay and conditions in the factories, to attacks on the officer class, to equality for women and their role in the war, to anti-racism in the armed forces and elsewhere, to real support for the resistance movements (the Yugoslav partisans not the Chetniks, the French fighters on the ground not De Gaulle, the Warsaw Uprising and so on), to solidarity with the anti-colonial struggle in India and elsewhere, to raising the whole argument about what sort of society the war was being fought for no return to the thirties etc. Indeed in so far as Trotskyist revolutionaries were able to engage actively with workers during the war it was largely through agitation of this sort but this agitation would have flowed more coherently from the position I have outlined than from an abstract equal condemnation of both sides.
In the colonial countries it would have been necessary to argue, in opposition to the Communist Parties, against any idea of deferring the struggle for independence. Clearly a risen and free India, and even more so a workers’ India, would have been a huge assistance to the struggle against Fascism and an infinitely harder country for Japan or Germany to subdue than an India still subjugated by Britain. None of this involves accepting the idea of the Second World War as a ‘good war’. The war was a catastrophe for humanity, costing 50–60 million lives, involving innumerable atrocities on all sides and giving birth to nuclear weapons and the Cold War which put in question the whole survival of the human race. It would obviously have been enormously preferable if fascism had been prevented from coming to power or overthrown by means of the class struggle and revolution, without resort to international war (and the likes of Churchill, Roosevelt and especially Stalin, bore a huge responsibility for preventing that from happening). We would not therefore have agitated in favour of war in advance. [12] Only once the war had broken out did it become necessary to say that the working class was not indifferent to the outcome.
 
A Note on Precedents
The main reason why the Trotskyist movement took the position it did was, in my opinion, because it saw the Second World War through the prism of the First. The social democratic betrayal of August 1914 was so etched into the consciousness of Trotsky and his followers that it seemed that their first duty in 1939 was to avoid any repetition of that collapse into social patriotism by repeating the formulae of Lenin and Liebknecht. However there are other historical precedents that are also useful to take into account.
The Spanish Civil War is one. In particular it shows how it was possible for revolutionaries to place themselves on one side (that of the Republic) militarily without giving the Republican government political support and while arguing for its overthrow in order to win the war against the fascists. Obviously the Second World War was not ‘the same’ as the Spanish Civil War but in this respect a similar approach could have been taken.
Another is precedent is the American Civil War. As is well known Marx gave clear support to the North and such is the authority of Marx that this has subsequently gone unchallenged. But could not all the kind of arguments deployed against giving military support to the Allies have also been used to justify neutrality or equal condemnation of the Republic and the Confederacy. Lincoln and the Republican government were themselves deeply racist and opposed to black equality (true). Lincoln did not go to war to free the slaves but to preserve the Union in the interests of US capitalism (true). The whole of the US, not just the South, was built on slavery and complicit in it (true). The whole of the US, north and south, was built on the expropriation and extermination of the Native Americans and so on. Yet despite all these considerations Marx rightly took the view that essence of the conflict was over the continuation and possible extension of slavery and that therefore it was in the interests of the class that the south should be defeated.
Also of interest is the case of the Paris Commune. The Commune the first experiment in workers’ power grew out of the Franco-Prussian War in 1870–71. The war was initiated by the French Emperor, Louis Napoleon III, who fell into a trap laid for him by the Prussian Chancellor Bismarck and launched an attack on Prussia. All genuine socialists denounced this reactionary imperialist adventure. But when Napoleon III was defeated the Prussian army went on to occupy large parts of France and lay siege to Paris inflicting extreme hardship on the people. This was opposed by socialists in Germany. Then the event that sparked the rising was the attempt by the French government, at the behest of the German occupiers, to disarm the Parisian people by removing the guns of the National Guard from Montmartre. In this way an imperialist war turned through intermediate stages into its opposite a workers’ revolution.
 
Finally a recommendation
How much of this argument Donny Gluckstein would agree with I don’t know. On the basis of his book my guess is that he agrees with some of it, if not my doubts about his concept of two ‘parallel wars’. However, I tend to think that if Gluckstein had clearly formulated the need to take sides in the war, he would not have needed the ‘parallel people’s war’ idea and could instead have treated the Second World War as a single whole with many intersecting and conflicting wars and class struggles.
Be that as it may, Gluckstein’s book is both interesting and highly thought provoking a must read for socialists and Marxists engaged with the momentous history of the twentieth century. I strongly recommend it.
* * *
Footnotes
1. Gluckstein, pp. 163–5.
2. ibid., pp. 195.
3. ibid., pp. 50–52.
4. ibid., pp. 187–92.
5. quoted ibid., p. 134.
6. ibid., pp. 56–7.
7. ibid., pp. 4–5.
8. ibid., p. 12.
9. ibid., p. 208.
10. Manifesto of the Fourth International on Imperialist War and the Proletarian World Revolution, http://www.marxists.org/history/etol/document/fi/1938-1949/emergconf/fi-emerg02.htm.
11. Ernest Mandel, Trotskyists and the Resistance in World War Two, http://www.marxists.org/archive/mandel/1976/xx/trots-ww2.htm.
12. In this context it is worth saying that I do not think that in neutral countries such as Ireland or in South America, socialists should have called for joining in the War.
 



The contemporary defence of Leninism involves two tasks: first, the defence of the political record of the historical Lenin; second the demonstration of the continuing relevance and applicability of Lenin’s key political ideas today. This article will mainly focus on the second task but I will begin with a few remarks about the first.
 
1. The historical Lenin







As I have written elsewhere:
Lenin matters. I don’t mean he mattered in Russian history or in the history of the twentieth century – that’s obvious. I mean he still matters, matters to the bourgeoisie and matters for socialist practice today.
The single most serious challenge to the world capitalist order in its whole history was that posed by the Russian Revolution of 1917 and the international revolutionary wave that followed in its wake. For a few short years the survival of the system literally hung by a thread and if we were to identify a single moment on which the fate of humanity hinged and when history turned, it would be the failure of the German Revolution in 1923. Obviously there can be no certainty in such matters, but if the German Revolution had succeeded there is an excellent chance that there would have been no Stalin, no Hitler and a fair chance that today we would be living in a socialist society.
Lenin symbolises the Russian Revolution and that historical moment. More than that, it was Lenin’s politics and organization that led the Russian Revolution to victory. [1]
For this reason it has always been especially important to the bourgeoisie and its academic apologists to discredit Lenin. This has involved a fair amount of personal character assassination [2] but the main charge has been that Leninism led, more or less inevitably, to Stalinism and that the principal factor in this continuity was the Leninist Party. Crafted by many hands over the years, ranging from former Mensheviks to American and British cold war ‘scholars’, this argument has achieved a remarkable consensus right across the political spectrum from right wing conservatives through liberals and social democrats to anarchists. In their own way even Stalinist communists agreed. Trotskyists were practically the only dissenters. But majorities, even large ones, are frequently wrong and there are powerful factual and theoretical arguments against what I shall call the Lenin/Stalin continuity thesis.
First the facts:

In terms of their political ideas and policies there was a vast gulf between Lenin and Stalin. Lenin was a strict internationalist and discounted the possibility of socialism in one country; Stalin adopted socialism in one country and encouraged Russian nationalism. Lenin was an egalitarian opposed to privileges for bureaucrats and party leaders; Stalin systematically encouraged such inequalities. Lenin detested racism and anti-semitism; Stalin made subtle and not-so-subtle use of it. Lenin passionately defended the rights of oppressed nations to self-determination (including directly against Stalin); Stalin crushed these rights. Lenin was absolutely in favour of women’s emancipation; Stalin made a point of restoring the traditional family. Lenin was opposed to forcing the collectivization of agriculture on the peasantry; Stalin imposed it at the cost of millions of lives. This list could be continued almost indefinitely.
 
There was very little continuity in terms of personnel between the Bolshevik leadership in Lenin’s day and the party leadership under Stalin. In October 1917, just before the insurrection, the party central committee elected a Political Bureau of seven – Bubnov, Zinoviev, Kamenev, Lenin, Sokolnikov, Stalin, Trotsky. Only one survived – Stalin, who murdered the rest with the exception of Lenin. Bukharin, Rykov, Tomsky, Smilga, Preobrazhensky, Shlyapnikov, Pyatakov, Radek, Krestinsky were all leading members of the CC in Lenin’s day and all played important roles in the party, the revolution and the Civil War; all were killed by Stalin in the purges. As were many thousands of other prominent Old Bolsheviks and Communists. When Trotsky said Stalinism was divided from Bolshevism by ‘a river of blood’ it was literally true.
 
Nearing the end of his life, in late 1922, Lenin turned against Stalin, broke off relations with him and was looking to remove him from his position as party General Secretary, as part of an overall struggle against growing bureaucracy in the party and the state.
 
The Bolshevik Party functioned highly democratically, from its foundation to well after the revolution – at least until 1921, when factions were banned, and in many respects until in 1923. At no point was it in any way the personal dictatorship of Lenin, who was quite often outvoted – for example on participating in Duma elections in 1907, on unity with the Mensheviks in 1910, on boycotting the Democratic Conference in September 1917, and on postponing elections to the Constituent Assembly in December 1917. On a number of crucial occasions when Lenin did get his way, it was only after vigorous debate in which he succeeded in winning a majority to his point of view; for example over breaking with the Provisional Government and orienting on workers’ power in April 1917, on launching the Insurrection in October 1917 and on signing the Brest-Litovsk Peace in January 1918. And in each of these cases Lenin’s victory was not just a matter of his personal authority or the power of his arguments but the fact that over a period of time they were seen to correspond to the objective logic of events.

The theory:
The academic myth that Leninism was elitist and authoritarian from the start as demonstrated by his 1901 statement in What is to Be Done? that ‘socialism has to be brought to the working class from the outside’ is been answered many times. [3] The formulation, taken directly from Karl Kautsky, was indeed ’biased therefore erroneous’ as Trotsky put it. [4] but it was revised by Lenin in 1905 and not at all typical of his thought – indeed it was never repeated in his later work and he specifically cautioned that What is to Be Done? was a polemic against ‘economism’ (a trend in Russia which argued that socialists should confine themselves to supporting workers’ economic demands) in which he ‘bent-the-stick’. Moreover Lars Lih, in a work of monumental scholarship, Lenin Rediscovered – What is to Be Done? in Context, comprehensively refuted the notion that Lenin had a negative attitude to the working class. On the contrary, Lih shows, with an abundance of evidence, that Lenin was consistently the most enthusiastic of all the Russian Marxists about the political capacities and potential of the Russian working class.
It should also be noted that as well as being historically false, the proposition that a whole social order of the dimensions and duration of Stalinist Russia (and remember similar regimes were established across Eastern Europe, China, North Korea etc) could be ‘based on’ or ‘caused by’ a ‘theory’ developed thirty years earlier is, in fact, crude and rampant idealism. It holds no more water than the notion that capitalism was based on or caused by the doctrines of John Calvin or Adam Smith, or that we that we can explain the nature of Nazi society mainly by means of Mein Kampf.
What is required is rather a historical materialist analysis which takes as its point of departure the development of the forces and relations of production in Russia and internationally and then examines the class forces at work in Russia after the revolution and the struggle between them. What such an analysis shows is that in 1917 the material basis for socialism, in terms of the level of economic development and the strength of the working class, existed internationally and especially in Western Europe and North America, but it did not exist in Russia taken by itself. This was common ground among all the Russian Marxists including both Lenin and Trotsky; as Lenin put it with characteristic bluntness, ‘It is the absolute truth that without a German revolution we are doomed.’ [5]
Moreover, if the material prerequisites for socialism were lacking in Russia in 1917, the situation rapidly got much, much worse due to the Civil War inflicted on Russia by the alliance of Western imperialism and the White Guard generals. This produced the utter collapse of the economy and the virtual destruction of the already small Russian working class. In these horrendous circumstances an alliance between the workers and peasants, under the leadership of the Bolsheviks, was able to defeat the White counter revolution, but in the process the exhausted and decimated working class lost the ability to exert democratic control over the state apparatus which passed increasingly into the hands of a combination of remnants of the old (pre-October) officials and newly emerging Bolshevik bureaucrats. Thus was born the embryo of a new ruling class who progressively separated themselves from the working class during the 1920s and, under the leadership of Stalin, took total power in 1927–28, launching Russia, via the Five Year Plan, on a process of forced industrialisation and capital accumulation in competition with the capitalist west. That, in class terms, is the essence of what happened. Without the spread of the revolution internationally (which WAS a real possibility and came within an inch of success, especially in Germany) it was highly unlikely there could have been any alternative outcome other than the conquest of Russia by foreign intervention.
Of course, on this basis the actions of the Bolshevik Party and the deeds and ideas of Lenin are both factors that play a role in the whole process and, provided they are not taken as the starting point of the account, need to be assessed. Lenin’s strategic orientation, as made clear during the debate over whether to sign the extremely onerous peace terms imposed at Brest-Litovsk in late 1917, was to take such measures as were necessary for the revolution to survive until such as time as the international revolution came to their aid while simultaneously doing everything possible to facilitate that revolution by means of the Communist International and so on. Lenin pursued this strategy until his terminal illness took him out of politics in early 1923. In the process he, and the Bolsheviks, doubtless made many mistakes – some on the authoritarian side, some on the adventurist side – e.g. the attempt to march on Warsaw in 1920, and perhaps, delaying the introduction of the New Economic Policy till 1921. Perhaps the suppression of Kronstadt was a mistake, though personally I think it was necessary. In the enormously difficult circumstances mistakes (and excesses, even crimes) were inevitable; but the overall strategy was surely correct. [6]
What were the alternatives? Two widely touted options were a) the establishment of a ‘liberal’ parliamentary democracy and b) immediate transition to a vibrant ‘ideal’ workers’ democracy or even a stateless anarchist commune. In my opinion neither of these options were remotely possible in the conditions prevailing in Russia during or following the Civil War. Attempting either would have led directly to the victory of the Whites, wholesale slaughter of the workers and the revolutionaries, and the setting up of a fascist regime of utter brutality. Victor Serge, the former anarchist and libertarian socialist, in explaining why he reluctantly supported the Bolsheviks at the time of Kronstadt wrote, ‘If the Bolshevik dictatorship were to fall, we felt, the result would be chaos: peasant putsches, the massacre of the Communists, the return of the émigrés, and, finally, another dictatorship, of necessity anti-proletarian.’ [7]
Finally it should be stressed that the alternative pursued by Stalin from 1923–24 onwards, while it certainly built on many of the authoritarian practices developed under Lenin, was a qualitatively different strategy. Whereas Lenin’s strategy was an attempt to hold out until the international revolution and in the meantime to try to counter growing bureaucratisation [8], Stalin’s was to entrench the bureaucratic apparatus, basing himself on it, and, crucially, with his articulation of the doctrine of ‘socialism in one country’, to abandon the pursuit of international revolution. Without international revolution, Russia, thrown back on to its own inadequate resources, could survive only by forced industrial development funded by the exploitation of its workers and peasants. This in turn necessitated the bureaucracy establishing itself, with Stalin at its head, as a new exploiting class. Far from being a continuation of Leninism Stalin’s policy was its counter revolutionary negation.
 
2. Leninism today
Clearly it is possible to respect and even revere Lenin as a historical figure while maintaining that due to changed circumstances Leninism, as a political doctrine or strategy, is no longer relevant or appropriate today. This was the ‘mainstream’ international Communist attitude to Lenin from, at least, the 1950s onwards when the European CPs adopted ‘the parliamentary road to socialism’. An example of this attitude is provided by one of that movement’s outstanding intellectuals, Georg Lukacs. In 1924 Lukacs produced a short book, Lenin: A Study on the Unity of His Thought, which was a superb summary and vindication of the essence of Leninism, but when in 1967 it was republished, he wrote a Postscript arguing ‘the renaissance of Marxism requires a purely historical treatment of the twenties as a past period of the revolutionary working-class movement which is now entirely closed’ [9] and confined himself to a eulogy of Lenin’s personality without reference to any of his specific political positions. This is not my position. I intend to argue that the core of Lenin’s politics (not every detail of course) not remain relevant but are an essential foundation for contemporary revolutionary socialist theory and practice.
I will make this argument by focusing on three aspects of Lenin’s thought which in my opinion constitute the main defining characteristics of Leninism: his theories of imperialism and war; of the state and his theory and practice of the party. In doing so I take for granted something that was undoubtedly even more fundamental to Lenin, namely the revolutionary role of the working class, but I would regard this as the defining characteristic of Marxism has a whole. [10]
 
Imperialism and War
Lenin’s theory of imperialism was most fully expressed in his famous book, Imperialism- the Highest Stage of Capitalism . This was written in 1916 with the aim of demonstrating the imperialist roots and character of the First World War, but it was also part of a collective endeavour by Marxists at that time to analyse the development of capitalism at the beginning of the twentieth century: other important contributions included Rudolf Hilferding’s Finance Capital (1910), Rosa Luxemburg’s The Accumulation of Capital (1913), and Nikolai Bukharin’s Imperialism and World Economy (1916). The work of summarizing Lenin’s analysis of imperialism has been done for us by Lenin himself. He writes:
If it were necessary to give the briefest possible definition of imperialism we should have to say that imperialism is the monopoly stage of capitalism ...
But very brief definitions, although convenient, for they sum up the main points, are nevertheless inadequate, since we have to deduce from them some especially important features of the phenomenon that has to be defined. And so, without forgetting the conditional and relative value of all definitions in general, which can never embrace all the concatenations of a phenomenon in its full development, we must give a definition of imperialism that will include the following five of its basic features:
(1) the concentration of production and capital has developed to such a high stage that it has created monopolies which play a decisive role in economic life; (2) the merging of bank capital with industrial capital, and the creation, on the basis of this ”finance capital”, of a financial oligarchy; (3) the export of capital as distinguished from the export of commodities acquires exceptional importance; (4) the formation of international monopolist capitalist associations which share the world among themselves, and (5) the territorial division of the whole world among the biggest capitalist powers is completed. Imperialism is capitalism at that stage of development at which the dominance of monopolies and finance capital is established; in which the export of capital has acquired pronounced importance; in which the division of the world among the international trusts has begun, in which the division of all territories of the globe among the biggest capitalist powers has been completed. [11]
The capitalists divide the world, not out of any particular malice, but because the degree of concentration which has been reached forces them to adopt this method in order to obtain profits. And they divide it “in proportion to capital”, “in proportion to strength”, because there cannot be any other method of division under commodity production and capitalism. [12]
As the relative strength of the main imperialist powers changes (e.g. the rise of Germany) so a struggle sets in for the redivision of the world; hence the drive to imperialist war.
It would, of course, be contrary to the Marxist dialectical method and Marx’s analysis of capitalism (‘Constant revolutionising of production, uninterrupted disturbance of all social conditions, everlasting uncertainty and agitation distinguish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones,.’ The Communist Manifesto ) to imagine that over almost a century there would not have been numerous and important changes in the economic and political structure of imperialism. Chris Harman in Analysing imperialism. [13] and Alex Callinicos in Imperialism and Global Political Economy
[14] offer extensive and masterly surveys of these changes which include: the decline in the importance of export capital; the shift of investment away from ‘the third world’ and the retreat from formal colonialism; the decline of Europe in the Second World War and the emergence of Cold War imperialist rivalry; the emergence of NICs (newly industrializing countries such as South Korea and Singapore, then China, Brazil, etc.) and of oil as the imperialist commodity par excellence; the collapse of ‘communism’ in the eastern block and the era of so-called ‘globalisation’.
However, the fact is that despite all these developments certain basic continuities remain. The process of concentration and centralisation of capital identified by Marx has continued and the world economy, more than ever, is dominated by giant multi-national corporations. The vast majority of these corporations, however, retain a national home base with close ties of mutual dependence to their respective state apparatuses, with state power (economic, diplomatic, political and military) being regularly deployed to bolster and defend those economic interests. As a result the world is still divided into oppressor and oppressed nations, so-called ‘great powers’ and ‘regional powers’ and much lesser fry. Imperialism is still with us and so is the fact and threat of imperialist war.
In the 1980s and 1990s, when the hype about globalisation was at its height, various attempts were made to deny this. On the right outright supporters of capitalist globalisation claimed that it was about to solve all problems of underdevelopment and poverty and produce a ‘flat’ world in which there would be little room for national conflicts. This went, hand in hand, with large quantities of (bourgeois) wishful thinking about a ‘New World Order’ and, even, ‘the end of history’ (by which Francis Fukayama meant the end of serious ideological/political conflict, i.e. of any challenge to capitalist liberal democracy). On the left, Nigel Harris argued that globalisation was liberating capital from its ties to the state and Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, in the influential Empire, argued that traditional imperialism, with its rival powers, had been replaced a de-territorialised global system of ‘Empire’.
Personally, I always found the notion of capital freed from its dependence on, and links to, state power completely implausible. Unless they had their own police or army, not a single supermarket could operate for a day without the back up of the state. The poor, all those with hungry children to feed, would simply walk in and help them themselves and if they got away with it, many others would follow suit. Be that as it may, history did not prove kind to these claims. As Joseph Choonara pointed out, ‘The ink had barely dried [on Empire] before the events of 11 September 2001 and the beginning of a new cycle of imperialist wars.’ [15]
In this context, and regardless of the precise economic structure of contemporary imperialism, the fundamental political and operational conclusions that Lenin drew regarding the socialist response to imperialism remain indispensable for revolutionary practice today.
First and foremost among these is uncompromising opposition to imperialism as a whole and imperialist war in particular. It was on this principle that Lenin broke from the Second International, of which he had previously been an ardent supporter, when the majority of its sections, above all its leading organization, the German Social Democratic Party, collapsed into patriotic support for their own governments at the outbreak of World War I. That it continues to be relevant and, indeed, crucial should be obvious. On the one hand the 21st century has already seen a series of vast international mobilisations against imperialist war (with the great demonstrations of 15 February 2003 being probably the largest national and international demonstrations in history). On the other hand we can see the lamentable trajectory of those former leftists, socialists and Marxists who abandoned opposition to imperialism in the name of the supposed threat posed by Islamic fundamentalism and terrorism: a trajectory epitomised by Christopher Hitchens (who actually ended up endorsing George Bush) but also manifested to greater or lesser extent by the likes of Fred Halliday, Nick Cohen and Norman Geras.
Then there is the ongoing vital question of Palestine. All those, including those on the left, who fail to grasp that the struggle in Palestine is fundamentally an anti-imperialist struggle tend to lose their way on this issue. Either they view the conflict as a local or regional dispute between different religions/races/nations who should learn to ‘tolerate’ each other. Alternatively they explain the US’s seemingly unconditional support for Israel in terms of ‘the power of the Jewish lobby’ as though Jewish interests controlled America, if not the world – an idea that leads straight to anti-semitic fantasies and conspiracy theories.
A grasp of, and opposition to, imperialism as an overall system is also of particular importance in relation to the current notion of ‘humanitarian intervention’, as practiced in relation to Libya and (so far by-proxy)Syria. For example, the claim that NATO was intervening in Libya to ‘save Benghazi’, or ‘prevent a massacre’ was a hypocritical lie, but it was much easier not to fall for this lie on the basis of an understanding of imperialism as a totality, rather than looking at the situation in Libya as an individual case.
Another aspect of Lenin’s antiimperialist politics is his support for the right of national self-determination. [16] Lenin first addressed this issue in relation to the problem of national minorities within the Tsarist empire (the ‘prison of the peoples’) and then in relation to the Austro-Hungarian Empire before the World War but it came to be an integral part of his opposition to imperialism in general. Lenin had to fight for his position against other socialists and Marxists, particularly Otto Bauer of the Austrian Socialist Party, Rosa Luxemburg and his fellow Bolshevik, Bukharin.
Bauer wanted to resolve the problem of oppressed nationalities ‘harmoniously’ within the framework of the Austro-Hungarian Empire and so opposed the right of political secession but advocated national-cultural autonomy (separate schools etc.). Lenin took the opposite view. He defended the right of oppressed nations to political separation but opposed cultural nationalism or separatism in the name of proletarian internationalism and international culture. Luxemburg and Bukharin opposed advocacy of the right of national self-determination on the grounds that it was utopian, in that it couldn’t be realised under capitalism, and opportunist in that it sowed illusions in nationalism. In opposition to this Lenin insisted that self-determination, including the right to form a separate state, was a basic democratic right which had to be supported.
The bourgeois nationalism of any oppressed nation has a general democratic content that is directed against oppression, and it is this content that we unconditionally support. [17]
He argued that to reject the right to self-determination was, in practice, to side with imperialism and oppression and that support for the right to secession was in the interests of the working class of the oppressor nation.
Can a nation be free if it oppresses other nations? It cannot. The interests of the freedom of the Great Russian population require a struggle against such oppression ...
In the internationalist education of the workers of the oppressor countries, emphasis must necessarily be laid on their advocating freedom for the oppressed countries to secede and their fighting for it. Without this there can be no internationalism. [18]
In the context of defending the Easter Rising of 1916 Lenin wrote:
The dialectics of history are such that small nations, powerless as an independent factor in the struggle against imperialism, play a part as one of the ferments, one of the bacilli, which help the real anti-imperialist force, the socialist proletariat, to make its appearance on the scene. [19]
At the same Lenin argued strongly for the unity of socialists of different nationalities or ethnicities in a common organisation (and ultimately a common international) and against
... attempts to give a communist colouring to bourgeois- democratic liberation trends in the backward countries ... The Communist International must enter into a temporary alliance with bourgeois democracy in the colonial and backward countries, but should not merge with it, and should under all circumstances uphold the independence of the proletarian movement even if it is in its most embryonic form. [20]
I would argue that all of this has great relevance today. Not only does it apply to the attitude socialists should take to anti-imperialist movements and struggles in the so-called Third World or Global South, where it is necessary to reassert that support for the right to self-determination is in no way dependent on approval of the leadership or government of the country concerned, it is also useful when it is a question of national rights within advanced capitalist and imperialist countries. For example, socialists have to defend the right of Quebec to secede from Canada or Scotland to secede from the UK if the Quebecois or Scottish people want it (without us arguing that they should want it).
The argument against giving nationalist movements a ‘communist colouration’ has become even more important than when Lenin first made it in view of the Stalinist practice, now long established, of doing just that and also the tendency, equally long established, of essentially nationalist movements to themselves adopt ‘Communist’ or ‘Marxist’ labels and language, as with such varied formations as the Castro regime in Cuba, the Ethiopian Derg (described in Wikipedia as a Soviet-backed Marxist-Leninist military junta),and Mugabe’s ZANU-PF in Zimbabwe, because of the attractiveness (to them) of the Stalinist model of industrialisation and development.
Finally the relevance of Leninist anti-imperialism to the struggle in Ireland before and after the ‘peace process’ should be clear. Those socialists and would-be Marxists, in Britain and in Ireland, who lost sight of the anti-imperialist, and therefore progressive, content, of the Republican struggle, for example equating the Provisional IRA and Loyalist paramilitaries, were ineluctably drawn into reactionary positions, siding with the British state by commission or omission. Whereas those who took the Republicans at their (more radical) word and invested in them their hopes for a workers’ republic, were doomed to disappointment.
 
The Theory of the State
Lenin’s theory of the state was set out in what is probably his most famous work, The State and Revolution, written in August 1917 in the heat of the Russian Revolution. Lenin believed that Marx had been profoundly distorted by Kautsky, Plekhanov and other leaders of the Second International and his aim was to ‘re-establish what Marx what Marx really taught on the subject of the state’ on the basis of an examination of ‘all the most essential passages in Marx and Engels on the subject’. [21] Because The State and Revolution is well known I will simply summarise its principal propositions without resort to extensive quotation.

The state is not an eternal institution but the product of the division of society into classes and the irreconcilability of class antagonisms.
 
The state is an organ of class rule, an organ for the oppression of one class by another.
 
The essence of the state is a public power standing over society and consisting of special bodies of armed men, police, prisons and other instruments of coercion.
 
The modern state is a capitalist state, serving the interests of the capitalist class – essentially it is the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie.
 
This state cannot be taken over and used by the working class to build socialism, as had been the strategy of the parties of the Second International. Rather it has to be broken up/dismantled/smashed by the proletarian revolution.
 
The smashed capitalist state must be replaced by a new workers’ state based on the election and recallability of all officials and the reduction of their salaries to ordinary workers’ wages.
 
This workers’ state is essential to deal with the counter revolutionary resistance of the bourgeoisie and secure the transition to socialism.
 
With the achievement of a fully classless society the state will wither away altogether and be replaced by a self governing community of associated producers.

As Lenin demonstrates all of these ideas were already present in Marx and Engels and his only real addition, on the basis of the experience of the Russian Revolutions of 1905 and 1917, was that the central institutions of the workers’ state would be workers’ councils or soviets (the Russian word for ‘council’) based on deputies from workplaces, and this is not elaborated in The State and Revolution. Nevertheless Lenin’s systematisation of the Marxist theory of the state was enormously important. It drew the clearest possible line of demarcation between reformism (including left reformism) and revolutionary socialism, the ‘Marxism’ of Social Democracy and that of Communism and the Third International. At the same time it clarified the differences between Marxism and anarchism.
The decisive point, taken from Marx writing on the Paris Commune and repeatedly emphasized by Lenin, is the need to destroy rather than take over the existing state machine. It has enormous implications not only for what will happen in a revolution but also for day-to-day political practice in the here and now. Right-wing social democrats, the likes of Tony Blair and Eamon Gilmore, who have abandoned any perspective of challenging capitalism straightforwardly accept and endorse the state, spreading the myth of its neutrality between the classes and supporting ‘our’ armed forces and police as representatives of the people as a whole. Left reformists, such as Tony Benn, Jean Luc Melenchon of Front de Gauche and Alex Tsipras of Syriza, frequently recognise the class bias of the police and the law, as well as often opposing war, but they generally stop short of calling for the smashing of the state preferring to hope that it could be placed under the control of a socialist government and reformed, or gradually brought under democratic control, i.e. precisely ‘taken over and wielded by the working class’ – the opposite of what Marx and Lenin urged. This is not only unrealistic because of the thousands of ties that exist between the state apparatus (the generals, police chiefs, judges, top civil servants and so on), but also gives rise to the possibility, indeed likelihood of slippage, from the left to the mainstream reformist position of wholesale acceptance and support for the capitalist state, especially in the event of assuming office. It is this context that Syriza’s failure to address this issue in its otherwise radical programme of social and economic policies, along with Tsipras’s public handshake with the Chief of Police in Athens, is a warning sign.
There have, over the last ninety odd years, been many implicit or explicit critiques of the Leninist theory of the state. A detailed discussion of all these is beyond the scope of this article but the most important are as follows: 1) the mainstream pluralist critique; 2) the Nietzsche/Foucault ‘will to power’ critique; 3) the so-called ‘Gramscian’ critique; 4) the autonomist/ anarchist critique. Here I will offer a brief explanation and rebuttal of each.
 
The pluralist critique: This view which drew on the work of the German sociologist Max Weber, and the Italian elite theorists Gaetano Mosca and Vilfredo Pareto, became the dominant position in academic social science in the fifties and sixties (in the work of political scientists such as Ronald Dahl, Arnold Rose and Raymond Aron) and remains the perspective underlying much media coverage of politics and current affairs. This perspective accepts that each area of political and social life e.g. industry, finance, media, law, medicine, trade unions, the arts, sport etc., is dominated by an elite but maintains that these elites do not form a unified ruling class, rather they are in competition with each other. The competition takes the form of influence exerted by numerous interest and pressure groups with the rivalry between them preventing any one group exercising total or grossly disproportionate power. Within this scenario the role of government and the state was to act as a mediator or broker between the different groups. Such pluralism was counterposed to the ‘totalitarianism’ of the Communist east in the Cold War and the way in which it dovetailed with a view of politics as seen from the vantage point of the US Congress, the Westminster Parliament, the Irish Dáil and the newsrooms of the BBC, RTE and other state broadcasters, should not be hard to see.
The pluralist analysis was effectively demolished as far back as 1969 by Ralph Miliband in his famous The State in Capitalist Society, which demonstrated, with much empirical evidence, that the various elites, including the elite of the state apparatus, were overwhelmingly drawn from the same social class, went to the same top schools and universities and shared the same basic (pro-capitalist) ideology, so that the ‘competition’ between them was illusory or superficial and that they did indeed form a ruling class which did indeed control the state.
The pluralist view also fails to take account of the way in which all the elites are governed by the same economic logic of capitalist competition (competitive capital accumulation) which also governs the behaviour of the government and the state, even when the government members and the state managers do not happen to be drawn from the capitalist class.
 
The Nietzsche/Foucault critique: the hugely influential French post-structuralist, Michel Foucault, argued that power was not concentrated solely in the hands of a social class or the state, as suggested (according to Foucault) by the Marxist and Leninist theory of the state, but is rather a relation present every where in society and operating in a multiplicity of institutions and social relations: prisons, schools, hospitals, families, offices and so on. Moreover, ‘where there is power, there is resistance’ [22] and therefore, instead of a strategy focused on the conquest of power, it was necessary to pursue a multitude of localized, dispersed, battles against overweaning power wherever it appeared.
The first objection to this argument is that, as so often, it rejects Marx and Lenin on the basis of an oversimplification. Neither Marx nor Lenin claimed all power was held by the ruling class or its state or that it was not necessary to challenge power at a local or workplace or familial level; merely that decisive power in society was concentrated there. Of course it is true that the teacher exercises a certain power in the classroom, the doctor in the hospital, the manager in the office, the father in the family, but to equate their respective power to that of the capitalist state is like equating the gravitational pull of an apple with that of the earth on the grounds that ‘gravity is everywhere’. Even a guerrilla struggle à la Mao or Castro has to culminate in taking the capital city (i.e. the state).
The second objection is that Marxism offers an analysis of why oppressive power relations exist in schools, hospitals and personal relations: it explains them in terms of the alienation and exploitation embedded in capitalism, and other class divided modes of production. Foucault rejected this analysis preferring to base himself on Nietzsche’s concept of an innate and universal ‘will to power’. But while this concept can possibly be used to underwrite a sort of left wing anti-authoritarian resistance, it offers no possibility of eventual liberation or victory. If the will to power is universal, success for relatively powerless person A over relatively powerful person B in office C will simply replace B with A while the oppression will continue. Moreover Foucault may have generally chosen to side with the oppressed, but such a choice is arbitrary. If everyone is pursuing their own ‘will to power’, as Nietzsche maintains, there is no particular reason for not siding with the oppressor, as Nietzsche himself did.
 
The so-called Gramscian critique: this is the most ‘Marxist’ sounding of the critiques of the Leninist theory of the state. Its origins have nothing to do with Gramsci but lie far back in the Stalinist Communist Parties’ turn to reformism with the Popular Front strategy in the 1930s. This was developed further after the Second World War with the western CPs’ adoption, at Moscow’s behest, of national and peaceful parliamentary roads to socialism. The CPGB programme, The British Road to Socialism, adopted with the approval of Stalin in 1951, stated:
The enemies of Communism accuse the Communist Party of aiming to introduce Soviet Power in Britain and abolish Parliament. This is a slanderous misrepresentation of our policy. Experience has shown that in present conditions the advance to Socialism can be made just as well by a different road. For example, through People’s Democracy, without establishing Soviet Power, as in the People’s Democracies of Eastern Europe.
Britain will reach Socialism by her own road. Just as the Russian people realised political power by the Soviet road which was dictated by their historical conditions and background of Tsarist rule, and the working people in the People’s Democracies and China won political power in their own way in their historical conditions, so the British Communists declare that the people of Britain can transform capitalist democracy into a real People’s Democracy, transforming Parliament, the product of Britain’s historic struggle for democracy, into the democratic instrument of the will of the vast majority of her people. The path forward for the British people will be to establish a People’s Government on the basis of a Parliament truly representative of the people. [23]
In the 1970s, when Antonio Gramsci’s writings became widely known, theorists associated with Eurocommunism (the trend in European Communism dissociating itself from Moscow) seized on some of his ideas to justify this parliamentary road and shift it even further towards social democracy. Gramsci, reflecting in a fascist prison on the causes of the defeat of the Italian and European Revolution in the period 1918–23, argued that due to Russia’s economic and social backwardness there was a substantially different relationship between the state and civil society from that which was characteristic of western Europe.
In Russia the State was everything, civil society was primordial and gelatinous; in the West, there was a proper relation between State and civil society, and when the State trembled a sturdy structure of civil society was at once revealed. The State was only an outer ditch, behind which stood a powerful system of fortresses and earthworks. [24]
And
In the case of the most advanced states ... ‘civil society’ has become a very complex structure and one which is resistant to the catastrophic ‘incursions’ of the immediate economic element (crises, depressions, etc.). [25]
This led to Gramsci’s emphasis on ‘hegemony’, i.e. the element of cultural, moral and intellectual leadership that accompanies the element of force in the ruling of society by an economically dominant class, and that enables that class to rule by consent as well as repressive power. ‘The supremacy of a social group manifests itself in two ways, as “domination”, and as “intellectual and moral leadership”A social group can, and indeed must, already exercise “leadership” before winning governmental power.’ [26]
Gramsci argued for what he called a ‘dual perspective’ combining ‘the levels of force and consent, authority and hegemony agitation and propaganda ... tactics and strategy etc.’ [27] and involving the construction of alliances, which in Italy meant in particular an alliance between the proletariat in the northern cities and the southern peasantry.
The Eurocommunists used Gramsci’s ideas to argue that the days of ‘insurrection’, i.e. revolution, were over and that the Leninist notion of ‘smashing the state’ should be abandoned in favour of gradual and protracted ideological struggle to establish cultural hegemony, combined with broad democratic alliances (with the middle classes) to achieve a left government. This interpretation of Gramsci and this strategy (at least the ‘ideological/theoretical’ element of it) proved to have a wide appeal in leftish academic circles and, for a period, it became almost the new academic orthodoxy that Gramsci had had displaced and replaced Lenin.
This was a complete travesty of Gramsci’s thought. He fully accepted the Leninist theory of the state including the need for its revolutionary overthrow and replacement by workers’ councils and considered Lenin to be ‘the greatest modern theoretician of the philosophy of practice’ and was seeking to build on Leninism not displace it. His concept of hegemony stressed the combination of ‘domination’ and ‘intellectual and moral leadership’ not the replacement of the former by the latter, likewise his ‘dual perspective’ involved both ‘force and consent’. His advocacy of alliances was a critique of ultra-leftism (represented in Italy by Amedeo Bordiga, leader of the Italian CP before Gramsci) in line with Lenin’s Left-Wing Communism: An Infantile Disorder and a development of the Bolshevik strategy of an alliance between the working class and the peasantry, not a precursor of the moderate parliamentarism of the Eurocommunists. [28]
Gramscian or not, however, this critique of Leninism is palpably false. The fact that the ruling class rules through intellectual hegemony as well as physical force does not at all mean that if its hegemony breaks down it will not resort to force. Numerous historical examples, from Mussolini in Italy itself to Franco in Spain and Pinochet in Chile, prove this. The matter has only to be posed concretely to become very clear. Would the Greek military (who ran the dictatorship from 1967–73) or the Greek police (50% of whom voted for Golden Dawn) sit back and let Syriza introduce socialism? Would the admirals, generals and marshals of the British armed forces with centuries of rule and empire and traditions going back to Marlborough, Wellington, Nelson and the Black and Tans, allow a government headed by Jeremy Corbyn or some such to ‘democratise’ them and gradually dismantle capitalism or would they ‘stand up for Queen and Country’ (and their class)? Would the senior officers of the Garda Síochána you know happily collaborate with Richard Boyd Barrett and Joe Higgins in ‘reclaiming Irish natural resources’ in Mayo, or locking up Ireland’s leading bankers? Alternatively is it plausible that the US working class could take over and wield for its own purposes the Pentagon, the CIA, the FBI and the NYPD?
To ask these questions is, I think, to answer them. Many things have changed since Lenin wrote The State and Revolution but the class nature of the state is not one of them.
 
The anarchist/autonomist critique: having written at length on this elsewhere [29], I shall be brief here. Revolutionary anarchists, as opposed to ‘life-style anarchists’, share the aim of destroying the capitalist state but they reject the idea that the working class, on the morrow of the revolution will need a state of its own, instead proposing an immediate abolition of the state as such and instant establishment of a self-governing community with no institutions of authority and force, not even democratic ones.
This position is both naive and utopian at the same time. Is it naive to imagine that the core elements of the capitalist state, even after the state apparatus has been broken by revolution, will not join with the core elements of the ruling class (the top bankers, industrialists etc.) in attempting counter revolution to restore capitalism, and therefore not need to be resisted by ‘bodies of armed men and women’ i.e. by a state. It is utopian to imagine that after the taking of power by the working class, when class divisions still exist (especially internationally) that the mass of the population will be so uniformly conscious and enlightened, so immediately and universally free of the legacy and habits of millennia of class society that it will be possible to build up a socialist economy without any element of subordination, of any compulsion of the minority to accept the will of the majority. Rejection ‘on principle’ of any use of state power is simply a recipe for defeat.
Many autonomists, like John Holloway, have argued that an obsessive focus on capturing the state – an inherently oppressive structure – has been an abiding error and source of corruption for the workers’ movement. (Insofar as the state in question is the bourgeois state they have a point but, as we have seen. This is not the Leninist position.) Instead he/they propose eschewing engagement with the state and establishing ‘autonomous’ spaces under democratic people’s control on the model of the Zapatistas in Mexico. But while this may appear an attractive tactical operation in the short term it is plainly not a viable strategy for changing society. The Zapatistas made inspiring propaganda but changed neither the world nor Mexico. As I have said before:
Moreover what was possible in the jungles of Chiapas is not replicable in São Paulo or Buenos Aires or Cairo or anywhere in advanced capitalist world, where there simply is nowhere that is beyond or outside the reach of the state, and no place which can be maintained indefinitely as an autonomous space if it is also a threat to capitalist power. We may try to ignore the state, but that does not mean the state will ignore us. [30]
For all these reasons the Leninist theory of the state remains an essential part of socialist practice today.
 
The Leninist Party
Of the core elements of Leninism identified here there is little doubt that his theory of the revolutionary party is the least popular in the current political atmosphere. This was manifestly the case in the Spanish Indignados movement and in many of the various Occupy camps. But it is a mood which extends beyond worked out anarchists and autonomists to broader sections of the left and merges with a widespread inchoate suspicion of all political parties among many of the general public.
So before addressing the specific Leninist theory of the party, I want to consider two antecedent questions: first whether it is possible to be a Leninist without the idea of a revolutionary party; second whether there is something wrong (or anti-democratic) inherent in parties as such.
Certainly there are activists and theorists who would broadly accept a version of Lenin’s concept of imperialism and much of his analysis of the state and who would pay homage to Lenin in other ways as well, but who reject the theory of the party and, especially, reject it in practice. This would be true of a many, perhaps most, of the contributors to the Lenin Reloaded conference and book of 2007 [31] (not Alex Callinicos, of course, but probably Žižek, Eagleton, Jameson, Anderson, Lazarus, Negri and others). To the best of my knowledge the theoretical pioneers of this position were C.L.R. James and Raya Dunaveskaya who were a faction within US Trotskyism in the 1940s and who, on breaking away, remained adherents of Lenin and the Russian Revolution but opposed any idea of a vanguard party. Kevin B. Anderson, a contributor to Lenin Reloaded, is probably the leading contemporary representative of this tendency.
Unfortunately for those who hanker for Lenin without the party the actual Lenin devoted his entire political life up to 1917 to the building of such a party, ferociously defending it against any tendency to liquidate it, even in the most desperate times of the 1907–12 reaction. Then, after 1917, he proceeded to the construction of similar revolutionary parties world wide and their unification in the Communist International. Lenin sans party is frankly a non-starter and those who renounce the idea of a revolutionary party are in reality abandoning Leninism.
As for the idea that there is something wrong with political parties as such we have, of course, to recognize how understandable such a reaction is in the face of the manifest behaviour of virtually all the parties most people have experience of, and we also need to understand there really is something wrong with the existence of political parties in that they are symptoms and expressions of a class divided society and thus exhibit many of the horrible characteristics of class society. [32] However given the actual existence of class society and the fact that the working class cannot walk away from this society and establish utopia elsewhere but has to fight for its liberation from within, and on the ground of, this society it has to be said that the existence of political parties is a gain and a necessary condition of even limited democracy.
First it should be noted that, historically, political parties developed hand in hand with the development of (bourgeois) democracy and the extension of the franchise to working people in the nineteenth century. Prior to that there existed not parties but only loose associations among ‘notables’ i.e. aristocrats and leading bourgeois. It was only the winning of the right to vote by the masses that obliged the upper and middle classes and the workers themselves to form parties to fight for those votes. Second, the only modern societies where multiple parties do not exist are those where they are forcibly suppressed by military, fascist or Stalinist dictatorships, i.e. where there is no democracy at all.
Moreover, imagine it were possible (of course, it is not), in a capitalist society, to secure without repression the voluntary dissolution of all political parties so that all deputies, TDs, MPs, councillors etc. were unaffiliated individuals. Would this benefit the working class and the majority of people? No, it would not. On the contrary in such circumstances it would the rich, the bourgeoisie, who would benefit enormously because they would be able to use their personal wealth and all their other advantages (connections, cultural capital etc.) to dominate politics even more than they do at present. Only through collective organisation – be it in unions or in parties – are working people able to resist the power of capital and the domination of the bourgeois.
To return specifically to the issue of the Leninist Party, I will pose three questions: 1) What are the main characteristics of the party as conceived by Lenin? 2) Is it the case, as is so often claimed, that there is something distinctively elitist or antidemocratic about such a party? 3) Why is it necessary, today, to undertake the difficult task of attempting to build such a party, here in Ireland and in every country?
Unlike on imperialism and on the state there is no single key text outlining Lenin’s view of the party – as noted earlier in this article attempts to use What is to be Done? as such a text are seriously flawed – therefore the account I offer here is a very brief summary based on a consideration of Lenin’s practice as a whole.
The Leninist party is first and foremost the party of a definite class: the working class. This is where its activity and membership is concentrated and this is the class whose interests it, primarily, strives to represent. The party’s doctrine is based on, and its activity is guided by Marxist theory. The party is an explicitly revolutionary party not only in the sense that its declared goal is revolution but also in that its membership is, by and large, confined to revolutionaries: the Leninist party is not a ‘broad church’ and does not include a reformist wing. It is a party of struggle which aims to engage with, and where possible lead, the mass of the working class as a whole in all its day to day battles with the bosses and the government. In order to reach the mass of workers the party works in the trade unions and participates in elections. [33] The party aims to raise the political consciousness and culture of its members to equip them to fight for leadership in the class struggle. The party operates according to the principle of democratic centralism – democratic debate and decision making followed by unity in action.
Do these distinctive features make the Leninist party more undemocratic than other forms of political organisation? On the contrary all these characteristics make the Leninist party the most democratic form of organisation available to socialists operating in a capitalist society. [34]
The working class, on which the party bases itself, is the most democratic class in capitalist society. The democracy of ruling class and middle class parties is continually subverted by the wealth and material privileges their ‘natural’ leaders and the careerism and aspiration to privilege of their cadres. Working class parties are not totally immune to these pressures but necessarily suffer from them far less. Revolutionary parties which aim to smash the state are also less subject to these pressures than reformist parties which aim to take over the existing state and thus offer the prospect of success within capitalist society (ministerial posts etc.) to their leaders. The democracy of reformist parties (and trade unions) is also undermined not just by the privileges of their leading strata but also by the fact that the leaders develop a fundamentally different political perspective from their rank-and-file members: managing capitalism on behalf of workers (or in the case of unions, negotiating with it) as opposed to defending workers interests within it. Of course the qualification for being a reformist politician or trade union leader is the ability skilfully to conceal this difference but it remains real and results in a continual effort to resist and divert democratic pressure from below. The Leninist party, restricted to revolutionaries, greatly inhibits the emergence of such a split between the aims of leaders and members.
The commitment to Marxism, i.e. to the self emancipation of the working class, and to the political education of members, also enhances the democracy of the party. It produces or works to produce a membership able to debate issues and hold leaders to account. Inevitably the political level will remain uneven but the situation is far better than in most non-Leninist organizations where there is little systematic attempt at political education. Reformist parties and trade unions, for example, are typically happy to leave their members largely uneducated so long as they pay dues, canvass and turn out to vote. Engagement in the day to day struggles of the class is another major democratic factor. It means that debates inside the party reflect issues facing the class and that party policies are subject to the test of practice.
Finally there is the question of democratic centralism, often a bugbear with many on the left because it appears to restrict ‘individual freedom’ in that it involves an obligation to implement decisions, including those one disagrees with. In reality this is always a voluntary or freely accepted obligation in that every individual can leave the party. Democratic centralism is also a highly democratic form of organisation, as well as an effective one, because it ensures that the decisions of the majority are actually carried out. Again the contrast is with non-democratic centralist organisations, especially reformist parties where, under the guise of ‘freedom’, majority decisions are commonly ignored by leaders.
Building a Leninist revolutionary party of any size with serious roots in the working class, is a difficult and onerous task. Why undertake it? Is it not out of date and unnecessary in these days of social media and horizontal networking? [35] Why not wait for more favourable circumstances, when the revolution breaks out for example? The answer to all these questions is simply that it is necessary for victory. This conclusion is based on both theory and experience.
The theoretical arguments are straightforward. The working class faces a centralised enemy – the ruling class and its state – and needs it own centralized organization to combat it. The ruling ideas are the ideas of the ruling class. ‘The class which has the means of material production at its disposal, has control at the same time over the means of mental production, so that thereby, generally speaking, the ideas of those who lack the means of mental production are subject to it.’ [36] Therefore there needs to be a struggle waged against the influence of those ideas on and within the working class. Working class consciousness and struggle develop unevenly. It is therefore necessary to organise the more conscious and advanced workers separately, in a revolutionary party, to combat both the direct influence of bourgeois ideology on the working class and its indirect influence via the reformists and the trade union bureaucrats. All of these conditions, operating in Lenin’s day, continue to operate today.
The historical experience is overwhelming. The working class has risen against the system on countless occasions from Paris in 1848 through to Egypt in 2011. On several occasions it has taken power locally or briefly (e.g. the Paris Commune of 1871) and on several other occasions it has come close to it (Germany 1923, Spain 1936 etc.) but only one question has it conquered national power and held it for a period of years: the Russian Revolution of 1917, until it succumbed to the Stalinist counter-revolution. What distinguished October 1917 from all the defeats was the presence and leadership of a mass revolutionary party, the Bolshevik Party of Lenin, and its role was decisive.
Waiting for the favourable circumstances of the revolutionary situation will not do. The difference between victory in Russia in 1917 and defeat in Germany in 1919–23, was that the Bolshevik Party had been built over many years and had won the confidence of the key sections of the working class, whereas Rosa Luxemburg, Karl Liebknecht and the German revolutionary socialists waited too long to split from the Social Democrats and did not have time, in the heat of the revolution, to build a strong party. It is necessary to be as well prepared as possible – that means building the party in advance of the revolution: now.
 
Conclusion
The three aspects of Lenin’s politics discussed here by no means exhaust his legacy – there is a vast amount to be learned from the totality of his theory and practice – but taken together they form a central core of what constitutes Leninism. Revolutionary socialist theory and politics today cannot rest content with these achievements – the world changes, capitalism develops and Marxism must develop too, on all fronts and on the basis of concrete analyses of contemporary reality. However it is my contention this will be best achieved on the basis of Leninism and not by abandoning it.
* * *
Footnotes
1. John Molyneux, Lih’s Lenin, http://johnmolyneux.blogspot.com/2006/11/lihs-lenin-review-of-lars-t-lih-lenin.html.
2. The idea that Lenin was, from the start, bent on personal power has always struck me as silly. If as a young man in Tsarist Russia in 1893 your aim was maximum personal power you would join the Tsarist bureaucracy, not as Lenin did, the Emancipation of Labour Group, with about 30 members and no prospect of getting anywhere except Siberia.
3. See for example, John Molyneux, Marxism and the Party, London 1978, Chs. 2 and 3, and Tony Cliff, Lenin: Building the Party, London 1975, especially Ch. 4.
4. L. Trotsky, Stalin, London 1968, p. 58.
5. Cited in Tony Cliff, Lenin: Revolution Besieged, London 1987, p. 54.
6. For a very detailed assessment of all Lenin’s political work during this period, which operates within this theoretical framework but is both critical and brutally realistic, see Tony Cliff, Lenin: Revolution Besieged, as above.
7. Victor Serge, Memoirs of a Revolutionary, http://www.marxists.org/archive/serge/1945/memoirs/ch04x.htm#h3.
8. For a thorough account of Lenin’s final struggle against bureaucracy see Tony Cliff, as above, pp. 394–442.
9. G. Lukacs, Lenin: A Study in the Unity of His Thought, London 1970, p. 89.
10. See John Molyneux, What is the Real Marxist Tradition?, London 1985.
11.
http://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1916/imp-hsc/ch07.htm.
12.
http://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1916/imp-hsc/ch05.htm.
13.
International Socialism 99 (2003).
14. Alex Callinicos, Imperialism and Global Political Economy, London 2009.
15. Joseph Choonara, Empire built on shifting sand, International Socialism 109 (2006), p. 143.
16. For a very full account of Lenin’s attitude to the national question see Tony Cliff, Lenin, Vol. 2, All Power to the Soviets, London 1985, pp. 44–57.
17. V.I. Lenin, The right of nations to self determination, cited in Cliff, as above, p. 53.
18. Cited in Cliff, as above, p. 54.
19. Cited in Cliff, as above, p. 55)
20. V.I. Lenin, Theses on the National and Colonial Question, in Theses, Resolutions and Manifestos of the First Four Congresses of the Third International (London 1980), p. 77.
21. V.I. Lenin, The State and Revolution, Moscow 1977, pp. 9–10
22. M.Foucault, The Will to Know, cited in Alex Callinicos, Is There a Future for Marxism?, London 1982, p. 108.
23.
http://www.marxists.org/history/international/comintern/sections/britain/brs/1951/51.htm.
24. A. Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks, London 1982, p. 238.
25. As above, p. 235.
26. As above, p. 57.
27. As above p. 169–70.
28. For a much fuller account and refutation of the distortion of Gramsci see Chris Harman, Gramsci versus Reformism, London 1983.
29. See John Molyneux, Anarchism: A Marxist Criticism, London 2011.
30. As above, p. 64.
31. S. Budgen, S. Kouvelakis, S. Žižek (eds.), Lenin Reloaded: Toward a Politics of Truth, Durham and London 2007.
32. See the discussion of some of these problems in John Molyneux, On Party Democracy, International Socialism 124 (2009).
33. See the extensive discussion of these points in V.I. Lenin, Left-Wing Communism – An Infantile Disorder.
34. This is a relative not an absolute statement. In practice Leninist parties suffer from all sorts of problems of elitism, hierarchy, infringements of democracy, as does every other organization in a hierarchical class society. It is just that it is better able than other forms of organization to resist these pressures. For fuller discussion of this see John Molyneux, On Party Democracy, as above.
35. For the uses and limitations of social media, see Jonny Jones, Social media and social movements, International Socialism 130 (2011) and John Molyneux, Will the Revolution be Televised?, London 2011, pp. 93–97.
36. Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The German Ideology.
 



Ever since the onset of the international economic crisis in 2008 and the consequent collapse of the Celtic Tiger and the Irish banking system we have seen the abject failure of the Irish trade union movement to mobilise serious resistance to the attempts by successive governments to make working people and the underprivileged pay for the crisis of the system.
There has, it is true, been some opposition: in January 2009 the unions organised a huge public sector workers demonstration of at least 120,000 and on November 24, 2009 held a public sector workers strike involving 300,000. Then in November 2010 the Irish Congress of Trade Unions held another big march of up to 100,000. But on each of these occasions the union leaders failed to follow through. After the November 24 strike the proposed strike for 3 December was withdrawn and massive pay cuts accepted. After the 2010 march they simply did nothing. In other words they led their troops up the hill and promptly led them down again without any serious attempt to make either the last or the present government change course. At the same time the Croke Park Deal, reached in June 2010, in which the public sector unions agreed to accept government plans for ‘leaner and more effective public sevices’, i.e. huge job cuts, in return for no more reductions in public sector pay, has even further weakened the unions and locked them into a position of passive resignation.
This failure has had the most serious consequences for the shape of Irish politics as a whole. It has made it possible for the general disgust and rage at the corrupt and bankrupt policies of Fianna Fail to be ‘captured’ by Fine Gael, even though they always planned to continue implementing essentially the same policies. It enabled the Labour Party to enter into coalition with Fine Gael with relatively little opposition within its own ranks. It has facilitated widespread acceptance of the idea, assiduously cultivated by the capitalist media, that there is ‘no alternative’ to massive cuts and abject prostration before ‘the markets’ and the hitmen of international capital, the IMF. It has meant that so far [these things could easily change] opposition on the streets has been confined to single issue campaigns, such as Roscommon Hospital, the SNAs, the DEIS schools etc) and smallish demonstrations called by the left (the Right to Work Campaign, Enough, Occupy Dame St., the Spectacle of Hope and Defiance) and the intermediate case of the Dublin Council of Trade Unions anti-austerity march.
It has also lead to the development on the left and among those who want to see real resistance (which includes many so-called ‘ordinary’ i.e. politically unaffiliated working people) of moods of rejection and condemnation of not only the leadership of the trade unions but frequently of the (Irish) trade unions as such. This can heard at many meetings and gatherings of the left and more widely among the working class. A particularly crass example of this was the Occupy Dame Street Camp’s refusal to support or take part in the above mentioned Dublin Council of Trade Unions demonstration [1], but this was only an extreme instance of what is undoubtedly a wider mood.
In these circumstances it is useful to go back to basics: to revisit the basic Marxist analysis of trade unions; to review the history of some of the debates about trade unionism in the Marxist movement and the to ask whether Irish trade unions today constitute a ‘different’ and ‘special’ case, or if, broadly speaking, the traditional Marxist attitude to trade unionism remains valid in Ireland today; and then, in light of these considerations, to try to outline the main tasks of socialists in relation to the unions in the present conjuncture.
 
Marx and Engels on Trade Unions
Strikes go back a long way. The first recorded strike was by tomb makers at the Royal Necropolis in Deir el-Medina in ancient Egypt in 1152 BC and was successful. The first recorded strike in America was the Jamestown Polish craftsmen’s strike in Virginia in 1619 demanding the right to vote in the colony’s elections.
The first use of the term ‘strike’ to denote an organised work stoppage comes from 1768 when sailors, in support of demonstrations in London for ‘Wilkes and Liberty’ ‘struck’ or removed the sails of merchant ships in the port thus rendering them unable to sail. [There were many such ‘strikes’ or ‘mutinies’ by sailors at this time.] [2] However trade unionism as we understand it today really begins to develop with the industrial revolution in Britain and the growth of the industrial working class at the end of the eighteenth and beginning of the nineteenth century. At this time it was illegal under various Combination Acts. In 1834 the utopian socialist, Robert Owen, initiated the Grand National Consolidated Trades Union, but it discouraged strikes in favour of forming cooperatives and never really took off. Also in 1834 came the famous case of the Tolpuddle Martyrs, agricultural labourers, who were sentenced to transportation for the crime of forming a union.
When Marx and Engels arrived on the scene as communists in the 1840s they found they found that most radicals, socialists and would be revolutionaries were actually opposed to trade unionism. Looking back in 1869, Marx noted, ‘in 1847 when all the political economists and all the socialists concurred on one single point – the condemnation of trade unions – I demonstrated their necessity’ [3] and Engels concurred ‘Marx’s assertion is true of all socialists, with the exception of us two’ [4] (In point of fact it was Engels in The Condition of the English Working Class in 1844 who first took first took up the cudgels on behalf of unions calling them, ‘the military school of the working-men in which they prepare themselves for the great struggle which cannot be avoided ... And as schools of war the Unions are unexcelled’ [5] Marx followed suit, making the question of ‘strikes and combinations’ a major issue in The Poverty of Philosophy (1847), his polemic against Proudhon (then the leading French ‘socialist’ who was anti-union):
In England, they have not stopped at partial combinations which have no other objective than a passing strike, and which disappear with it. Permanent combinations have been formed, trades unions, which serve as ramparts for the workers in their struggles with the employers. The first attempt of workers to associate among themselves always takes place in the form of combinations ...
Large-scale industry concentrates in one place a crowd of people unknown to one another. Competition divides their interests. But the maintenance of wages, this common interest which they have against their boss, unites them in a common thought of resistance – combination. Thus combination always has a double aim, that of stopping competition among the workers, so that
they can carry on general competition with the capitalist ... In this struggle – a veritable civil war – all the elements necessary for a coming battle unite and develop. [6]
After 1850 and the onset of a period of reaction Marx largely withdrew from active politics in order to write Capital in the library of the British Museum but in 1864 he attended the founding meeting of the International Working Men’s Association in London. ‘I knew’, he wrote, ‘that this time “real powers” were involved both on the London and Paris sides and therefore decided to waive my usual standing rule to decline any such invitations.’ [7] The real powers were the French and British trade unions.
In the course of his work with the International Marx frequently defended the crucial importance of the trade union struggle. For example, in 1866, writing on Trades’ unions. Their past, present and future he argued:
Trades’ Unions originally sprang up from the spontaneous attempts of workmen at removing or at least checking that competition, in order to conquer such terms of contract as might raise them at least above the condition of mere slaves. The immediate object of Trades’ Unions was therefore confined to everyday necessities, to expediences for the obstruction of the incessant encroachments of capital, in one word, to questions of wages and time of labour. This activity of the Trades’ Unions is not only legitimate, it is necessary. It cannot be dispensed with so long as the present system of production lasts. [My emphasis – JM]
However, he also injected a note of caution, warning the working class against relying on trade unionism alone and warning the unions against focussing only on the immediate economic struggle.
At the same time, and quite apart from the general servitude involved in the wages system, the working class ought not to exaggerate to themselves the ultimate working of these everyday struggles. They ought not to forget that they are fighting with effects, but not with the causes of those effects; that they are retarding the downward movement, but not changing its direction; that they are applying palliatives, not curing the malady. [8]
And he sounded the same note at the end of Wages, Price and Profit (1865):
Trades Unions work well as centers of resistance against the encroachments of capital. They fail partially from an injudicious use of their power. They fail generally from limiting themselves to a guerilla war against the effects of the existing system, instead of simultaneously trying to change it, instead of using their organized forces as a lever for the final emancipation of the working class that is to say the ultimate abolition of the wages system. [9]
In 1875 both Marx and Engels sharply criticised the German Social Democrats for failing to deal with the role of unions in their political programme (the so-called Gotha Programme):
... there is absolutely no mention of the organisation of the working class as a class through the medium of trade unions. And that is a point of the utmost importance, this being the proletariat’s true class organisation in which it fights its daily battles with capital, in which it trains itself and which nowadays can no longer simply be smashed, even with reaction at its worst (as presently in Paris) [10]
As the nineteenth century wore on the British working class movement, on its journey from Chartism to Labourism, became more and more reformist and respectable and this led Marx and Engels to grow more critical of:
corrupt trade union leaders [who] never raised a finger for their own brothers in South Wales, condemned to die of starvation by the mineowners. Wretches! ... the only workers’ representatives in the House of Commons and moreover, horribile dictu [horrible to relate] direct representatives of the miners, and themselves originally miners – Burt and the miserable Macdonald – [who] voted with the rump of the “great Liberal Party”. [11]
Near the end of his life Engels was greatly cheered by the strike wave and rise of New Unionism (representing unskilled workers) in the East End of London, in which Eleanor Marx and other avowed socialists played an important role. But even here he was forced to note ominous signs of the new union leaders like John Burns becoming incorporated by the bourgeoisie.
I am not at all sure, for instance, that John Burns is not secretly prouder of his popularity with Cardinal Manning, the Lord Mayor and the bourgeoisie in general than of his popularity with his own class. [12]
Thus, although the emphasis shifts depending on the changing situation, we find that from 1844 to the end of their lives, Marx and Engels always defended trade unions as an absolutely necessary element in the class struggle but at the same time never gave them uncritical support or regarded them as sufficient in themselves.
 
Lenin, Trotsky and the Comintern
Tsarist repression made the normal development of trade unionism in Russia impossible and there were no real trade unions before the 1905 Revolution. There was however the strange but instructive episode of the Zubatov unions. Sergei Zubatov was a teenage revolutionary who became first an informer and then later a Director of the Okhrana (the Tsarist secret police). In that capacity, in the period 1900–3, he set about organising workers’ ‘unions’ in order to steal the thunder of the revolutionaries and keep the workers in line. What is interesting is that, instead of boycotting them as might have been expected, Lenin organised his supporters (they were not yet Bolsheviks) to do political work in these police unions [13] and, in almost every case, as the workers’ struggle rose, these ‘unions’ got out of control of their masters. After a series of strikes in 1903, Zubatov was dismissed from his post. Similarly, Father Gapon, who was both a Russian Orthodox priest and a police agent, organized the Assembly of Russian Factory and Mill Workers of St. Petersburg, which led the mass demonstration to the Winter Palace that culminated in Bloody Sunday and launched the 1905 Revolution. In both these cases, therefore, the fundamental class basis of these organisations, in conditions of mass struggle, at least partially overcame the worst possible leadership.
This lesson was not lost on Lenin or the Bolsheviks when it came to organising the Comintern (the Communist or Third International, founded in 1919 as a world party of revolution). The building of the Comintern in its early years involved political battles on two fronts: in the first place against reformism and centrism (centrism referred to the Kautskyite ‘centre’ of German social democracy and the international co-thinkers, formally Marxist but in practice reformist); in the second place against immature ultra-leftism, which became a significant force in many European countries during the revolutionary wave that followed the First World War. On both fronts the question of the trade unions played an important role. In the struggle against centrism the Comintern bitterly denounced the leaders of the so-called Amsterdam Trade Union International (such as Carl Legien, Arthur Henderson and Leon Jouhaux) and sought to persuade unions to affiliate instead to the Red International of Labour Unions based in Moscow. Lenin explicitly compared them to Zubatov: ‘The Gomperses, Hendersons, Jouhaux and Legiens are nothing but Zubatovs, differing from our Zubatov only in their European dress, polish etc.’ [14] At the same time Trotsky was debating and discussing much more fraternally with various syndicalists from America, France and Spain (Monatte, Rosmer, Pestana etc.) ‘who not only wish to fight against the bourgeoisie but who ... really want to tear its head off’ [15], seeking to persuade them of the need for a revolutionary party alongside of revolutionary trade unionism.
In the struggle against ultra-leftism, which became particularly urgent in 1920 as the post-war revolutionary wave receded, Lenin wrote one of his most important works, ‘Left-Wing’ Communism: An Infantile Disorder, in preparation for the Third Congress of the Comintern. In it Lenin dealt with a number of issues – strategy and tactics, party and class, the policy of ‘no compromise’, the necessity of participating in bourgeois parliaments – but on the question ‘should revolutionaries work in reactionary trade unions?’ he was especially trenchant.
The German “Lefts” consider that, as far as they are concerned, the reply to this question is an unqualified negative. However firmly the German “Lefts” may be convinced of the revolutionism of such tactics, the latter are in fact fundamentally wrong, and contain nothing but empty phrases. We cannot but regard as equally ridiculous and childish nonsense ... disquisitions of the German Lefts to the effect that Communists cannot and should not work in reactionary trade unions, that it is permissible to turn down such work, that it is necessary to withdraw from the trade unions and create a brand-new and immaculate “Workers’ Union” invented by very pleasant (and, probably, for the most part very youthful) Communists, etc., etc. ...
The trade unions were a tremendous step forward for the working class in the early days of capitalist development, inasmuch as they marked a transition from the workers’ disunity and helplessness to the rudiments of class organisation ... the development of the proletariat did not, and could not, proceed anywhere in the world otherwise than through the trade unions, through reciprocal action between them and the party of the working class.
We are waging a struggle against the “labour aristocracy” in the name of the masses of the workers and in order to win them over to our side; we are waging the struggle against the opportunist and social-chauvinist leaders in order to win the working class over to our side. It would be absurd to forget this most elementary and most self-evident truth. Yet it is this very absurdity that the German “Left” Communists perpetrate when, because of the reactionary and counter-revolutionary character of the trade union top leadership, they jump to the conclusion that ... we must withdraw from the trade unions, refuse to work in them, and create new and artificial forms of labour organisation! This is so unpardonable a blunder that it is tantamount to the greatest service Communists could render the bourgeoisie ... To refuse to work in the reactionary trade unions means leaving the insufficiently developed or backward masses of workers under the influence of the reactionary leaders, the agents of the bourgeoisie, the labour aristocrats. [16]
Lenin’s polemic was very powerful – there is much more in the same vein as the above – but the basic idea is very simple: there are millions of workers in trade unions and, regardless of their leadership, they are the fundamental mass organisations of the working class; revolutionaries, therefore, are absolutely obliged to work in these unions so as to reach, influence and lead the mass of the working class. Lenin’s position carried the day in the Communist International and subsequently has been the starting point in relation to trade unionism for all serious socialists i.e. socialists who base themselves on the working class.
However there was one weakness in Lenin’s argument at this time. In attempting to explain the degeneration of the Second International into reformism and social chauvinism (support for imperialism and the First World War) and the fact that the Social Democrats retained significant support in the working class and in the unions, Lenin used the concept of the ‘labour aristocracy’ (taken from some of Engels’ letters to Marx) which he outlined in his 1916 booklet, Imperialism and the Split in Socialism.
... objectively the opportunists are a section of the petty bourgeoisie and of a certain strata of the working class who have been bribed out of imperialist superprofits and converted to watchdogs of capitalism and corruptors of the labour movement ...
A privileged upper stratum of the proletariat in the imperialist countries lives partly at the expense of hundreds of millions in the uncivilised nations. [17]
As Tony Cliff showed in Economic Roots of Reformism (1957) the idea that imperialism ‘bribed’ a very small upper stratum of the working class is flawed because none of the mechanisms for this ‘bribery’ (reduced unemployment, higher wages, labour law reforms, welfare etc.) were, or could be, confined to an upper stratum but, instead, raised the general living standards of the working class as a whole in the advanced capitalist countries.
An inevitable conclusion following upon Lenin’s analysis of Reformism is that a small thin crust of conservatism hides the revolutionary urges of the mass of the workers. Any break through this crust would reveal a surging revolutionary lava ... This conclusion, however, is not confirmed by the history of Reformism in Britain, the United States and elsewhere over the past half century: its solidity, its spread throughout the working class, frustrating and largely isolating all revolutionary minorities, makes it abundantly clear that the economic, social roots of Reformism are not in “an infinitesimal minority of the proletariat and the working masses” as Lenin argued. [18]
This criticism pointed to the need for a more developed analysis of the role of reformist trade union leaders than just seeing them as ‘bribed’ by imperialism. It is a point to which we shall return.
 
As the Stalinist reaction took hold in Russia, from about 1923 onwards, and the Revolution degenerated towards state capitalism, so the Communist International was rapidly transformed from an instrument of international workers’ revolution into an instrument of Soviet foreign policy. Its main purpose came to be making friends with influential political forces and leaders who might be induced to oppose western intervention in Russia and this inevitably impacted on work in the unions. The most dramatic example of this was the episode of the Anglo- Soviet Trade Union Committee and its effect on the policy of the British Communist Party in the General Strike of 1926.
Established in 1925 the Committee was a joint council of Soviet trade union leaders and members of the TUC General Council (particularly its ‘lefts’ – Purcell, Hicks and Swales). Its aim, as stated by Stalin, was ‘to organise a broad movement of the working class against imperialist wars in general, and against intervention in our country ... by Britain in particular’. [19] As a result of this alliance the British CP, in the run up to the General Strike, muted its criticism of the trade union leaders in general and the ‘lefts’ in particular, even putting forward the slogan ‘All Power to the General Council’ as if it were a revolutionary soviet. In the event the TUC General Council, including its lefts, ignominiously betrayed the General Strike, calling it off after nine days, without any gains, while the strike was still gaining momentum. The fact that the CP had not warned the working class or its members of the danger of relying on the trade union leaders meant that it was unable either to avert the sell out or gain from it politically.
The whole episode became a major issue in the struggle between the Stalinists and the Left Opposition. Trotsky fought in the Central Committee of the CPSU for a demonstrative exposure and break with the strike breakers of the General Council. Of Purcell, Hicks and Swales he wrote, ‘The left faction of the General Council is distinguished by its complete ideological shapelessness and therefore is incapable of organisationally assuming the leadership of the trade union movement’ [20] and ‘These “left” friends, in a serious test, shamefully betrayed the proletariat. The revolutionary workers were thrown into confusion, sank into apathy and naturally extended their disappointment to the Communist Party itself, which had only been a passive part of this whole mechanism of betrayal.’ [21] In short the left trade union leaders, as much as the right, were not to be trusted in a serious confrontation with the state and it was the duty of Marxists to make this clear to the workers.
In 1928, after five years of moving to the right, Stalin imposed on the Comintern what appeared to be a sharp turn to the left. It was declared that since 1917 there were three periods: 1917–24, the ‘first period’ of revolutionary upsurge; 1925–28, the ‘second period’ of capitalist stabilisation; 1928 onwards, the ‘third period’ of the final crisis of capitalism and direct revolutionary struggle. This phase which became known as ‘third period Stalinism’ was characterised by extreme ultra-leftism and sectarianism towards working class organisations. The corner stone of this strategy was the theory of Social Fascism according to which the Social Democrats were becoming, or had become, objectively fascist and therefore there could be no question of any united front with them.
What seems to have motivated the ‘third period’ was Stalin’s desire to cloak his assault on Bukharin and the Russian peasantry and his drive to forced industrialisation of Russia in left-wing rhetoric, but its consequences for the international working class and for the international Communist movement were catastrophic. The worst disaster was in Germany where the refusal of the Communist Party to form a united front with the Social Democrats allowed Hitler to come to power without serious resistance, but the ‘third period’ also wrecked Communist work in the unions internationally.
Just as Social democracy is evolving through social imperialism to social-fascism, joining the vanguard of the contemporary capitalist state ... the social-fascist trade union bureaucracy is, during the period of sharpening economic battles, completely going over to the side of the big bourgeoisie In this process of the rapid fascistization of the reformist trade union apparatus ... a particularly harmful role is played by the so-called ‘left’ wing. [22]
Thus in the space of three years Comintern trade union policy had switched from uncritical support for the left trade union leaders to calling them fascists. The logic of this led to splitting the unions and the encouragement of breakaway trade unions. This was directly contrary to the policy that had been advocated by Lenin. ‘We cannot but regard as equally ridiculous and childish nonsense ...disquisitions of the German Lefts ...that it is necessary to withdraw from the trade unions and create a brand-new and immaculate “Workers’ Union”’(as quoted above). Almost everywhere this was tried the effects were highly damaging because if the socialists and militants had the support of the majority of workers in a given union they would be able to transform it. But if, as was generally the case, they were only a minority then forming a breakaway new union had the effect of artificially isolating the militants from the less advanced workers and leaving the latter in the hands of the reformist bureaucrats and sell out merchants. In other words it actually divided the working class and assisted both the bureaucrats and the employers. Attempting to apply this line the membership of the French CP declined from 52,000 in 1928 to 39,000 in May 1930 and the British CP fell from 5,500 in 1928 to 3,500 in March 1929.
The disastrous nature of this strategy is worth stressing, not because third period Stalinism has any influence today or because it is likely to revive, but because the impulse to form breakaway unions can come from genuine trade union militants – in the midst of, or on the basis of, real struggles – who are rightly disgusted at the behaviour of their union officials. But however good the intentions of the workers concerned it has to be remembered that experience has shown that forming breakaway unions is almost always a mistake.
 
The International Socialist Tradition and the Trade Union Bureaucracy
The next major contribution to the Marxist analysis of trade unionism was made by the International Socialists in the 1960s and 70s. This was a collective enterprise to which many comrades contributed – Colin Barker, Jim Higgins, Duncan Hallas, Chris Harman, Donny Gluckstein and others – and it was developed in dialogue with many trade union militants who may not have written books or articles but whose experience was fed into the theory; however it was Tony Cliff who was the driving force and leading theorist in the whole process.
The foundation in 1950 of the International Socialist tendency by Tony Cliff (in the shape of the tiny Socialist Review group in Britain) came in the early stages of the long post-war boom. The boom produced about twenty five years of rising living standards and more or less full employment accompanied by slow but steady strengthening of rather unpolitical trade unionism. Industrial disputes were numerous, generally small scale mostly quickly successful. In conditions of it was usually worth employers’ while to concede workers demands in order to get production going again. On the basis of this workplace organisation thrived and ‘the shop steward’ became a figure of national importance – demonised by the right and lionised by the left.
As the boom petered out at the end of the sixties and turned into crisis in the seventies so the British ruling class launched an offensive against the unions. This generated a series of much larger, and more political, set piece confrontations, such as the Miners Strikes of 1972 and 1974 (which led to the 3-day week and the fall of Edward Heath’s Tory Government) and the Pentonville Five Dock’s dispute of 1972 which nearly turned into a general strike (the government capitulated just in time). At first the workers generally won these struggles but union organisation was undermined by social partnership (known as the Social Contract) with the Labour Government of 1974–79. Then came Thatcher and a sustained assault on union power culminating in the major class defeat of the Miners Strike in 1984–5.
Throughout this period the trade union struggle was at the centre of British political life and Cliff and his comrades produced a sustained and, to some extent, path breaking analysis of trade unionism. At lot of ground was covered – the ‘shifting locus of reformism’ from parliament to the shop floor, the role of incomes policy and anti-union legislation [23], the attempt to weaken unions through productivity deals [24], the effects of the social contract and the down turn in struggle in the late seventies and early eighties. [25] At the heart of this analysis stood the question of the trade union bureaucracy.
As we have seen the tendency of trade union leaders to sell out the members was nothing new and was observed by Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky and many others such as Rosa Luxemburg and Daniel De Leon. However this was variously explained by a) personal ambition and bribery; b) their representing high paid ‘labour aristocrats’; c) their reformist ideology. Instead Cliff viewed the trade union bureaucracy not as a series of individuals but as a distinct social layer, consisting of local and regional officials, as well as national leaders, standing between and, by virtue of their social role, mediating between the working class and the employers.
This layer was characterised by 1) higher pay (in the case of top leaders, much higher) and better conditions than the workers they represented; 2) the relative detachment of their conditions from those of their members, e.g. a union official who gave away a tea break in negotiations did not thereby lose his/her tea break; 3) a working life which led to spending more time talking to management than to the shop floor; 4) a tendency to view disputes not as struggles to be won but as problems to be solved. At the same time the union officials remained ultimately dependent on the existence of the union and its membership to pay their wages, and were therefore subject to pressure from below. If the union officials openly abandoned all attempt to represent their members, the members would either remove the officials or leave the union; either way the officials would be out of a job. Their material interest, without bribery and regardless of ideology, was to maintain the balance between the employers and the workers.
This objective social position produced in the trade union bureaucracy an equally objective tendency to vacillate between the classes. Vacillation went both ways. Under pressure from the workers they could swing, in words and to some extent in deeds, to the left. Under pressure from the bosses (or the media and the government etc) or from fear that the rank-and-file would get out of control, they could and would swing to the right. The political ideology of the individual leader or official (which would normally range from right wing labour to left labour or Stalinist) was irrelevant in this but neither was it the main determining factor. The division between left and right in mattered but it was not fundamental; the fundamental division was between the officials and the rank-and-file.
Here is a sample of the kind concrete analysis of the unions that Cliff was able to make using this theoretical framework:
The large scale movement against the Industrial Relations Bill [Tory anti-union laws] saw a number of important political strikes – December 8th, January 12th, March 1st and March 18th – as well as the biggest working class demonstration on February 21st since the war. The movement, unofficial in origin, could not have developed on the scale it did without the support of sections of the trade union leadership. This support changed the atmosphere of the campaign and made possible the raising of slogans like ‘TUC must call a General Strike’ and ‘Kick out the Tories’.
The leftward shift of sections of the official movement – however limited it was – was the factor that made the slogans conceivable, and this shift reflected real pressure from significant numbers of militants within the movement.
These events have important political lessons. The ultra-left illusions that the official trade union movement is dead, that it cannot mobilise its membership and that the sole field of trade union activity for revolutionary socialists are unofficial rank and file committees, have been yet again exposed as dangerous nonsense. The danger now is that the opposite illusion may gain ground.
The vacillation of the trade-union bureaucracy between the state, employers and the workers, with splits in the far from homogeneous bureaucracy, will continue and become more accentuated during the coming period.
The union bureaucracy is both reformist and cowardly. Hence its ridiculously impotent and wretched position. It dreams of reforms but fears to settle accounts in real earnest with the state (which not only refuses to grant reforms but even withdraws those already granted); it also fears the rank-and-file struggle which alone can deliver reforms. The union bureaucrats are afraid of losing what popular support they still maintain but are more afraid of losing their own privileges vis-à-vis the rank and file. Their fear of the mass struggle is much greater than their abhorrence of state control of the unions. At all decisive moments the union bureaucracy is bound to side with the state, but in the meantime it vacillates. It is important to see that this attitude actually introduces confusion and disorganisation into governmental policies themselves.
It is wrong to confuse the employers and the state with the ambivalent union bureaucracy, and to ignore the conflicts between them or to brush them aside. Because of its bureaucratic position, the union officialdom is in conflict with the workers, but because of its dependence on its members it is bound to reflect workers’ pressures to some extent. Its policy is not consistent. Even the pattern of its retreats in the face of threats from employers or the state is not completely predictable. [26]
This analysis of the bureaucracy led a strategy for trade union work known as ‘rank-and-filism’. The Communist Party, previously the dominant force on the left of the British trade union movement, and the Labour lefts worked through what were known as ‘Broad Lefts’ – groups of activists whose primary function was to support and secure the election of left officials – the likes of Hugh Scanlon in the Engineering Union and Jack Jones in the Transport and General Workers Union. In contrast the main purpose of the Rank-and-file groups was to bring together workplace militants so as to enable them to act independently of the officials where necessary. This did not mean abstaining on union elections – the rank-and-file groups would support left against right and sometimes put up candidates themselves – but this was seen as secondary to developing networks and action at the base. A key element in this strategy was the fight for union democracy ie increasing the level of control of officials by the rank-and-file. As Cliff put it :
Apathy toward the trade unions will become more and more an impediment even to the immediate economic struggle for the defence of labour conditions. The demand for worker’s control of the trade unions will become more and more vital. This demand can take the authentic form of a demand for radical changes in the structure of the unions – election of all union officials, right of recall, paying them wages no higher than those of the members they represent – or the purely reformist, opportunist form of the CP and “left” labour – “Vote for X”. [27]
At the height of the movement (in the early to mid seventies) the IS/SWP succeeded in building a number of rank-and-file organisations with significant support and substantial sales of their respective papers such as Rank-and-File Teacher, Dock Worker, Car Worker, Hospital Worker and so on. And when the severe down turn in industrial struggle of the early eighties forced the SWP to draw in its horns and disband the failing rank-and-file groups, it nevertheless maintained the principle of distrust of union officialdom and focus on the rank-and-file.
In recent years when a certain political radicalisation (especially in the shape of the anti-war movement) has gone alongside very low levels of industrial struggle the SWP has foregrounded the concept of ‘political trade unionism’. This stressed the need of party members to raise in their union branches political issues, such as the Iraq War, racism and Palestine , as well as basic economic issues.
 
The tradition summed up
The main conclusions that follow from these 170 years of Marxist engagement with trade unionism can be straightforwardly summarised.

Trade unions are the basic mass organisations of the working class and socialists support them, work in them and build their struggle in virtually all circumstances.
 
Trade unions though essential are limited. They are needed to defend the working class against the assaults of capital but in themselves they not able to overthrow capitalism. In addition to trade unions the working class needs its own – revolutionary – party and workers’ councils.
 
Trade unions need to be, as far as possible, all encompassing organisations of the working class. Socialists, therefore, work as far as possible to maintain trade union unity. In general they oppose breakaway unions which tend to isolate the militants from the more passive majority and make it easier for the reformist union leaders to retain control.
 
Trade unions, almost universally, have developed bureaucratic leaderships which vacillate between the employers and the workers. Socialists, while supporting left leaders versus right in the unions, encourage workers at the base not to trust or rely on union officials and to organise independently of them within the unions.
 
Socialists fight to increase democracy in the unions: for the election and recallability of all union officials, for officials to receive the average wage of the members, for democratic conferences and so on.
 

Are Irish Unions Different?
Is there anything so different about the Irish trade union movement as to make the Marxist tradition on trade unions inapplicable here or in need of major revision? I would argue that despite their very poor record in recent years there is not.
It is certainly true that twenty five years of social partnership has been an exceptionally long period of collaboration with the bosses and the state, and that such collaboration not only resulted in the working class’s share of the national product decreasing – the share of wages, pensions and social security in the national income fell by 10 per cent in the first decade of social partnership [28] – but also in a huge fall in the level of strikes. In 1979 there were over 1,300,000 official strike days, in 1985 about 400,000 and in 1988 (after social partnership in 1987) under 200,000 falling to about 50,000 in 1989. [29] Moreover this fall in strike activity undermined the role of the shop steward and weakened union organisation in the work places. With wages settled at a national level, there was little for grass activists to do. This is illustrated by the fact that unofficial strikes declined even more than official ones. Whereas in the seventies the number of unofficial strikes substantially exceeded the official strikes, in the nineties under social partnership they almost disappeared. [30] And since 2000 the strike figures have fallen even further, so that in 2002 there were 21,257 strike days, in 2006, 7,352 , in 2010 6,602 and in 2011 only 3,695. [31] The extremely low figure for 2011 must be attributed, at least in part, to the effects of the Croke Park Deal of June 2010.
It is also the case that Irish trade union leaders are very well paid, earning far more than their members:
The Irish Times ... determined the pay and benefits of the bank trade union IBOA’s general secretary, Larry Broderick, from a UK disclosure. His pay last year was €133,518 plus pension contributions of €46,731, a car, bonus and VHI benefits that totalled a further €19,957. His total package was €200,206.John Carr of the INTO has a salary of €172,000 while Peter McLoone of Impact has a salary of €171,313. McLoone’s salary is the equivalent of that of the Cork County Manager. The general secretary of the Irish Congress of Trade Unions, David Begg, has a salary of €137,400. He earns an additional €27,700 from his work as a director of the Central Bank and as a Governor of the Irish Times Trust. With the add-ons, total benefits would top €200,000 easily. [32]
Moreover there is more than a whiff of outright corruption as the very damaging Fas/SIPTU scandal showed. [33]
Finally there is the direct experience of many trade union activists (such as Eugene MacDonagh and Paul Shields) who regularly report on the failure of their union officials, and therefore of the union, to defend them or support any campaigns they try to mount. Eugene MacDonagh was a member of the National Bus and Rail Union National Executive victimised for union activity by Dublin Bus who had to wage a battle along with rank and file bus drivers (and with the support of socialist comrades and TDs but without support from his union) to get vindication in the courts. And, of course, it is the combination of all these factors that, along with the general failure to resist austerity, has fed the widespread mood of disillusionment and rejection of Irish trade unions that constituted this article’s point of departure.
Nevertheless none of these truly appalling and miserable phenomena change certain basic realities. With 579,578 members in 2011, the Irish Congress of Trade Unions remains the largest civil society organisation in Ireland and, by a very long way, the largest, organisation of working people [compared with the 8000 members of the Labour Party and less than a 1,000 of the United Left Alliance].What is more those half a million workers are, by comparison with the average (not by comparison with organised socialists), the more class conscious section of the proletariat – they have at least grasped the need for some kind of collective organisation. As a result the trade unions have a far greater mobilising capacity than any other organisation or organisations as was shown by the demonstrations of February 2009 and November 2010 and even the much smaller Dublin Council of Trade Unions anti-austerity march in November 2011. For all these reasons Lenin’s arguments of 1920 that is imperative for socialists to work in even ‘reactionary’ trade unions retain all their force.
International comparisons are useful here. The first thing to realise is that trade unions exist in virtually every country in the world, from Togo to Botswana, from Mexico to Mongolia and, again, the existence of a more or less conservative trade union bureaucracy is equally universal. Trade union density (proportion of the workforce in a trade union) at 38% in Ireland is higher here than in the UK (23%) or Germany (18%) and much higher than in the US (11%). As we have seen the pay of Irish union leaders is shockingly high but not significantly higher than union leaders elsewhere – it has been estimated that 37 trade union general secretaries in the UK earn more than £100,000 a year and Derek Simpson of Amicus had a salary of £186,000. I do not have figures for US trade union leaders but they will almost certainly be much higher.
In terms of their behaviour the Irish trade union bureaucracy may be particularly conservative and undemocratic at the moment [34] but they are by no means unique. There have been periods, especially during Labour Governments, when the British union leaders have acted as a similar break on the struggle and under the Blair government strikes fell to record lows, while American unions have been notorious for their sweetheart deals and their business unionism. Dave Prentis and the (Labour Party) leadership of UNISON, Britain’s largest union, have repeatedly witchhunted socialist activists and collaborated in their victimisation (e.g. the cases of Tony Staunton and Yunus Baksh). But this does not prevent these same rotten leaders changing their tune and when the mood in the class changes and they come under sufficient pressure from below: for example on March 26, 2011 the TUC organised perhaps the largest march in British trade union history and on November 30 mounted the biggest strike since the General Strike, while the support given by the US labour movement to the Occupy movement in Wall St., Oakland and elsewhere was hugely significant. That similar shifts can and will occur in Ireland is shown by the fact that in the midst of the steeply declining strike figures of the 2000s cited above there was the ‘exceptional’ year of 2009 when there were 329,593 strike days, and by the fact that the Unions have supported the Vita Cortex and La Senza occupations. Another example is SIPTU’s recent call for the Household Charge to be dropped – Jack O’Connor sensed which way the wind was blowing and moved accordingly.
To note this does not mean to develop illusions in these bureaucrats. They may move to head struggles only in order then to behead them ie support in one phase of a battle can switch to sabotage in the next. This is what is happening right now on the part of Dave Prentis and others in the Pensions Battle. But it does mean that socialists absolutely have to be present and actively engaged in the unions. It means that in their union work they need to develop rank-and-file networks such as SIPTU for Change or the Bus Workers Rank-and-File which can enable them to pressurize the officials and, if necessary, act independently of them and which fight for much increased democracy in the unions. It also means, and this can only come through practical experience, they have to learn how to deal with the endless vacillations of the bureaucrats, resisting every move to the right and taking advantage of every move, large or small, to the left.
* * *
References
(Note by ETOL: The links have not been checked, except those to files within MIA.)
Kieran Allen, The Celtic Tiger: the myth of social partnership in Ireland, Manchester 2000.
Tony Cliff, Economic Roots of Reformism, Neither Washington Nor Moscow, London 1982, p. 109. http://www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1957/06/rootsref.htm.
Tony Cliff and Colin Barker, Incomes Policy, Legislation and Shop Stewards, London 1966. http://www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1966/incomespol/index.htm.
Tony Cliff, The Employers’ Offensive: productivity deals and how to fight them, London 1970. http://www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1970/offensive/index.htm.
Tony Cliff, The balance of class forces in recent years, International Socialism 2 : 6, 1979. http://www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1979/xx/balance1.htm.
Tony Cliff, The Bureaucracy Today, International Socialism 1 : 48, June 1971. http://www.marxists.org/archive/cliff/works/1971/06/tubur.htm.
Tony Cliff, In the Thick of Workers’ Struggle: Selected Works, Vol. 2, London 2002.
F. Engels, The Condition of the English Working Class in 1844, London, 1968.
D. Hallas, The Comintern, London 1985, p. 126.
V.I. Lenin, ‘Left Wing’ Communism: An Infantile Disorder, Peking, 1965.
Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow 1965, p. 55.
Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Vol. 2 ,Moscow 1977, p. 75.
Jonathan Neale, The Cutlass and the Lash, London 1985.
Michael O’Brien, Luxurious all-expenses-paid trips SIPTU/HSE training fund scandal, The Socialist, July 2010.
J. Stalin, On the Opposition, Peking 1974.
Leon Trotsky, Leon Trotsky on Britain, New York, 1973.
Leon Trotsky, Writings on Britain, Vol. 2.
Joseph Wallace, Industrial Relations in Ireland, Dublin 2004.
Central Statistical Office, http://www.cso.ie/en/media/csoie/releasespublications/documents/labourmarket/2011/disputes_q42011.pdf.
Fin Facts Ireland, http://www.finfacts.ie/irishfinancenews/article_1018283.shtml.
K. Marx, Trades’ unions. Their past, present and future, The International Workingmen’s Association, 1866. http://www.marxists.org/history/international/iwma/documents/1866/instructions.htm#06.
F. Engels to August Bebel, March 1875. http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1875/letters/75_03_18.htm.
K. Marx to W. Liebknecht, 11 February, 1878. http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1878/letters/78_02_11.htm.
F. Engels to F.A. Sorge , 7 December, 1889. http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1889/letters/89_12_07.htm.
V.I. Lenin, Imperialism and the Split in Socialism, 1916. http://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1916/oct/x01.htm.
* * *
Footnotes
1. It is possible, even probable, that a majority of ODS supporters would have voted at the camp’s general assembly(s) to back the march but there was always a hard core determined to block the proposal and under the camp’s ‘consensus’ system of decision making that was enough.
2. See Jonathan Neale, The Cutlass and the Lash, London 1985.
3. Marx/Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow 1965, p. 55.
4. as above p. 300.
5. F. Engels, The Condition of the English Working Class in 1844, London 1968, p. 224.
6. K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy, Progress Publishers, 1955.
7. Marx/Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, 1965, p. 146.
8. K. Marx, The International Workingmen’s Association, Instructions for the Delegates of the Provisional General Council, 1866.
9. Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Moscow 1977, p. 75.
10. F. Engels to August Bebel, 1875.
11. K. Marx to W. Liebknecht, 11 February 1878.
12. F. Engels to F.A. Sorge , 7 December 1889.
13. V.I. Lenin, ‘Left Wing’ Communism: An Infantile Disorder, Peking, 1965, p. 47.
14. as above p. 47.
15. L. Trotsky, The First Five Years of the Communist International, Vol.1, New York, p. 98.
16. as above, pp. 36–44.
17. V.I. Lenin, Imperialism and the Split in Socialism, 1916.
18. Tony Cliff, Economic Roots of Reformism, Neither Washington Nor Moscow, London 1982, p. 109.
19. J. Stalin, On the Opposition, Peking 1974, p. 355.
20.
Leon Trotsky on Britain, New York, 1973, p. 163.
21. Leon Trotsky, Writings on Britain, Vol. 2, p. 253.
22. Resolution of the Comintern Executive, July 1929, cited in D.Hallas, The Comintern, London 1985, p. 126.
23. Tony Cliff and Colin Barker, Incomes Policy, Legislation and Shop Stewards, London 1966.
24. Tony Cliff, The Employers’ Offensive: productivity deals and how to fight them, London 1970.
25. Tony Cliff, The balance of class forces in recent years, International Socialism 2 : 6, 1979.
26. Tony Cliff, The Bureaucracy Today, International Socialism 1 : 48, June 1971.
27. Tony Cliff, In the Thick of Workers’ Struggle: Selected Works, Vol. 2, London 2002, p. 139.
28. Kieran Allen, The Celtic Tiger: the myth of social partnership in Ireland, Manchester 2000, p. 71.
29. Joseph Wallace, Industrial Relations in Ireland, Dublin 2004, p. 232.
30. See above, p. 231.
31. Central Statistics Office, http://www.cso.ie/en/media/csoie/releasespublications/documents/labourmarket/2011/disputes_q42011.pdf.
32. Fin Facts Ireland, http://www.finfacts.ie/irishfinancenews/article_1018283.shtml.
33. Michael O’Brien, Luxurious all expenses paid trips SIPTU/HSE training fund scandal, The Socialist, July 2010.
34. One consequence of this would seem to be the relatively high level of breakaway trade unions that have been formed in recent years in Ireland. These have not been ‘red’ or ‘revolutionary’ unions, as advocated by German ultra-lefts in 1920 or the Stalinists in the ‘third period’. Rather they have been a relatively spontaneous expression of the frustration of ordinary trade unionists at the failure of their unions to represent them and they have often involved switching from one union to another. These instances pose complex tactical issues and it is probably wrong to try to formulate a single one-size fits all policy. But a couple of general remarks are possible. Socialists sympathise with the frustrations of such workers but would usually argue against such moves for the kind of reasons given above, especially the need not to isolate the militants from the majority, and because the new unions tend rapidly to become as bureaucratic as the old. However, if we lose this argument and the breakaway takes place anyway, it may well be necessary for the revolutionary socialist trade unionists to go with and support the militant minority.
 



Why are there two main organisations on the Irish radical left – the Socialist Workers Party and the Socialist Party? This is a question that many ask today.
Both organisations work together in the United Left Alliance which currently has five TDs in Dail Eireann. But while working together in a common front against the right wing parties, neither the SWP or SP hide the differences that exist between them.
The purpose of this document is to trace the connections between the current political line and conduct of the SP and its fundamental politics developed over decades. Such a document is necessary not because we have any desire to quarrel with the SP – rather we wish to be able to work with them in a comradely and cooperative way where any divergences of perspective and tactics are debated openly and settled. Rather, its purpose is to clarify the differences in politics and methodology.
Given that this document, by its nature, is going to make a series of criticisms of the SP it is necessary to make one thing clear at the start: the members of the SP, both leaders and rank-and-file, are undoubtedly genuine and sincere socialists and working class militants who serve the cause of socialism with dogged determination, hard work and real commitment; this is precisely why we have been and remain keen to work with them in campaigns and strengthen our unity in the ULA. None of the criticisms presented here alter this.
 
The Roots of SP politics
The SP is the Irish section of an international Trotskyist tendency called the Committee for a Workers’ International (CWI) which consists of a number of affiliated socialist organisations – most of them very small – in a variety of different countries. Its ‘parent’ organisation was what was then known as the Militant Tendency in Britain and its political and theoretical leader was Ted Grant, a South African Trotskyist who came to Britain in the 1930s and who became a leading figure in the Revolutionary Communist Party (RCP) which for a short period in the late 1940s united most of Britain’s very few Trotskyists. In the sixties, seventies and eighties what distinguished the politics of Ted Grant and of the Militant Tendency was their strategy of ‘entrism’ into the Labour Party, which was also adopted by virtually all their international affiliates in relation to their respective social democratic parties.
In Ireland, the Militant first appeared in 1973 with a paper bearing that name and proclaiming in its banner headline, An Independent Programme for Labour. The Labour Party was entering a coalition with Fine Gael at the time and many left wingers had left in disgust. Militant, however, warned against any attempt to build any alternative party to the left of Labour. The only place socialists could usefully be, they claimed, was in the Irish Labour Party.
This policy came to an end in the early nineties after the expulsion from the Labour Party of a number of their leaders. Like the rest of the CWI, the Irish Militant then took the view that the Labour Party and social democratic parties everywhere had become capitalist parties. In Britain, the change to open party building was strongly, but unsuccessfully, resisted by Ted Grant, who was expelled, and in the mid-nineties the name Socialist Party was adopted in both England and Ireland. In Ireland, former leaders of the Militant such as Finn Geaney also departed at this time. The current politics of the SP are a product of this whole long development. In particular they have been shaped by the following factors: 1) the legacy of Trotsky’s Fourth International; 2) their analysis of Russia and Eastern Europe; 3) their prolonged ‘entry’ into the Labour Parties; 4) the poll tax campaign and their turn to open work in the nineties. We shall look at each in turn.
 
The Legacy of the Fourth International
When, in 1933, the Comintern or Third International, failed to mount any serious resistance to the rise of Hitler and the Nazis, Trotsky decided that it was dead for the purposes of revolution. From that time on he sought to build a new revolutionary socialist international. Unfortunately circumstances were very much against him – this was a period of terrible defeats for the working class – and the Trotskyists made little progress. However in 1938 they decided to proclaim a new Fourth International. The founding conference in September 1938 was attended by only twenty one delegates from eleven countries (only one of whom, the American Max Shachtman, represented a substantial organisation) and met for only one day in a house in France.
They compensated for their actual weakness on the ground by adopting a grand name, ‘The Fourth International (World Party of Socialist Revolution)’ and an even grander programme, written by Trotsky, entitled The Death Agony of Capitalism and the Tasks of the Fourth International which also became known as ‘The Transitional Programme’. Since then the Trotskyist movement has undergone many splits and changes but in understanding the SP it is important to know that they and the CWI see themselves as the true ‘orthodox Trotskyists’ who still stand on the ground of this document and proclaim their adherence to its political method. They see themselves, and themselves alone, as the true heirs of Trotsky and of the whole Marxist tradition.
This is unfortunate because there were major flaws involved in both the founding of the International and in its programme. In the first place it was highly problematic declaring the existence of a ‘world leadership’ without any serious base in the working class and bound to lead to a misplaced pride and arrogance. It led in turn to an over emphasis on, almost a fetishisation of, the importance of the programme at the expense of the movement of the working class from below. It also led to a belief that ‘the leadership’ can draw up the programme of the revolution in advance of, and without interaction with, the actual working class struggle. Marx, by contrast, used to say ‘One step forward of the real movement is worth a dozen programmes.’
Moreover the economic and political perspectives on which the Transitional Programme was based, though plausible at the time, turned out to be mistaken. The programme declared that capitalism was in its ‘death agony’ and that, ‘The economic prerequisite for the proletarian revolution has already in general achieved the highest point of fruition that can be achieved under capitalism. Mankind’s productive forces stagnate.’ From this Trotsky drew the conclusion that ‘there can be no discussion of systematic social reforms’ and that the reformist organisations, both Social Democratic and Stalinist ‘will depart the scene without a sound, one after the other’. In reality none of this happened: the Second World War brought the end of the economic crisis and was followed by the massive post-war boom in which the productive forces grew rapidly; there were substantial reforms (such as the establishment of the National Health Service in Britain and a Welfare State throughout much of Europe) and improvements in living standards across Europe and the USA; and in general the Social Democratic and Stalinist parties grew in strength.
Finding themselves having to deal with these difficulties, and with Trotsky no longer alive to assist them, many of Trotsky’s followers retreated into a conservative frame of mind in which defending the programme and maintaining the letter of Trotskyist ‘orthodoxy’ became all important. In 1946 Ted Grant was still repeating Trotsky from 1938:
The definitive decline of Europe, already begun in 1914, has been aggravated in the succeeding decades, and World War II has put its seal on this decline. While cyclical upturns will take place and are taking place at the present time, there can be no real growth of the productive forces as in the past. The chronic crisis and death agony of capitalism will once again be revealed in its full scope ... The programme of the Fourth International will become the banner of the European and world proletariat. [1]
Indeed Grant was still echoing the words of the Transitional Programme in 1979. ‘...we are now in the epoch of the death agony of capitalism. There will be a tendency for living standards to fall in all the countries of capitalism, including the industrial countries, with only temporary exceptions.’ [2]
It is a dogmatic and mechanical approach which still affects the leaders of the SP today. They still believe they have the correct Marxist programme and that advancing this programme is the key to the socialist transformation of society This leads to a top down view of the relationship between the party and the working class. The party is in possession of vital insights which it must teach the working class because it has studied Trotsky’s transitional programme. Less emphasis is placed on a party learning from a working class which has entered struggles and which will throw up its own demands.
 
Russia and Eastern Europe: the Stalinist States
As ‘orthodox’ Trotskyists the Socialist Party, have always felt obliged to defend Trotsky’s characterisation of Stalinist Russia as a ‘degenerated workers’ state’. They argued that the Stalinist bureaucracy had betrayed genuine revolutionary socialism in Russia but that the survival of state ownership and state planning meant that, despite Stalinism, Russia remained fundamentally non-capitalist and a workers’ state. When in 1948 Tony Cliff first produced his analysis of Russia as state capitalist, it was Ted Grant who wrote the main reply to him. [3]
What was at stake in this argument was not just what label to attach to the Soviet Union, but what constituted the essential, the fundamental, difference between capitalism and a workers’ state. For Cliff it was which class controls production and therefore runs the society, for Grant it was the form of property (private versus state property). This became especially clear in relation to the establishment of Stalinist regimes in Eastern Europe. These regimes became ‘communist’ not by virtue of the working class in these countries taking power but by virtue of the advance of the Red Army. If state ownership was the decisive criterion for a workers’ state these countries had to be regarded as workers’ states, even if ‘deformed’ and not fully socialist, and this was Grant’s view and the view maintained by the whole of the CWI to this day. So fixated was Ted Grant with the state property criterion that even concluded at one point that Burma and Syria were workers’ states with planned economies. In other words the overthrow of capitalism and the creation of the economic foundations of socialism did not have to be ‘conquered by the working class itself’, as Marx put it, but could be established from above by a ‘leadership’ (in this case the Red Army). The subsequent military victories of ‘Communist’ forces, armies based on the peasantry rather the working class, in North Korea, China, Cuba, Vietnam and Cambodia, all of which established state ownership of the main means of production, reinforced the point that making this the key criteria led away from the self emancipation of the working class from below as the essence of socialist transformation. This in turn has dovetailed, in the political practice of the SP, with the focus on ‘the programme’ over and above the struggle.
Moreover if the Red Army can establish a series of workers’ states over the heads of the workers, why shouldn’t this be possible for a ‘socialist government’ with a ‘socialist programme’ in parliament? Here we see one of the original roots of the SP’s current electoralism.
 
The Effects of Entrism
The tactic of entry into the mass social democratic parties was advocated by Trotsky, and adopted by his supporters in 1934 (it was known as ‘the French turn’ because it was first based on the situation in France) as a short term measure to relate to the masses of workers who, at that point, were joining these reformist parties. It was adopted by the Militant tendency as a long term (indeed more or less permanent) strategy and raised almost to the level of a principle. The long period, lasting more than three decades, during which entrism was pursued had a profound effect on shaping the politics of the Militant Tendency, the CWI as a whole, and the SPs of Britain and Ireland.
In the first place in order to remain in the Labour Party and not be expelled they had to disguise some aspects of their Marxist politics. In public they denied they were a revolutionary socialist or Leninist organisation, insisting they were only a current of thought around the Militant paper (when in fact they were a very tight democratic centralist party). They also presented themselves in the Labour Party, not as revolutionaries who wanted, à la Lenin in The State and Revolution, to smash the capitalist state but as left reformists who believed socialism could be brought about by electing a Labour Government pledged to socialist policies. No doubt, in private, the Militant leadership told a different, more revolutionary story, but since they recruited publicly on the ‘Labour Government with socialist policies’ basis there is little doubt that many of their members and, even more so, of their supporters accepted the left reformist parliamentary perspective.
The fact that they stood candidates, and got them elected as City councillors and MPs in Britain (such as Derek Hatton, Terry Fields and Dave Nellist) as Labour Party members, who had to be especially careful what they said, only reinforced this tendency.
As entrists they also adapted to their Labour Party hosts in other ways. They adopted a very narrow economistic approach to the working class. By economism we mean a near exclusive focus on bread and butter issues and a failure to raise more difficult issues concerned with repression in the broader working class movement. For Lenin:
Working-class consciousness cannot be genuine political consciousness unless the workers are trained to respond to all cases of tyranny, oppression, violence, and abuse, no matter what class is affected ... the Social-Democrat’s [i.e. Marxist’s – JM] ideal should not be the trade union secretary, but the tribune of the people, who is able to react to every manifestation of tyranny and oppression, no matter where it appears, no matter what stratum or class of the people it affects. [4]
But, in practice, this was not at all the approach of the Militant Tendency. All issues other than straightforward economic and class issues were either ignored or massively down played. Thus while they played a leading role in the Anti Water Charges campaign in the 1990s or in the fight against bin charges, they did not play a substantial role in anti-war campaigning at any time. They joined the Irish Anti-War Movement only after the massive mobilisation on 2003 and then left afterwards. [A] Instead of targeting US imperialism as the main enemy, they tried to balance a condemnation of ‘terrorism’ with opposition to the US war efforts.
Anti-imperialism has always been a particular weakness (as it was for Social Democracy historically). Thus they treated the anti-imperialist IRA as equally as bad as the pro-imperialist UVF and UDA. They refused, for example, to support political status for republican prisoners during the hunger strike of 1981 instead demanding a labour movement inquiry to determine who was and who was not a political prisoner. This, despite the fact, that many of the union leaders played an active role in conniving with the British and Irish states in trying to break the H Block movement.
On Palestine they tend towards two statism, advocating both a Jewish and Arab state despite standard socialist objections to ethnic exclusivity, and to equal opposition to Hamas and Zionism. They oppose the boycott of Israeli goods as a concrete way giving support to the Palestinian cause. In both these cases they covered their effective abstention by reference to Trotsky’s opposition to individual terrorism and by, formally correct, but completely abstract calls for socialism.
Often what motivated these choices was a reluctance to offend or challenge the prejudices of ‘ordinary’ workers in the Labour Party or trade unions whose votes they needed in elections or for positions in the movement. For example, at the start of the great Miners Strike of 1984–5 in Britain many of the miners (for very understandable reasons) held very backward sexist and homophobic views and would chant sexist slogans on their demonstrations. The Militant comrades were unwilling to argue with the miners about these things, saying they were just part of working class culture, and criticised SWP members, who did challenge these ideas (in a comradely way) as being middle class.
Unfortunately this is a habit that persists to this day in the practice of the SP in both Britain and Ireland and it is linked to their ‘socialism from above’ approach and their electoralism. If you see the mass of workers as essentially a passive army of supporters because socialism will be introduced by a government with the correct socialist programme, then it doesn’t matter very much if their heads contain various backward and reactionary ideas, but if you see the working class as emancipating itself in revolutionary struggle then the fight for the consciousness of the class is of paramount importance.
Obviously the SP comrades believe their approach is correct but this leads them to defend it by attributing more backwardness to the working class than is justified and by quietly going along with conservative ideas when they can be used against others on the left (especially the SWP). Thus for example, they have been happy in the past to denounce the SWP as ‘all middle class students’ or ‘supporters of the IRA’. Indeed during their period in the Labour Party they used to argue that since the Labour Party was ‘the mass party of the working class’ anyone not in Labour Party (again, especially the SWP), were not really part of the labour movement at all.
Another legacy of entrism was that to operate semi-secretly under the hostile gaze of the Labour leadership Militant had to operate with a highly trained, strictly centralised core membership or cadre. This is in some respects a strength, and one which they retain, but unfortunately it went hand in hand with training their cadre in sectarian contempt for others on the left (especially their main rivals i.e. the SWP). Obviously any small left wing party needs its members to understand its political differences with other left parties but it does not need to educate them in a spirit of arrogant contempt which makes working together very difficult. This is what Militant and later, the SPs have tended to do.
Finally, the experience in the Labour Party led to a strategy of organising that stressed manoeuvring in back room committees to win control of particular campaigns. All the emphasis is on gaining key positions and bizarre alliances are sometimes formed in pursuit of this objective. Thus in the current anti-household campaign the SP have formed an effective alliance with anarchists and left republicans to gain control of key positions. They have even argued against the United Left Alliance intervening in the movement with coherent tactics that have been debated democratically within the alliance.
 
The Poll Tax, the Water Charges and the Turn to the Open Party
The abandonment of entrism and the turn to open party building was basically a product of the expulsions they experienced in the Labour Party in both Britain and Ireland. What made this particularly hard to cope with was that this was not supposed to happen. For years the Militant leadership had proclaimed that it was virtually a law of history that workers would flood into the Labour Party and that the party would move to the left.
The move out of Labour was preceded in 1989–90 by the struggle against the Poll Tax. First in Scotland (it was the making of Tommy Sheridan) and then in England and Wales, Militant were able to launch and lead mass campaigns of non-payment. Similarly, in Ireland the Socialist Party played an important role in the fight against water charges and managed to secure the election of Joe Higgins to the Dail, primarily as an anti-water charges candidate.
These two struggles have provided a mainly positive experience for the current fight against household charges. However this is not the whole story. There are other aspects of the anti-poll tax struggle which the SPs are less keen to remember or celebrate and which could have a bearing on their behaviour in the current household tax campaign.
The first is that the campaign by no means consisted just of mass non-payment and the poll tax was not defeated just by non-payment. On the contrary, from the start of the struggle there were mass demonstrations and protests at town halls, some of which turned into attempts to storm those town halls. Then on 31 March 1990 the Anti-Poll Tax Federation (under Militant leadership) called a national demonstration in London. In the run up to the demo Militant started to worry that it might turn violent. They did their very best to try to prevent this. On the coaches to London Militant stewards tried to get everyone to pledge not to be violent. In the event, however, the police attacked the march and it turned into a massive riot in and around Trafalgar Square.
Inevitably there was a media storm against ‘violence’ and calls for ‘exemplary sentences’ by the Labour establishment like Roy Hattersley. Sadly the Militant leadership also condemned the riot and blamed it on anarchists. Steve Nally, Militant member and secretary of the Anti-Poll Tax Federation, said they would ‘hold an enquiry and name names’. Subsequently Militant attributed the defeat of the Poll Tax exclusively to non-payment and denied that the mass demo and riot had anything to do with it. Tory Minister, Alan Clark, in his diaries, tells a different story. ‘Civil Disorder. Could cut either way, but I fear will scare people into wanting a compromise – just as did Saltley Colliery [in the 1972 Miners Strike]. In the corridors and the tea room people are now talking openly of ditching the Lady to save their skins.’ Doubtless the SP are now embarrassed by this rather shameful episode but the memory of it may be a factor in their original hostility to mass protests in the Household Tax campaign.
It is already noticeable that the move of the household campaign to mass civil disobedience has taken place in areas where the SP has little influence. In New Ross and Donegal, for example, crowds of people have invaded council chambers. The SP, by contrast, has emphasised public meetings and a national indoor rally rather than a mass national demonstration to the Dail.
Two other things need to be said about this period. The first was that the election of Joe Higgins to the Dail on an anti-water charges ticket opened up a huge opportunity for the SP but they proved unable to adapt their party to dealing with a huge influx of workers. Political education remained confined to the grooves of a narrow propagandist group and those who joined as fighters against wage charges soon found it difficult to adapt to the long meetings discussing the Transitional Programme. After an initial surge of recruitment, many left.
Unfortunately, the current SP leadership drew the conclusion from this experience that an even deeper immersion into sectarian politics was required. In 2004, against the background of the bin charges dispute, for example, the party produced an extraordinary pamphlet attacking the SWP and former key figures that had left, including Joan Collins, currently a TD, and Dermot Connolly, the former party secretary. In it, they proclaimed that ‘Based on experience going back many years we do not believe the SWP has a positive role in the re-development of the movement’. The aim was to clearly inoculate their membership against any genuine dialogue with others on the left. The result of this experience has led the SP to adopt a dual approach.
On one hand there is a genuine attempt to engage with mass movements and to encourage them into existence. But this is often combined with a political methodology of manoeuvring and denouncing perceived rivals on the left.
On the other the combination of the extremely hostile environment in the Labour Party and the success of the Poll tax and anti-water charges campaigns convinced the Militant leadership to make a final break from Labour. However entrism had been so central to the Militant and CWI tradition, so much their political trademark, that this created a substantial political/theoretical problem for them. Were they to concede that decades of entrism had been a failure? Or perhaps they could acknowledge that the strategy was more problematic than they had previously acknowledged? Neither of these options seemed to have appealed. Instead they opted to argue that entrism was no longer appropriate because the Labour Party had qualitatively changed. From being ‘the mass party of the working class’ it had become, they said, a purely capitalist party, indistinguishable from the Tories or Fianna Fail. This merely exchanged one mechanical position for another.
The Labour Party had never been simply a working class party. It had never had a predominantly working class leadership; it had never fought consistently for working class interests; and it had never governed in the interests of the working class when in office. On the contrary it had always propped up capitalism and accepted all the key priorities of the capitalist class. There was no heyday of working class politics in the Irish Labour Party. Labour, for example, had led the campaign against Noel Browne’s Mother and Child scheme in the 1950s and even when it turned left in the sixties, it was led by a member of the Knights of Columbanus, Brendan Corish.
Lenin described the British Labour Party as follows:
... most of the Labour Party’s members are workingmen. However, whether or not a party is really a political party of the workers does not depend solely upon a membership of workers, but also upon the men that lead it, and the content of its actions and its political tactics. Only this latter determines whether we really have before us a political party of the proletariat. Regarded from this, the only correct point of view, the Labour Party is a thoroughly bourgeois party. [5]
Lenin summed up the contradictory character of the Labour Party by defining it as a ‘capitalist workers’ party’. So when Labour moved rightwards under Blair or Spring it was a quantitative shift rather than a fundamental change. Moreover what constituted the ‘workers’ element in this capitalist workers’ party, namely its working class base – as expressed in its vote, its membership and its organic relationship to the trade unions – was weakened but clearly did not disappear.
By adopting the undialectical view that the Labour Party was now a purely capitalist party the SP threw away decades of Marxist analysis of Social Democracy in favour of a position they would previously have denounced as ultra-left.
This is what lies behind the Irish SP’s current dogmatic and sectarian refusal to contemplate sharing a platform with even former Labour Party representatives in campaigns. These, it is argued, must first prove, their genuine socialist credentials before being allowed to share platforms. This sectarian approach misses out on opportunities to bring many more people over from Labour to the radical left.
 
The SP today
The politics of the SP in Ireland today are a product of all this history. Yes, they are committed and hard-working socialists who undoubtedly are genuine in their desire to end capitalism, but they have a mechanical and formalistic view of how this is to be achieved. They emphasise the question of the programme over struggle from below and the ‘socialist programme’ they so exalt emphasizes nationalisation and state planning over the self-emancipation of the working class. They retain an economistic view of working class struggle, showing little interest in other issues. They are still weak on issues of anti-imperialism, especially in the North where they equate republican nationalism and orange loyalism, demanding that any united left formation in the North must be based on acceptance of their position. In their own words:
The opposition of the Socialist Party to the extension of the ULA into North has nothing to do with being slow to move on the issues that affect the working class, but is based on having a principled and sensitive approach to the conflict of national aspirations [Note ‘conflict of national aspirations’, i.e. loyalism – loyalty to British imperialism – is regarded as a ‘national aspiration’] that exists in the North.
We believe that a new workers party in the North, even more so than elsewhere, must be based on the emergence of a layer of working class activists from struggles. It is vital that a new formation is rooted in the understanding of the need to oppose both loyalist and republican sectarianism, ... and for workers unity against sectarianism and capitalism.
While sometimes over the last years, the SWP have argued for workers unity, that does not mean that they have overcome their one-sided view of the national question [i.e. opposition to imperialism] which has been a hallmark of their position.
The SWP approach has been infected with the view that republicanism as it emerged during the Troubles is progressive, and that includes an approach that tends to excuse Catholic sectarianism while highlighting and condemning loyalist sectarianism. [6]
In the history of the Marxist movement there is a particular term, ‘centrism’, which accurately describes the political character of the SP. The term comes from the German Social Democratic Party (SPD) which at the time of the First World War contained three currents – the right, led by Scheidemann and Noske, who were openly reformist, supported the War and helped suppress the German Revolution (including being complicit in the murder of Rosa Luxemburg and Karl Liebknecht); a revolutionary left led by Luxemburg and Liebknecht, who opposed the War, and became the Spartacus League and then founded the German Communist Party in 1919; and vacillating between the right and the revolutionary left, the Centre led by Karl Kautsky. In words Kautsky proclaimed his commitment to Marxism and ‘revolution’ but in practice he always avoided drawing revolutionary conclusions or pursuing revolutionary action. Hence Lenin and Trotsky developed the term ‘Centrism’ to describe political tendencies that waiver between revolution and reform; that in the abstract adhere to a revolutionary programme but are conservative and cautious when it comes to action.
This is the Socialist Party. They are formally committed to revolution but in practice highly electoralist. They have a top down and controlling attitude in campaigns such as the household charges campaign where they originally insisted on drawing up ‘the plan’ in advance and on everyone else adhering to it. Originally they tried to discourage protests and national demonstrations and arguing that all the mass of working class people need to do is ‘stay at home and stay away from their computers’. Working people transform themselves and their consciousness in struggle. That, Marx says, is how they fit themselves to run society. But if what you really want is just for them to vote for you, why not ask them to ‘stay at home’, so long as they remember you when it comes to the election.
The same electoralism is shown in their role in relation to the ULA. After much prevarication they agreed to the ULA before the last election – as an electoral alliance – but since the election they have opposed any development of the ULA beyond a mere electoral alliance, blocking virtually all proposals in that direction on the Steering Committee.
As true believers, sincerely convinced that they and they alone are possessors of the true Marxist method inherited from Trotsky, they are reluctant in the extreme to put themselves in a position in any campaign or in the ULA where they might be democratically outvoted by the rank and file. [The Socialist Party in Britain literally walked out en masse of the Socialist Alliance when that body adopted the democratic principle of one person one vote – and claimed this represented the SWP wrecking the organisation!].
A useful insight into the SPs real modus operandi is provided by Dermot Connolly’s account of their behaviour over the question of a list of anti-bin tax candidates.
Having been members of the SP until very recently, and involved in its leading bodies, we can state without any doubt that the SP has been and remains absolutely determined not to become involved in any sort of election pact or list which would involve the SWP. However, given the events of last autumn, they had to respond to the pressure from working people that the bin tax campaigns should put up a united front and really put it up to the right wing parties, and labour, in the June elections.
They therefore came up with the public position that they were in favour of a slate of anti-bin tax candidates, provided it contained genuine people who had actually had involvement in the struggle. On paper this sounds fine. Why give a platform to political opportunists to jump on the band wagon? It is also the case that if a slate was open to anybody and everybody that some people with no real creditability would have stood, getting derisory votes and weakening the overall effect and thus the campaign.
The reality though was different. the SP were not concerned with putting forward a creditable list of candidates, but of ensuring that there was no list. At a meeting of the four campaigns to discuss a possible all Dublin list, it was quickly clear that we were not facing a situation where anybody and everybody was trying to get themselves onto this list. There could have been a list of twenty plus candidates, all of whom had played some role in building the various campaigns, and were likely to be nominated as candidates by local campaigns ...
Instead the SP insisted on a limited list, which included only those SWP candidates who they couldn’t argue against. When it was proposed by people at this meeting that areas where there was a question mark over the local campaigns’ level of organisation and activity, such as in Ringsend or Coolock/Artane, we could write to the membership, calling a meeting and then judge whether to support candidates on the basis of the level of turnout and local support, This was rejected out of hand. So was a proposal to facilitate a meeting between the SP and SWP (who had made clear their willingness to cooperate and withdraw one or two candidates) to try and resolve differences. The SP eventually gave an ultimatum; either their version of the list or they would not participate in it. [My emphasis – JM] [7]
Despite all these problems the SWP remains willing and committed to working in a comradely way with the SP in the interests of Left unity and the wider interests of the working class. We hope that joint work will improve trust and even help the SP to overcome some of its more mechanical approaches to issues. Doubtless we will also learn much in the process. We believe the Household Tax campaign can win and that the ULA, if it develops, still has the potential to be a pole of attraction to working people. But we are not willing to be tied down or restricted to the limits imposed by the SPs mechanistic approach to the struggle.
* * *
Footnotes
This article was originally written as an internal briefing document for the SWP. Thanks are due to Kieran Allen for his assistance with the piece.
1. Ted Grant, Economic Perspectives, 1946.
2. http://www.marxists.org/archive/grant/1979/08/world.htm.
3. Against the theory of State Capitalism – Reply to Comrade Cliff.
4. V.I. Lenin, What is to be Done?, Collected Works, Moscow 1961, Vol. 5, pp. 412–23.
5. V.I. Lenin, On Britain, London 1959, p. 460.
6. What programme for the United Left Alliance?, www.socialistworld.net, 14/07/2011.
7. Dermot Connolly, The Socialist Party, Joan Collins and the Bin Tax Campaign.
* * *
Correction
A.John Molyneux states that the SP did not join the Irish Anti-War Movement till after the great mobilisation of 15 February 2003. This was a mistake. As Michael O’Brien has pointed out to us, the SP joined the IAWM in 2002 and continued to participate until 2006. We apologise for this error, but of course continue to stand over the general political argument of the article (from Editorial, Irish Marxist Review, Vol. 1 No. 3, September 2012).
 



What Is Communist Anarchism?
Alexander Berkman
Dover/Constable, £1.50
Alexander Berkman, of Russian origin, first became known in 1892 for his attempt to assassinate Henry Clay Frick, a steel magnate responsible for the shooting of strikers. For this he spent 14 years in jail, recording his experience in Prison Memoirs of an Anarchist. On his release he became, with Emma Goldman, a leading figure in the American anarchist movement until, in 1919, they were both deported to Soviet Russia. Berkman opposed the desperate measures taken by the Bolsheviks to deal with the counter-revolution and economic ruin, and soon decided to leave Russia. For 15 years he continued his work as an anarchist until as a result of depression, fatigue and chronic illness he committed suicide in 1936.
What is Communist Anarchism? was first published in 1929 under the title Now and After: The ABC of Communist Anarchism. The aim of the book was to set out the author’s ideas, drawn largely from Kropotkin, as comprehensively and simply as possible for the English reader. In this the book was an unqualified success; but it succeeds in exposing with equal clarity the weakness of those ideas.
The theoretical basis of Berkman’s anarchism is unashamed idealism. ‘Government and capitalism are the forms in which the popular ideas express themselves. Ideas are the foundation; the institutions are the house upon it’ (p.233). From this follows an amazingly simplistic view of revolution. Capitalism survives because people believe in it. Once their eyes are opened and they stop believing in it they will abolish capitalism. The capitalists will probably not change their ideas, so a struggle is likely; but it will be a very gentlemanly affair. ‘The revolution will offer its enemies an opportunity to settle in some part of the country and there establish the form of social life that will suit them best.’ (p.296). As Engels once said: ‘Have these gentlemen ever seen a revolution? A revolution is certainly the most authoritarian thing there is.’
Perhaps the most telling criticism of this book, even in its own terms, is that someone convinced by its arguments is given no clear guide to action. Important tactical questions such as the validity of individual terrorism, or work in the trade unions, are raised but not clearly answered. The chapter on Preparation is the weakest in the book. Berkman has absolutely nothing concrete to say on the subject. But this is of course no accident. It is one of the basic reasons why anarchism is, and will remain, more a vague expression of a mood than a coherent political movement.



Chris Nineham’s critical response (Art and Alienation: A Reply to John Molyneux, International Socialism 82) to my article on The Legitimacy of Modern Art is welcome because one of the main purposes of that article was to stimulate debate in an area in which there is not and cannot be an agreed ‘line’ and because it allows me to clarify a number of misunderstandings or misreadings that have evidently arisen regarding my position on art and alienation.
Especially welcome is the casual ‘of course’ in Chris’s opening declaration that it ‘is, of course, right to defend the validity of modern art against anyone who rejects it outright as a fraud or condemns it all for being unrealistic’. [1] If that is how things now stand, I am delighted. I have to say it was not quite how they looked to me when I embarked on this project some 18 months ago. Nor was it the hostility of the likes of Roger Scruton that was my main concern. Rather at that time it seemed a serious argument was required to persuade not all, but a substantial proportion of International Socialism readers that contemporary visual art was worth serious consideration. I think also that I should concede the accuracy of Chris’s criticism that I overstated ‘the level of mainstream hostility to contemporary art’. [2] This is a question of degree, for there is certainly quite a lot of such hostility still around, but he is right that it has lessened markedly in recent years and that in quite wide circles modern art is currently very fashionable.
But however much I welcome the debate I cannot agree with the main thrust of Chris’s critique. Stripped of all extraneous elements, subsidiary comments and historical illustration this critique is as follows:


my definition of art as a product of unalienated labour is false because alienation is rooted in capitalist exploitation and capitalist relations of production and no aspect of society or part of the production process can escape the alienation imposed by the capitalist market;
 
my definition of art is not only false but dangerous because it encourages or runs the risk of encouraging an attitude to art which is uncritical, elitist and ahistorical.


Before offering a response to these points I must note a peculiarity in the way Chris approaches this whole issue: namely he criticises my definition of art but offers no alternative definition of his own. He worries repeatedly about the ‘risks’ involved in my position, but seems to think he can avoid those risks himself by taking no position at all. Perhaps he thinks it is satisfactory to rely on a ‘common sense’ definition of art but surely he must realise that on this question, as on so many others, the common sense definition is going to be a bourgeois one. (I, at least, attempted a specifically Marxist definition using specifically Marxist categories.) Perhaps he thinks no definition is necessary or possible. This is an arguable, though in my opinion mistaken, position but Chris does not argue it. He simply fails to acknowledge the problem. But there is a problem – a real problem.
The reactionary opponents of modern art argue again and again that modernist works are not art. This was the case made against Brancusi [3], against Pollock, against Carl Andre’s ‘bricks in the Tate’ and, of course, against Hirst. Nor is it just a question of the opponents. Many of the leading practitioners of modernism have clearly been addressing this question themselves – think of Duchamp with his readymades, of surrealism, minimalism, pop art, conceptual art and so on. Each of these movements has overthrown accepted ‘conventions’ or ‘definitions’ of art. Each has defiantly addressed critic and public alike with the challenge, ‘So you think you know what art is – look at this!’ Therefore the question cannot be ignored. If we are going to discuss art and art works we need criteria for distinguishing art from non-art. Naturally I understand that the question is a difficult one or rather that answering it is difficult and I have no problem in accepting that my definition may be flawed or incomplete. I can even accept that it is completely wrong – on one condition: that I am shown a better one. This is a task Chris has not even attempted.
On the question of whether or not art is a product of unalienated labour let me begin by returning again to Marx’s analysis of alienated labour in the 1844 Manuscripts:
What constitutes the alienation of labour? First, that the work is external to the worker, that it is not part of his nature; and that, consequently, he does not fulfil himself in his work but denies himself, has a feeling of misery rather than well-being, does not develop freely his mental and physical energies but is physically exhausted and mentally debased. The worker, therefore, feels himself at home only during his leisure time, whereas at work he feels homeless. His work is not voluntary but imposed, forced labour. It is not the satisfaction of a need, but only a means for satisfying other needs. Its alien character is clearly shown by the fact that as soon as there is no physical or other compulsion it is avoided like the plague. External labour, labour in which man alienates himself, is a labour of self sacrifice, of mortification. Finally, the external character of work for the worker is shown by the fact that it is not his own work but work for someone else, that in work he does not belong to himself but to another person. [4]
Do any or all of these primary characteristics of alienated labour apply to artistic work. Plainly they do not. Michelangelo was sculpting, carving marble, to within four days of his death at the age of 89. Was this for the money? Not at all. Was it work in which he denied himself or was mentally debased? The opposite is the case. Was it ‘imposed forced labour’ or labour ‘avoided like the plague’ in the absence ‘of physical or other compulsion’? Absolutely not. But is Michelangelo exceptional in this respect? No: Titian, Monet, Renoir, Picasso, Matisse, Moore and innumerable other artists worked on into extreme old age and infirmity long after any material pressure on them to do so had disappeared. Renoir is a case in point. In his last years he was crippled by arthritis, yet continued to paint with the brushes wedged between his twisted fingers. Was this alienated labour or was this because painting was essential to his being? The answer is obvious.
These examples do not, by themselves, prove my case – even if these artists’ work was unalienated labour this may not be true for all or most art – but they do refute a major part of Chris Nineham’s case because his argument is that, under capitalism, unalienated labour is impossible. (‘… under capitalism no part of the production process can escape the alienation imposed by the capitalist market’. [5])
On this point Chris is simply wrong. Of course under capitalism the majority of labour and the characteristic form of labour is alienated wage labour but this does not make all labour under capitalism alienated. As a university lecturer I have a relatively ‘soft’ job with a relatively high degree of autonomy. Nevertheless I am acutely aware of the distinction between the alienated work I do for my employer because I need to earn a living and the non-alienated work I freely choose to do for myself or because I believe in it, which includes writing for International Socialism and selling Socialist Worker and would include growing flowers in the garden if I did it. Of all the characteristics of alienated labour identified by Marx the most fundamental is that ‘for the worker ... it is not his own work but for someone else, that in work he does not belong to himself but to another person’. This is true of the labour of the car mechanic who works for Kwikfit. It is not true of the labour that same mechanic expends on fixing her car on Sunday morning.
Chris fails to grasp this distinction because of two confusions. First he confuses art and artists being affected by alienation, alienated labour and capitalism in general with whether or not their art is the product of alienated labour. Second he confuses the commodification of art works with the alienation of artistic labour. Of course artists as people are affected by alienation and so is their art. Alienation is rooted in the relationship of the immediate producers to their work but from this root it pervades and affects every aspect of society – religion, philosophy, sex, sport and naturally, art – and I have never suggested otherwise. [6] Indeed many artists are palpably deeply alienated individuals (Van Gogh, Pollock, Kafka for example) and art, especially modern art, frequently tackles alienation as a theme and not infrequently succumbs to its pressures. This was, and frankly I would have expected Chris to notice this, a central argument in my review of the Royal Academy Sensation exhibition in International Socialism 79. However, it is not the same as the artist having lost possession or control of their labour.
In several passages Chris seems to equate commodification of the art work with the alienation of artistic labour:

(a) ‘But with the spread of commodity production into every nook and cranny of social life, a straightforward distinction between commercial and artistic production becomes extremely difficult’. [7]

(b) ‘... the undeniably commercial and therefore alienated fields of film, architecture or popular music’. [8]

(c) ‘The activity of the artist attempts a self-expression that is denied in alienated labour. But once artists are at the mercy of the market alienation is reintroduced ... Once their work is produced even partially in response to external necessities the artist is no longer in control of their own creativity’. [9]

There is very little precision in the writing here. Passage (a) says a straightforward distinction’ is ‘extremely difficult’. Does that mean a subtle distinction is possible? Passage (b) speaks of the ‘undeniably commercial’ fields of film, architecture and popular music. Are the fields of theatre, art dealing and classical music less commercialised? What does passage (c) mean by the reintroduction of alienation – when and how did it go away? And why does a relative in the first half of the last sentence (‘even partially in response’) turn into an absolute in the second half (‘no longer in control of their creativity’)? Nevertheless it is clear that if commodification of product does equal alienation of labour then Chris needs no other argument to refute my position since it is an undeniable empirical fact, and one I acknowledged in my article [10], that capitalism brings about the commodification of works of art, in all fields of art. But commodification of the product does not equal commodification of the labour that produces the product, nor does it equal the alienation of that labour. Marx made this clear in a passage I cited in my article:
Milton produced Paradise Lost for the same reason that silkworms produce silk. It was an activity of his nature [i.e. unalienated labour – JM]. Later he sold the product for £5. [11]
In his first paragraph Chris approvingly quotes Trotsky to the effect that art ‘by its very essence’ cannot tolerate orders. If he had thought about the meaning of this quote he would have seen that it supports my position but contradicts his. If commodification, by itself, shapes and determines the labour that produces the commodity then, if Trotsky is right, art would have been destroyed since art works have clearly been commodified. Certainly capitalist commodification threatens to reach back and completely determine the content and nature of the artistic labour thus negating its character as art, which is why art is always embattled under capitalism [12], but it does not necessarily succeed. Remember, the majority of artists (and novelists, song writers, poets, film makers etc.) accept or actively seek the commodification of their output (they try to sell it) but they also defend their control over the process of production. To give one telling example: Ken Loach had to accept Land and Freedom becoming a commodity or the film could not have been made, but if he ceded basic control of the filming to the studio or business sponsors there would have been no point in making it. [13]
Moving on to what Chris sees as the dangers of my position I want first to consider the charge that ‘it could easily encourage an uncritical attitude to art’. [14] Now it is true that my definition of art is rooted in and encourages a fundamental bias in favour of art (in all its forms). I believe that, in general, the production and consumption of art is of benefit to human beings, contributing to their spiritual growth and their understanding of the world. This is a bias, or rather a judgement, that is clearly shared by Marx and by all the great classical Marxists. In this respect my attitude to art is analogous to my/our attitude to education and medicine. I defend them despite the fact that the art world, like the education system and the health service, is dominated by the bourgeoisie and distorted by capitalism and despite the fact that some would be artists, like some would be teachers and doctors, do more harm than good. But does my definition lead to an uncritical attitude in the sense of an unwillingness or inability to make the necessary distinctions between good and bad art, the outstanding and the mediocre? I don’t think it does and I don’t see why it should. In my article on Sensation I attacked Marcus Harvey and the Chapmans and praised (some of) Hirst and Whiteread. In my review of Pollock (Socialist Review, April 1999) I say some of his paintings are failures and others are masterpieces. Obviously Chris may disagree with my critical judgements but I don’t see how he can deny that I make them.
Chris says – and I think it is intended critically – that for me ‘art is fundamentally counterposed to capitalism’. [15] If by this Chris means that I think all or most art is consciously anti-capitalist or that art is bound to move in an anti-capitalist direction or that I underestimate the capacity of the bourgeoisie to co-opt art and use it for its purposes, then he is very wide of the mark. The only senses in which I counterpose art to capitalism are the sense in which Marx wrote ‘capitalist production is hostile to ... art and poetry’ (a quote discussed in my original article) and the sense in which Trotsky wrote:
Generally speaking art is an expression of man’s need for a harmonious and complete life, that is to say, his need for those major benefits of which a society of classes has deprived him. This is why a protest against reality, either conscious or unconscious, active or passive, optimistic or pessimistic, always forms part of a really creative piece of work. [16]
Chris also seems to think I underestimated the damage done to art by class society:
Isn’t the fact that art exists in this ‘privileged sphere’, separated from the life and concerns of the vast majority, going to have some fairly devastating effects on the art itself? And doesn’t this have implications for our attitude to art? [17]
Obviously the answers to these rhetorical questions are ‘yes’ and ‘yes’, and the implications are that we seek to defend art from those devastating effects as far as possible, while encouraging democratic access to art and the development of critical and revolutionary art and at the same time fighting for the overthrow of class society so that, amongst many other things, we conquer the realm of art for the oppressed and liberate art from the constraints under which it has hitherto laboured. But if Chris is implying that in rotten and exploitative societies you only get rotten art or you don’t get wonderful art he is palpably wrong, whether we are talking about the slave societies of Ancient Egypt and Greece or the feudal societies of Europe and Asia (check out Trotsky on Dante) or even the horrific capitalism of the 20th century. The interesting question, in my opinion, is why, despite the oppressive nature of society, despite the barbarism that is history, there still exists such magnificent art? The answer, I suspect, has something to do with the nature of human creativity and how it finds expression in unalienated labour.
Few debates on cultural questions last long before the bogey of ‘elitism’ is raised and, sure enough, Chris cannot resist throwing this charge into the pot. But what does ‘elitism’ mean in this context? Logically it should mean defending the privileges of the ruling elite, or maintaining that the mass of ‘ordinary’ people are congenitally inferior, ignorant or incapable of ruling or appreciating art whatsoever. But I doubt that even in the heat of polemic Chris would accuse me of these sins. In fact he makes two specific charges. The first is that my definition of art ‘runs the risk of favouring in advance the work of the individual fine artist in their garret who appears to control their productive activity over the collective work of musicians, technicians, actors and so on who produce in the undeniably commercial and therefore alienated fields of film, architecture or popular music’. [18] Well, doubtless I do run this risk, much as if I ride a bicycle I run the risk of falling off, but actually it makes no difference whether the artist is in a garret or an airy studio or whether they work individually or collectively. I suspect Chris is just trying to mobilise stereotypes here. With equal logic he could have claimed that my position ‘runs the risk’ of favouring the ‘free’ spontaneity of jazz over the discipline and tradition of the classical symphony, or favouring the individual singer-songwriter Bob Dylan over the collective bourgeois aristocratic corps de ballet. [19]
Chris’s second charge is that ‘it could even lead us to accept the simplistic and elitist distinctions between “high” and “low” culture so beloved of the right’. [20] Since I did not address this question and Chris offers neither evidence nor argument for his assertion, and since the issue is complex and space is short, I will make only brief comments. First, I do, in general, consider the ‘canon’ of so called ‘high’ culture (Shakespeare, Mozart, Picasso etc.) superior in quality to most of what is most successful in terms of popularity (Coronation Street, Michael Jackson, Titanic etc.) and I wouldn’t mind betting Chris does too. But this does not mean I reject all forms of ‘popular’ culture or the possibility of outstanding work emerging from these genres (e.g. Billie Holiday, Charlie Chaplin). Second, Chris himself makes a statement I essentially agree with and think important:
In an important sense the capitalist market [I would say ‘system’; it is the same under state capitalism – JM] also denies artists an audience. By robbing the mass of the population of control over their own labour and therefore over production generally the market robs us – the potential audience – of much of our artistic or aesthetic capacities. [21]
But these are sentiments that would instantly be condemned as elitist by the kind of anti-intellectual populism (and postmodernism) that is just as beloved of the right as ‘high culture’ snobbery.
Last but not least comes Chris’s claim that my position ‘tends to take art out of historical development’ and that I imply ‘a trajectory for artistic development separate from the rest of society’. [22] I must confess to being temporarily nonplussed here. The idea of art existing outside of history or separate from the rest of society is to me so absurd, so alien, that I was somewhat taken aback and it took me a while to figure out what he meant. Where we really differ – I think – is that I believe it is possible, at least to some extent, for powerful art to develop not outside of history or society but in dialectical opposition to the dominant trajectory of society. This is because, as we all know, historical development is the resultant of opposed forces and there is always resistance, both progressive and reactionary, to the main trajectory. Thus in a society where the main trend is the victory of fascism there can arise a powerful anti-fascist art (Heartfield, Brecht, Picasso’s Guernica etc.). In a feudal society in decline there can be significant art that laments or fears that decline and also significant art that is linked to the rising bourgeoisie. (Shakespeare somehow managed to do all of this.) And in capitalist society in crisis there can be great art that responds to this crisis from a variety of points of view. Chris seems not to believe this or not to understand it. This is the only sense I can make of his claims here and his comment that my expectation of ‘late 20th and early 21st century masterpieces’ is unsatisfactory.
This brings to a close my direct rebuttal of Chris’s case. I want to conclude by reasserting what I see as the advantages of understanding art as the product of unalienated labour. Firstly, it offers a distinctively Marxist criterion for distinguishing between art and non-art but one which is inclusive and non-sectarian – it excludes no significant art form (film, poetry, photography, drama etc.) nor any tendency in art on the grounds of its form, technique or ideology. Secondly, it rejects both the position – which really is elitist – that art is what is produced by artists who are defined by special qualities, innate or acquired, which set them apart from other people and the idealist position that art is just what people say it is. Thirdly, it locates within a Marxist analysis of the fundamental characteristic of the human species, creative social labour and in so doing lays the foundation for (though is not in itself a substitute for) an historical materialist account of the gradual emergence of ‘art’ as a distinct area of human activity as well as anticipating the eventual reintegration of art within productive labour as a whole in the communist society of the future. Fourthly, it helps us to understand the ongoing complex and contradictory relationship between art and capitalism which combines – on both sides – hostility and dependence, ridicule and adulation, rejection and incorporation and why the great Marxists in the classical tradition have always maintained a critical defence of art and a supportive engagement with it.

Notes
1. C. Nineham, Art and Alienation: A Reply to John Molyneux, International Socialism 82, p. 75.
2. Ibid., p. 75.
3. In the instance of Brancusi there was actually a court case held to decide whether or not one of his sculptures was art when it was imported and customs claimed it was scrap metal, not art, and as such liable for scrap metal duty.
4. K. Marx, Early Writings (London, 1963), pp. 124–125.
5. C. Nineham, op. cit., p. 80.
6. I have to confess to being not a little irritated by the way Chris on several occasions implies or suggests that I regard art, or that my definition of art leads to a view of art, as existing in some kind of ‘alienation free zone’ or as somehow ‘immune’ to alienation. Chris writes, ‘It seems rash to suggest that artistic production is in a simple way immune from such powerful processes’ and ‘... we are deluding ourselves if we believe that any aspect of our lives completely escapes the alienation imposed by capitalist relations’. It is not just that I did not write this, it is that I wrote the direct opposite:
By non-alienated labour I do not mean labour that exists ‘outside’ of capitalism (which is increasingly non-existent), or labour that does not produce commodities (the massive commodification of art under capitalism is obvious) ... Still less do I mean that ‘artists’ are not alienated or that their work does not reflect and express alienation – alienation affects everyone in capitalist society. What I mean is labour that remains under the control and direction of the producer.
Two points here: first I think it is reasonable to expect Chris to pay closer attention to the argument he is criticising and not to caricature it like this; second if he wishes to deny the existence under capitalism of ‘labour under the control and direction of the producer’ then how does he account for working class revolutionary activity, for the building of the street barricades or the writing of the Communist Manifesto or for resistance and self emancipation as a whole?
7. C. Nineham, op. cit., p. 76.
8. Ibid., p. 77.
9. Ibid., p. 78.
10. Again it seems to have escaped Chris’s attention that in discussing the causes of the crisis of legitimacy of modern art I assign considerable importance to the role of commodification of visual art in the form of extremely expensive luxury items for the super-rich.
11. K. Marx, Theories of Surplus Value, cited in M. Solomon (ed.), Marxism and Art (Brighton 1979), p. 75.
12. And why, as I have already argued, Marx describes ‘capitalist production as hostile to ... art and poetry’.
13. Underlying Chris’s confusions about art and alienation is a deeper misunderstanding of Marx’s original theory of alienation itself. Unravelling this misunderstanding takes some time and trouble but is worth it if it leads to greater clarity about this important aspect of Marxism. Chris writes:
For Marxists, the root of alienation lies in capitalist exploitation, in the fact that the capitalist owns the means of production in society and runs production for profit. Labour becomes a means to create maximum profit by maximising output. In the process the worker loses control over the finished product and the nature of the product itself is determined by the dictates of the market.
This formulation makes alienated labour appear as a consequence, an effect of capitalist exploitation and capitalist relations of production, whereas for Marx alienated labour is constitutive of capitalist exploitation and analytically prior to it:
The relation of the worker to labour produces the relation of the capitalist to labour ... Private property is this product, result, and necessary consequence of externalised labour, of the external relation of the worker to nature and to himself.
Private property thus is derived, through analysis, from the concept of externalised labour ... But the analysis of this idea shows that though private property appears to be the ground and cause of externalised labour, it is rather a consequence of externalised labour ... Wages are a direct result of alienated labour, and alienated labour is the direct cause of private property ... As we have found the concept of private property through analysis from the concept of alienated, externalised labour, so we can develop all the categories of political economy with the aid of these two factors, and we shall again find in each category – for example, barter, competition, capital, money – only a particular and developed expression of these primary foundations. (K. Marx, 1844 Manuscripts, cited in L.D. Easton and K.H. Guddat (ed.), Writings of the Young Marx on Philosophy and Society (New York 1967), pp. 297–299.)
Both alienated and unalienated labour existed in pre-capitalist modes of production (as did exploitation, oppression, classes, money, and commodities). Under feudalism, for example, the peasant performs alienated labour when working unpaid on the lord’s land but unalienated labour when working to produce his/her own subsistence. (Some of what the peasant produces is sent to market, i.e. commodified, but that is not the same as the peasant’s labour being commodified – or alienated). Capitalism does not invent alienated labour but its development enormously increases and intensifies it precisely because capitalism rests on the commodification of labour power. However, this intensification of alienated labour, and therefore alienation in general, does not totally eliminate all forms of non-alienated labour – including that form which is art which develops in dependence upon but also dialectical opposition to the bulk of alienated labour.
14. C. Nineham, op. cit., p. 80.
15. Ibid., p. 75.
16. L. Trotsky, On Literature and Art (New York 1977), p. 104.
17. C. Nineham, op. cit., p. 76.
18. Ibid., pp. 76–77.
19. To this I plead guilty, but I also think Chris fails to practise what he preaches here. When he writes about Courbet and Cézanne, artists he rightly admires, he somehow fails to mention the canvas manufacturers, paintbrush makers, models etc. whose collective labour contributed to their paintings. And when he discusses Battleship Potemkin or The Threepenny Opera does he remember to credit the actors and technicians or does he, like the rest of us, just say Eisenstein and Brecht? And does this make him an elitist or is it that he recognises that it is the labour of Courbet and Cézanne, Eisenstein and Brecht that is of principal significance in determining the works’ artistic character.
20. C. Nineham, op. cit., p. 80.
21. Ibid., p. 78.
22. Ibid., p. 81.
 



Geoffrey Swain
Trotsky
Pearson Longman, 2006, £14.99
‘Readers of this biography’, writes Geoffrey Swain, Professor
in Russian and East European Studies at Glasgow University, ‘will
not find their way to Trotskyism.’ Well, some might despite the
author’s best intentions, but this cannot be regarded as an overstatement.
There are now many books on the life and politics of Leon Trotsky
[1] and this is one of the worst. It casually, but outrageously and
repeatedly, slanders Trotsky. Perhaps such slander should be ignored,
but I, for one, am fed up with the casual ‘academic’ slandering
of great revolutionaries. Such books do real damage. They find their
way onto university booklists, especially the booklists for the
author’s courses, and exercise an influence on some students. They
say, with the full weight of academic authority behind them, ‘Don’t
even begin to look to Trotsky (or Marx or Lenin – Lenin is a
favourite for this kind of treatment) for an intellectual alternative
to the present system,’ and, inevitably, many of the students lack
the resources to reply or even to discern the fraud that is being
perpetrated. I, therefore, intend to respond – without academic diplomacy.
Swain does not hang about. On page 3 of his introduction he offers
the following assessment of Trotsky’s intellectual capacity and
theoretical contribution:
‘Trotsky scholars might be surprised to find in this
biography that there are no references to Baruch Knei-Paz’s great
study The Social and Political Thought of Leon Trotsky ...
[his] approach makes Trotsky a far greater thinker than he was in
reality. Trotsky wrote an enormous amount and, as a journalist, was
always happy to write on subjects about which he knew very little.
Trotsky could write beautifully, but he was no philosopher. Knei-Paz
does a better job than Trotsky himself in synthesising his ideas.
Trotsky was a jobbing journalist and revolutionary activist and his
writings cannot be divorced from their context. Trotsky’s first
revolutionary comrade, Grigorii Ziv, doubted that Trotsky had the
patience to fully engage with Marxism as an intellectual tool. A
similar verdict came from Lunarcharskii ... [who] concluded ... “He
is as bold as can be in opposing liberalism and semi-socialism, but
he is no innovator”.’
Leaving aside the merits of Knei-Paz [2], this is, by any
standards, a monstrous, in legal terms ‘perverse’, judgment. I am
well aware that journalism can be an honourable profession – one
thinks of John Reed, Paul Foot, John Pilger, Eamonn McCann, Robert
Fisk (all of them more than journalists) – but to describe the
author of The History of the Russian Revolution as just a
‘jobbing journalist’ is laughable. No, it is slander of the first order.
For those  who have read The History further comment is
superfluous; for those who have not it is in three volumes, runs to
more than 1,200 pages, and combines in one majestic whole a broad
theoretical analysis of the revolution’s place in history and an
exposition of its internal dynamic as it unfolded day by day in the
deeds and thoughts of the different classes and parties and their
leading, and not so leading, spokespersons. It is widely considered
to be the greatest historical work of the 20th century. Nor does The
History stand alone: Trotsky’s other major theoretical works
include Results and Prospects (which sets out the theory of
permanent revolution), The Third International After Lenin,
The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany (which to date remains
the foremost Marxist analysis of Nazism and how to fight it), The
Revolution Betrayed and Literature and Revolution. Swain
‘deals’ with this large body of inconvenient evidence by simply
ignoring it. Not a single one of the works I have cited, nor the
theoretical analyses they contain, are either summarised or discussed
anywhere in Swain’s book.
Instead Swain offers as corroboration a quotation from the
esteemed Ziv (whose own contribution to Marxist theory stands at
zero), who only knew Trotsky as a youth and whose last, fleeting,
contact with him appears to have been in New York in early 1917, by
which time Ziv had become a supporter of the First World War. This is
backed by a quote from Lunarcharskii, which dates from 1923 (before
most of Trotsky’s main theoretical works were written), which is
unrepresentative of Lunarcharskii’s overall assessment of Trotsky
and which is anyway palpably false: Trotsky’s theory of permanent
revolution is clearly one of the most important innovations in
Marxist theory since Marx, likewise his analysis of fascism. This is
a bit like saying Shakespeare was a good comic dramatist but couldn’t
handle tragedy and then writing a book about him which doesn’t
mention Hamlet, King Lear and Macbeth.
Even worse, because it denies one of the central principles of
Trotsky’s entire life, is the following assertion, also in the
introduction but repeated in the conclusion:
‘There is little [in this book] about world revolution.
Trotsky believed in world revolution, but no more and no less than
every other Bolshevik, and like all other Bolsheviks this belief was
largely rhetorical ... It was only in exile in 1933 that
internationalism actually became central to Trotsky’s
purpose’ (pp. 2–3).
Here only the first sentence is true. The rest is arrogant
garbage. Reading the comment on the Bolsheviks I could not avoid
thinking of Professor Swain secure in his Chair at Glasgow University
and wondering whether this man had ever in his life held a principle
for which he was required to make a serious sacrifice. The Bolsheviks
were men and women who risked their liberty and their lives for their
ideas, who suffered, not by way of exception, but virtually as a rule
imprisonment, Siberia and exile, and who, almost alone among Europe’s
socialist parties, took an internationalist position in August 1914.
And he has the gall to say they were not serious about their beliefs.
As for Trotsky, the evidence for the centrality of
internationalism to his theory and practice long before 1933 is so
abundant that to present even the main body of it would fill this
whole journal. In 1904 Trotsky opposed the Russo-Japanese War on an
internationalist basis. [3] The theory of permanent revolution
developed in 1905–06 is internationalist in its premise –
Russia’s combined and uneven development is a product of its
relationship to international capitalism; and in its conclusion –
that a victorious socialist revolution in Russia would be able to
sustain itself only if the revolution spread to Europe. [4] In his
years of exile prior to 1917 Trotsky was actively engaged with the
revolutionary movement in a number of countries, including Austria,
the Balkans, France and the US. In 1914 he, with the Bolsheviks and
Luxemburg and Liebknecht, was one of the few to remain loyal to
internationalism and played a leading role in the famous anti-war
Zimmerwald Conference in 1915. After October he was appointed
Commissar for Foreign Affairs, in part because of his
internationalism, and at Brest-Litovsk he, at first, refused
(mistakenly) to sign a peace with the Germans on internationalist
grounds. From 1919 to 1922 he played an active and leading part in
the Communist International. [5]
Swain knows all this and mentions much of it but only as isolated
individual ‘facts’ and he does not allow these facts to affect
his argument. He even claims that Trotsky really supported Stalin’s
doctrine of socialism in one country. He bases this claim on
Trotsky’s silence on the question in 1925–26 (which was for
tactical reasons and did not at all signify agreement) and a couple
of quotes taken out of context from Trotsky’s discussions of
economic construction. [6] He completely ignores a) that Trotsky had
opposed socialism in one country in advance in Results and
Prospects, and b) Trotsky’s major theoretical critiques of
socialism in one country in The Third International After Lenin
(which runs to 72 pages and predicts with striking accuracy the
effect the doctrine will have on the international communist
movement), Permanent Revolution and Appendix II of The
History of the Russian Revolution – all of which were written
before 1933.
Faced with the undeniable importance of international questions
(principally Germany 1923, Britain 1926 and China 1925–27) for
Trotsky in these years, Swain has a neat solution:
‘His critique of the failed German Revolution in 1923
was simply camouflage for an attack on his then domestic opponents
Zinoviev and Kamenev. It was the same with his writings on the
British General Strike, although here his opponents were Bukharin and
Stalin. As to his enthusiasm for China in 1927, that too was
essentially domestic in focus, for Chiang Kai-shek’s destruction of
the Chinese Communist Party was simply a metaphor for Thermidor, for
what would happen in Russia if the kulaks ever found a general’ (p. 3).
Swain is trading, for this cheap slur, on his audience not having
read the texts in question, for it is hard to imagine how anyone who
had read them, with their combination of passionate polemic and
theoretical acuity (I wish I had space to quote them) could accept
his cynical interpretation. Nevertheless it is obviously a line of
argument with a future. How about, ‘The anti Vietnam War protesters
didn’t care about Vietnam, they just had a grudge against LBJ over
the draft’? Or, ‘The SWP only opposed the wars on Afghanistan,
Iraq and Lebanon because of what Blair was doing on privatisation and
the Labour Party’? Nearer the mark might be, ‘Swain has no real
interest in Trotsky, he has only written this book for the money and
another entry on his publication list.’
Sadly, refuting slanders takes much longer than issuing them and
it is therefore impossible in the space of a review to pursue any but
the grossest of Swain’s falsehoods and misrepresentations. One that
has to be noted, however, is his insistent repetition of the old
Stalinist charge that Trotsky ‘underestimated the peasantry’.
Swain tells us that ‘Trotsky’s attitude to the peasantry was his
Achilles’ heel’ (p. 216). In fact Trotsky never denied, in
theory or in practice, that the peasants would play a crucial role in
the Russian Revolution. What he argued was that the peasantry was
unable to play an independent role, i.e. independent of the
leadership of one of the main urban classes, the bourgeoisie or the
proletariat. In this Trotsky based himself on Marx’s famous
analysis of the peasantry in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis
Bonaparte and the whole history of peasant revolt in Russia and
internationally. [7] Moreover he was vindicated by the actual course
of the Russian Revolution.
What the Stalinists did in accusing Trotsky of ‘underestimating
the peasantry’ was run together, in a single demagogic phrase,
Trotsky’s attitude to the peasantry before and after the October
Revolution. Prior to the revolution the ‘underestimation’
consisted of rejecting Lenin’s view that the existence of a large
peasant majority in Russia excluded the establishment of workers’
power (in this Trotsky was proved right). After the revolution it
consisted of overestimating the obstacle the peasants constituted to
the construction of socialism and exaggerating the threat of kulak
(rich peasant) inspired counter-revolution. If Trotsky did exaggerate
the kulak threat it was not because he was wrong about the peasants
but because he underestimated the threat posed by the Stalinist
bureaucracy. Swain sheds no light on this question, but simply echoes
the Stalinist line.
Swain’s book also contains an absolutely astonishing omission.
There is no mention of, not a single sentence on, Trotsky’s
campaign in 1930–33, from exile in Prinkipo, to alert the German
Communist Party to the danger posed by Hitler, to criticise the
strategy imposed by Stalin, and to urge the formation of a united
front against the Nazis. Given the brilliance of Trotsky’s writings
on the subject and the extreme importance of the events, this
omission amounts virtually to historical censorship. How can it
possibly be justified? Not, I assume, by ignorance, or by
considerations of space – Swain manages to devote a couple of pages
to Trotsky’s affair with Frida Kahlo (the priorities of the News
of the World at work here, I suspect), and whole sections to the
relatively minor episodes such as the Vienna Pravda of 1908–10
and the Vienna Conference of 1912. [8] Presumably Swain did not think
he could get away with claiming that for Trotsky Hitler was just a ‘metaphor’.
The book also says next to nothing about such minor matters as the
Spanish Civil War, the Moscow Trials, the international slander and
persecution of Trotsky as a fascist agent, Stalin’s purges and
gulag, or the little question of whether socialism was actually built
in the USSR. Trotsky’s spats with Victor Serge and Ante Ciliga are,
however, featured, while the struggle for the Fourth International
is, of course, dismissed as a trivial irrelevance.
All these slanders, distortions and omissions do serve a purpose,
however. Swain’s avowed focus is on the period when Trotsky was in
power or near to power, the decade of 1917–27 and the years of
Trotsky’s direct struggle with Stalin. [9] What they enable Swain
to do is to treat that struggle in largely personal terms, as a
battle for power between rival individuals, devoid of real principles
and in isolation from wider social forces (I imagine he thinks of it
as something like the rivalry between Blair and Brown). He attributes
Trotsky’s defeat partly to ‘personality failings’,
characteristic of Trotsky from his youth, partly to a ‘disagreement
about how the party should operate’, with Lenin as much as with
Stalin, and partly to his ‘ideological obsession with the kulak
danger’ (p. 4). I doubt Swain realises it but this is all
taken more or less directly from Stalin. It is not only factually
false but also a miserably inadequate methodology – a species of
the long discredited ‘great man’ theory of history.
‘History’, wrote Marx, ‘is the history of class struggle.’
This applies as much to Russia in the 1920s as it does to everywhere
else. Trotsky lost to Stalin because at the time in question the
social force he represented – the working class – was weaker than
the social force Stalin represented, the rising bureaucracy. There
were two ways in which Trotsky could have won: through the victory of
the international revolution or, possibly, through abandoning the
working class to engage in an unprincipled personal power struggle –
in that case he would have ceased to be Trotsky. That the first
option did not materialise is Trotsky’s and humanity’s tragedy;
that he rejected the second, despite extraordinary difficulties and
pressures, is his greatness. Swain’s inability or unwillingness to
comprehend any of this leaves him with the distinction of having
produced what is probably the most mendacious account of Trotsky
since the days of high Stalinism.

Notes
1. These include Isaac Deutscher’s magnificent trilogy, The Prophet Armed, The Prophet Unarmed and The Prophet
Outcast; Tony Cliff’s Trotsky (4 vols.); Pierre
Broué, Trotsky; Victor Serge and Natalya Sedova, The Life
and Death of Leon Trotsky; Ernest Mandel’s Trotsky – a
Study in the Unity of his Thought and Trotsky as Alternative;
Baruch Knei-Paz, The Social and Political Thought of Leon Trotsky;
Ian Thatcher, Trotsky; Dimitry Volkogonov, Trotsky: the
Eternal Revolutionary; John Molyneux, Leon Trotsky’s Theory
of Revolution; Duncan Hallas, Trotsky’s Marxism. Of
these Deutscher’s is the finest literary-historical achievement,
Cliff’s the best and most detailed politically, and Hallas’s the
best introduction. Unsurprisingly Cliff, Mandel, Hallas and Molyneux
receive no mention in either Swain’s book or his bibliography –
presumably lest the readers might find their way to Trotskyism!
2. Long ago I wrote a highly critical review of Knei-Paz’s book
for the Critique journal. Unfortunately I cannot find a
reference for it, but it was reprinted in H. Ticktin and M. Cox
(eds.), The Ideas of Leon Trotsky (London, 1995).
3. Bizarrely for his own argument, Swain actually records this
fact (p. 18) but presumably fails to notice the contradiction.
4. Again Swain quotes Trotsky to this effect (p. 29).
5. Trotsky’s articles and speeches fill two volumes – see Leon Trotsky, The First Five Years of the Communist International, vols. 1 and 2 (New York 1972).
6. Trotsky’s silence in 1925–26 was one of a number of
hesitations and tactical compromises he made in order to avoid an
irrevocable split. In my view these were mistakes and derived
ultimately from Trotsky’s failure, because of his lack of a theory
of state capitalism, to see that the Stalinist bureaucracy could
become a new ruling class. These matters are discussed in some detail
in J. Molyneux, Leon Trotsky’s Theory of Revolution, and T.
Cliff, Trotsky: Resisting the Stalinist Degeneration (vol. 3).
What Swain does is exploit these hesitations to misrepresent
Trotsky’s fundamental views.
7. There is a basic Marxist principle at stake here. Until very
recently the overwhelming majority of the world’s exploited and
oppressed were peasants, not workers. If it were not for this
political weakness, produced by their objective economic and social
circumstances, they and not the proletariat would be the main
revolutionary class, as was argued by the Narodniks in Russia and by
various third worldists in the 1960s.
8. What these events do show is Trotsky at odds with Lenin, and
Swain follows the Stalinist practice of highlighting every
disagreement with Lenin, no matter how minor or superseded by history.
9. Swain claims that ‘the decision to concentrate on the years
in power enabled me to do justice for the first time to Trotsky and
Russia’s Civil War’(p. 2). Our ideas of justice obviously
differ, but, once again, this is not even factually true. Tony Cliff,
unmentioned by Swain, dealt with the Civil War and Trotsky’s role
in it, at greater length and in greater detail (and with much greater
political understanding) in Trotsky: the Sword of the Revolution (vol. 2).
 



Trotsky as Alternative
Ernest Mandel
Verso £14.95
There are now a lot of books devoted to Leon Trotsky – Isaac Deutscher’s magnificent trilogy, three studies by different SWP authors, an earlier work by Mandel and a number of others.
To this collection Mandel has now added the work under review and it has to be said that there seems precious little justification for it. If it has been written with a specific political purpose or to respond to a particular situation, this is not made clear. Likewise Mandel doesn’t appear to have anything new to say except in minute particulars and on various marginal matters.
This is not to say the book is without merit. Mandel has an encyclopaedic knowledge of Trotsky’s writings – five decades of quoting him for internal polemics in the Fourth International have seen to that. Also Mandel is an active Trotskyist which places him closer in spirit and politics to Trotsky than some writers who have tackled the subject.
Nevertheless, the book’s weaknesses outweigh its strengths. As an introduction it is unsatisfactory (unlike Duncan Hallas’s excellent Trotsky’s Marxism) because it tries to cover too much ground and too many issues. As a work for the more experienced reader or specialist it disappoints and irritates. Mandel has a habit of raising a contentious issue, for example Trotsky’s role in the trade unions debate of 1921–22, or his position on black nationalism in the late 1930s, making a few confident assertions about it and then slipping off onto something else without substantiating the assertions or discussing the issue in depth.
Both these problems are related to a third. Every sympathetic analyst or biographer is likely to a greater or lesser extent to paint Trotsky in his or her own image. In this case the boundaries between Mandel’s ideas and Trotsky’s are blurred again and again, and this is facilitated by the paucity of direct quotation, referencing, evidence and historical context.
This process begins in the very first chapter which is devoted to a 17-point exposition of the law of uneven and combined development. What we are presented with is not Trotsky’s concept in any particular text or series of texts or at any particular time or even in its stages of historical development, but Mandel’s own synthesis. To be sure, Mandel’s ideas derive more or less from Trotsky’s but it is still Mandel we are getting, not Trotsky – a fact confirmed by the footnotes which are used mainly to make supplementary points rather than cite Trotsky’s works.
And the trouble with Mandel’s Trotsky is that by and large he is a figure with the creases ironed out. Mandel does acknowledge the occasional difficulty and even error but you always feel these are being smoothed over and minimised. Nor does this tendency enhance Trotsky’s stature. On the contrary, in glossing over difficulties in aspects of Trotsky’s political life and thought, Mandel also underplays the truly incredible difficulties in the objective situation through which Trotsky so valiantly battled to preserve genuine Marxism. In fact much less sense of Trotsky’s greatness as a revolutionary emerges from this work than from Tony Cliff’s more critical study.
Finally Mandel has the infuriating habit of trying to demonstrate the vindication of Trotsky’s ideas by quoting some Russian source or figure who happens to have said something similar to him. Thus, we are told that Trotsky’s United Opposition campaigned against ‘the public promotion of sales of vodka, with arguments that anticipated those of Gorbachev’s leadership more than 50 years later’. This both insults Trotsky and speaks volumes for the accommodation to Stalinism that underlines the politics of the author for all his protestations of loyalty to the Old Man.
 







‘Philosophers have interpreted the world in various ways, the point, however, is to change it.’



This, the most famous of all Marx quotations, written almost at the beginning of his political and theoretical development, points to the fact that from the outset Marx was driven by a passionate will to fight for a better society. Engels, speaking at Marx’s graveside, testified to the fact that this passionate will survived throughout his life:
For Marx was before all else a revolutionist. His real mission in life was to contribute, in one way or another, to the overthrow of capitalist society and the state institutions which it had brought into being, to contribute to the liberation of the modern proletariat ... Fighting was his element. And he fought with a passion, a tenacity and a success such as few could rival. [1]
The same, of course, is true for the overwhelming majority of socialists and Marxists today. Our starting point is the desire to fight back, the wish to contribute to the making of a better world. It is this which leads us to Marxist theory, rather than Marxist theory which makes us want to change things. Perhaps somewhere there is someone who made an exhaustive study of all of Marxism and of all rival philosophical, historical, social and economic theories and on that basis, at the age of 90, decided to become a Marxist. If so I have yet to encounter them.
However, it was also Marx’s great achievement that he transformed socialism from a utopia into a science, or more accurately, from a utopia or a conspiracy into a science. Prior to Marx there were two dominant approaches to the establishment of socialism. The first, exemplified by Saint-Simon and Fourier in France and Owen in Britain, was to paint such a beautiful picture of socialism as a more rational form of society than capitalism that sooner or later everyone, including the ruling class, would be persuaded of its benefits. The second, derived from the Jacobin tradition in the French Revolution, exemplified in the 19th century by Blanqui, was that a small secret conspiracy of enlightened revolutionaries should seize power by means of a coup d’état and impose socialism on society from above.
Marx rejected both these approaches, not only by espousing socialism from below, by which he meant the self emancipation of the working class, but also by insisting that such emancipation was possible only on the basis of the internal contradictions and social forces objectively at work within capitalism. In The Communist Manifesto he wrote:
The theoretical conclusions of the Communists are in no way based on ideas or principles that have been invented, or discovered, by this or that would-be universal reformer. They merely express, in general terms, actual relations springing from an existing class struggle, from a historical movement going on under our very eyes. [2]
And in November 1850, following the defeat of the 1848 revolutions, Marx wrote:
In view of the general prosperity which now prevails and permits the productive forces of bourgeois society to develop as rapidly as is at all possible within the framework of bourgeois society, there can be no question of any real revolution ... A new revolution will be made possible only as the result of a new crisis, but is just as certain as is the coming of the crisis itself. [3]
Socialist theory, therefore, had to be founded on the scientific study of history and economics. Socialist strategy had to be founded on the scientific analysis of the objective situation. Revolutionary enthusiasm alone was not enough. Once again these problems are still with us. How many ardent new converts to socialism have felt they had only to tell everyone they met the good news for them all to see the light? How many young revolutionaries, after their first dramatic confrontation with the forces of the state in Trafalgar Square or Hyde Park, have thought that with a few more demonstrations like that the revolution would be round the corner?
These two elements, the revolutionary will to change the world and scientific analysis of the laws of history and society, are both present in Marx and Marxism. Individual lines of Marx can be quoted to make him appear the partisan of one element of the other. Taken in isolation, ‘Philosophers have interpreted the world in various ways, the point, however, is to change it’, might suggest complete indifference to philosophy or even theory as a whole. Whereas, ‘The windmill gives you society with the feudal lord; the steam mill, society with the industrial capitalist’ [4], might be held to suggest that new technology – the internet perhaps – will give us socialism without any revolutionary struggle or intervention. In reality, however, both activism and science coexist throughout Marx’s life and work, and the history of Marxism.
But is there not an inconsistency here? If Marxism claims that history is governed by laws and human behaviour is shaped by material conditions, how can Marxism also claim that revolutionary socialist activity is vital? Or, to put it even more bluntly, if, as is sometimes claimed, Marx ‘proved’ that socialism is inevitable, why do we need to fight for it?
All of this raises the question of determinism – that is, the question of the extent to which history is determined by economic and other social forces independent of our will and actions as revolutionaries. It also raises the closely related question of the extent to which Marxism should be regarded as a deterministic theory.
Before dealing directly with these issues it is worth noting that bourgeois thought has never been able to resolve the problem of determinism. Rather it has swung back and forth between voluntarist idealism, which ignores social conditions and places all the emphasis on ‘great’ individuals and ideas, and mechanical materialism which stresses the unchangeable nature of people and society. Both these positions reflect aspects of bourgeois society viewed from the top down. On the one hand the bourgeoisie standing at the head of society, freed from productive labour and living off the exploitation of others, is able to flatter itself that its ideas and deeds rule the world. On the other hand looking down on the masses it sees them there as mere objects, passively driven this way and that by the requirements of capital accumulation. Bourgeois ideology thus attacks Marxism both for being too deterministic and for not being deterministic enough.
From Max Weber onwards bourgeois sociology and its related disciplines have condemned Marxism for its ‘crude’ economic determinism, its underestimation of the autonomy of ideology, politics and culture and its insistence on the central importance of class. Bourgeois historians have repeatedly tried to undermine any notion of an overall pattern of development in world history, concentrating their fire particularly on the schema outlined by Marx in The Communist Manifesto, and attacking the idea that the English and French Revolutions had any determinate class character or any historical necessity.
At the same time the socio-biologists have condemned Marxism and every form of left wing and socialist thought for its ‘utopian’ failure to grasp that inequality, hierarchy, class and competition (along with war, racism and sexism) are encoded in our genes and thus ineradicable.
Debates about determinism have also occurred amongst those claiming allegiance to Marxism. At different points in time both passive determinist and highly voluntarist interpretations of Marxism have flourished. The most important example of the determinist trend was the version of Marxism developed by Karl Kautsky which dominated German Social Democracy and the Second International in the period leading up to the First World War. In Kautsky’s view the economic laws of capitalism guaranteed the growth in numbers and consciousness of the working class to the point where power would ‘automatically’ fall into its hands. All that was required of the socialist movement was that it build up its organisations, strengthen its vote and avoid adventures while patiently waiting for economic development to do its work. [5] It was of this period that Gramsci wrote that ‘the deterministic, fatalistic and mechanistic element has been a direct ideological “armour” emanating from the philosophy of praxis [Marxism – JM] rather like religion or drugs’. [6]
At the opposite pole, the most extreme cases of voluntarism trading under a Marxist label were Maoism and Guevarism. Maoism proclaimed not only the possibility of industrialising China by will power in the disastrous Great Leap Forward but even the direct transition to complete communism in China alone without any regard for objective material circumstances (this is discussed further below). Guevarism, basing itself on the special case of Cuba, developed a theory of revolution instigated by a small band of guerrillas in the countryside. ‘It is not necessary’, wrote Guevara, ‘to wait until all the conditions for making revolution exist: the insurrection can create them’. [7]
Revolutionary Marxists have always sought to combat both these positions. Luxemburg, Lenin and Trotsky, followed later by Lukacs and Gramsci, subjected the fatalism and passive expectancy of the Second International to devastating criticism. Lenin and Trotsky also took up arms against the ultra-left voluntarist trend that developed among European communists in the early years of the Communist International. [8] In the 1950s and 1960s it was largely supporters of this journal who produced a historical materialist critique of Maoism and Castroism. [9] The problem of determinism, however, does not go away. The structure of capitalist society with its elevation of ‘great’ individuals and its suppression of the personality of the masses generates both mechanical determinism and voluntarist idealism and these pressures continue to bear upon Marxists.
Its is against this background that this article attempts to outline and defend an interpretation of historical materialism which avoids both these dangers remaining thoroughly materialist and resolutely activist. The first step in its argument is to consider absolute determinism and absolute indeterminism as limiting cases.
 
Determinism: absolute and relative
By absolute determinism I mean the view that every event in the history of the universe from the big bang to the end of time and every human action from the writing of Capital to whether or not I raise my right eyebrow is inevitable and could not be other than it has been, is or will be. The argument in favour of absolute determinism is that every event/action has its cause or causes, and that these causes determine precisely the nature of the said event/action and that these causes are themselves completely determined by prior causes. Thus every particular event or action is part of an infinitely complex but absolutely inevitable chain reaction inherent in the singularity or whatever lay at the origin of the universe.
Historically this position has its roots in Newtonian physics from which it draws its ‘billiard-ball’ view of causality (a view in which the causation of all events and processes is seen as analogous to the way in which the motion of a billiard ball is wholly determined by the speed and angle with which it is struck by another billiard ball). [10] However, it also involves the belief that human behaviour is ‘ultimately’ reducible to the movements of the physical particles of which humans are made up and which are held to obey universal natural laws. Some such view as this, even if not openly proclaimed, seems to have influenced those Marxists who have held an absolute determinist position. Such Marxists, however, have generously held that for the purposes of social analysis it was unnecessary to effect a reduction to the level of physics since human behaviour was governed by social laws which were akin to natural laws in their operation.
Discussing absolute determinism, Ralph Miliband comments, ‘This is not a view that can be argued with: it can only be accepted or rejected. I reject it and pass on’. [11] Miliband has a point in that it is impossible to cite empirical evidence which refutes absolute determinism (just as it is impossible to cite facts which ‘prove’ it). Nevertheless it is a view which can be argued with. Bearing in mind Marx’s dictum that:
In practice man must prove the truth, that is, the reality and power, the this-sidedness of his thinking. The dispute over the reality or non-reality of thinking which is isolated from practice is a pure scholastic question. [12]
It is possible to assess the advantages and disadvantages of absolute determinism from the standpoint of practice.
Absolute determinism has two important merits vis-a-vis anti or indeterminist theories and for this reason has played at times a certain progressive role. First it obliges us to look for materialist explanations of events and phenomena, be they wars, revolutions, juvenile crime or child sex abuse, rather than simply ascribing them to chance, divine or satanic intervention, or personal wickedness. Second, as Gramsci notes, when the working class was going through a period of defeats, mechanical determinism could become ‘a tremendous force of moral resistance, of cohesion and of patient and obstinate perseverance. I have been defeated for a moment but the tide of history is working for me in the long term’. [13] Nevertheless it has a number of disadvantages which require its rejection.
First of all absolute determinism is, in practice, impossible to live by. The fact is that all human beings experience making decisions or choices. While it is obviously true that none of these decisions can ever be completely ‘free’ if by ‘free’ is meant uninfluenced by prior conditioning and present circumstances, it is no less true that we distinguish between decisions that are strongly constrained or coerced, for example, those taken at gunpoint or under threat of starvation, and those which are voluntary or relatively so. If this distinction and the whole experience of decision making is an illusion, as the absolute determinist must claim, it is an illusion which is inescapable in practical life, including for the absolute determinist. Consequently in practice absolute determinism always contains an escape clause through which voluntarism returns by the back door. Typically it results in what Marx, in his critique of Feuerbach’s mechanical materialism, described as ‘dividing society into two parts, one of which is superior to the other’. [14]
Secondly, the Newtonian foundations of absolute determinism have been undermined by subsequent scientific developments such as thermodynamics, quantum mechanics including the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle and Schrödinger’s Equation, and, most recently, the rise of chaos theory. [15] For our purposes the two key points are that quantum mechanics, which deals with the behaviour of elementary particles, provides laws which are probabilistic rather than absolutely deterministic and that chaos theory shows that ‘the tiniest difference in initial conditions (of a natural system such as the weather) could lead to enormous and unpredictable differences in outcome’. [16] Of course it is a crude error to generalise mechanically from natural science to social science and it is perfectly possible that aspects of human behaviour, and therefore of history, are more strictly determined than the behaviour of sub-atomic particles and the weather (just as quantum mechanics allows Newtonian laws of motion to remain valid within certain limits). Nevertheless these scientific advances challenge the widespread implicit identifications of science with absolute determinism.
Thirdly the historical experience of the working class movement has shown that absolute determinism has tended to encourage serious political errors, in particular passivity at moments of revolutionary crisis and underestimation of the role of the revolutionary party. These questions will be discussed later but quotations from Gramsci and Trotsky both make the point. Gramsci, who had bitter personal experience of the damaging effects of deterministic passivity on the part of the Italian Socialist Party in 1919–1920, comments (in the obscure language he adopted to deceive the censor):
But when the subaltern becomes directive ... mechanism at a certain point becomes an imminent danger ... The boundaries and the dominion of the ‘force of circumstance’ becomes restricted. But why? Because, basically, if yesterday the subaltern element was a thing, today is no longer a thing but an historical person, a protagonist... an agent, necessarily active and taking the initiative. [17]
Trotsky, reflecting on his non-Bolshevism prior to 1917, explained it in terms of his deterministic belief ‘that the revolution would force the Mensheviks ... to follow a revolutionary path’, and offered this self criticism:
I underestimated the importance of preparatory ideological selection and of political case-hardening. On questions of the inner development of the party I was guilty of a sort of social revolutionary fatalism. [18]
Absolute determinism therefore, must be rejected because it fails the decisive test of practice on three levels: the level of everyday life, the level of scientific practice and the level of political practice.
At the opposite pole to absolute determinism stands absolute indeterminism, the idea that human beings can do whatever they want without constraint and that everything which happens in history is purely accidental. This is such an absurd position that it is hard to see how it could be given coherent formulation. It is an inescapable fact that human behaviour is constrained and determined in a multitude of ways by, for example, the law of gravity or by the fact that if body temperature falls below a certain level we die. However strong, rather than absolute, indeterminism enjoys widespread circulation. By strong indeterminism I mean the denial of any overall shape or pattern of development in history and a heavy emphasis on the role of individuals as masters of their own fate and makers of history. In recent years postmodernism, with its ‘incredulity towards metanarratives’ [19], has been the dominant academic representative of this view. In this respect the postmodernists are singing an old song long intoned by bourgeois historians of various persuasions. It also underpins innumerable second rate journalistic accounts of events purely in terms of the whims and personalities of individual politicians and leaders, and finds expression in numerous popular sayings such as ‘Life is what you make of it’, ‘If you believe in yourself everything is possible’, or, ‘If you want something badly enough you can get it.’
Such strong indeterminism need not detain us long. It is plainly ideological in that it serves to mask all the real social forces, the concentrations and structures of economic, political, military and ideological power, which both shape individuals and limit their freedom of action. It mitigates against any attempt to consciously make history or change society by rendering history and society unintelligible. It is also plainly false. It is not true that the mass of working class children can grow up to be brain surgeons or film stars if they try hard enough. Quite apart from factors such as early social conditioning, economic deprivation and poor education there is the simple fact that the vacancies for brain surgeons and film stars are strictly limited. Strong indeterminism is refuted by the most elementary sociological evidence such as education, crime or health statistics which, despite their numerous problems and limitations, all demonstrate beyond serious question the powerful influence of, among other things, social class on life chances and social behaviour.
Strong indeterminism is just as impossible to live by as absolute determinism. Everyday life depends on the ability to predict both natural phenomena and human actions: that it will be cold in the winter and warmer in the summer; that barley seed will grow into barley, not wheat; that the number 17 bus will go to the town centre; that if you sell your labour power to an employer you will be paid at the end of the week. The predictions do not have to be exact or certain – we all know that there are mild winters, that harvests sometimes fail, buses break down and employers sometimes go bankrupt – but there has to be a degree of regularity and predictability or our social life would be impossible. A degree of predictability depends on a degree of determinism.
If both absolute determinism and absolute or strong indeterminism must be rejected this leaves relative determinism as the only practical option. If relative determinism is accepted as a general stance what we actually require from both natural and social science are theories which tell us what is determined and what is not and which establish for concrete situations the extent and limits of what is determined and the extent and limits of what can be altered by human decision and intervention. This is what is needed for everyday life, for farming the land, making goods and tools, planning a journey or driving a car. This is what is needed on a higher plane in a more systematic way for the project of consciously changing society.
Every course of political action, every strategic and tactical decision is dependent on judgements about what is and is not determined. For example: if the ideology of social groups is in no way determined by their economic position and class interest, then the utopian socialist project of persuading the ruling class of the virtues of a socialist society would be viable. If, on the other hand, the ideology of the individuals or social groups was mechanically and absolutely determined by their class interests there would be no point in trying to persuade anyone of anything, no point in any form of political argument or propaganda.
What Marxism provides better than any theory is precisely this: an account of what in human history and society is determined independent of our will and what it is possible to change through conscious intervention. It is this which makes Marxism ‘not a dogma but a guide to action’ in the struggle for workers’ revolution and human liberation.
At this point it is necessary to note an apparent paradox. Provided one stops short of absolute determinism, which renders the concept of human freedom meaningless, determinism (in the theoretical sense) and freedom are not necessarily diversely related. On the contrary, the higher the level of human understanding of the natural and social forces that determine our lives, the more in practice is human choice and freedom expanded. For the uncomprehending, the laws of nature make it impossible to fly but a sophisticated understanding of those laws (along with the application of human labour) has made flight commonplace.
Another concept that needs signposting here is ‘probabilistic determinism’ (already mentioned in relation to quantum mechanics). Some things are very strongly determined and therefore virtually inevitable; some things are very probable but not certain; some things are likely; some things hang in the balance. Things which are only likely in individual cases become increasingly certain as the number of cases increases. It is certain that I will die. It is unlikely but not impossible that I will die tomorrow. It is probable but not certain that I will die before I reach 100. Given a million people it is virtually certain that the large majority die before the age of 100. If an individual middle class child is even marginally more likely to get to university than an individual working class child, it becomes virtually certain that a higher percentage of middle class children as a whole will go to university.
The concept of probabilistic determinism is politically important in at least three ways. First it plays a role in the current battle against ruling class ideology. The ruling class which is perfectly capable of grasping probabilistic determinism when it suits it (for instance when fixing insurance premiums) often denies it for propaganda purposes – as when rejecting a link between crime and unemployment. Secondly it is crucial in the understanding of history. Take the familiar question of the inevitability of the First World War. It makes no sense to argue that the outbreak of war was inevitable precisely at the beginning of August 1914. Princip might have missed his shot, the Austro-Hungarian government might have responded differently and so on. Nor should we be drawn into trying to prove the absolute inevitability of world war at some point. But it makes good sense to argue that given important rivalries the war was overwhelmingly likely (or virtually inevitable).
Thirdly it plays a central role in political tactics. The decision to call a strike or even a demonstration depends in considerable part on the assessment of the objective possibility of such an action taking place and being a success. Clearly there is no way in which such assessment can be rendered an exact science, but neither can it be dispensed with. Napoleon’s oft quoted maxim, ‘First engage, then we’ll see’, expresses an important truth, but only within definite limits. An army which engages in a pitched battle with an enemy that is better armed and many times its size will almost certainly be defeated, as will one which invades Russia without taking account of the highly deterministic effects of the Russian winter.
Finally it should be noted that, whereas absolute determinism renders conscious political action to change the world superfluous, and strong indeterminism renders it hopelessly ineffective, relative determinism puts a premium on such action. If in a given situation a particular desired outcome is either probable but not guaranteed or hangs in the balance, then every action taken towards that outcome (provided, of course, it is not counterproductive) increases the probability of it occurring and is therefore valuable. In the light of these theoretical considerations I shall now examine the extent and limits of determinism in the Marxist theory of history.
 
Forces and relations of production
Marx’s theory of history begins with an assertion that is extremely simple and obvious:
... that man must be in a position to live in order to be able to ‘make history’. But life involves before everything else eating and drinking, a habitation, clothing and many other things. [20]
Without food and water people die. This is so simple and obvious that one might wonder why Marx bothers with it (not once but repeatedly) [21] and why I bother to cite it. The answer is that it is a necessary first premise and that ‘the writing of history must always set out from these natural bases’ [22], but there are innumerable bourgeois theories and accounts of history and society which manage to lose sight of, conceal or evade this most fundamental point.
From the necessity for food, drink, clothing and so on, it follows, Marx argues, that the basis of every society and all human history is the production, through social labour, of these means of subsistence. This leads Marx to a further proposition:
In the social production of their life, men enter into definite relations that are indispensable and independent of their will, relations of production which correspond to a definite stage of development of their material productive forces. [23]
This is a proposition which can be summarised as the thesis that the level of development of the productive forces determines the social relations of production (provided we leave open for the moment the precise meaning of determine in this context).
There is no doubt that within the ‘classical’ interpretation of Marxism – the line that runs from Marx, through Engels, Lenin, Luxemburg and Trotsky – this thesis has been seen as a cornerstone of historical materialism. At the same time, however, every aspect of the proposition has been the subject of vigorous controversy, beginning with the meaning of the terms productive forces and relations of production.
Frequently the productive forces have been seen as simply the technology (tools/machinery) available to society – an interpretation which has served as the basis for viewing Marxism as essentially a theory of technological determinism. And certainly there is one passage in Marx which, taken in isolation, seems to support this interpretation, namely the famous statement in The Poverty of Philosophy that, ‘The windmill gives you society with the feudal lord; the steam mill, society with the industrial capitalist’. [24] However, later in the same text Marx also writes that ‘of all the instruments of production the greatest productive power is the revolutionary class itself’. [25] This suggests a broader interpretation of productive forces as not only machinery but also the labour of the producers. Quotations from Marx apart from this latter interpretation make far more sense for the simple reason that tools and machinery have first to be produced by human labour and, even then, do not produce anything themselves without further human labour to set them in motion. What is more, the labour involved is more than a matter of muscle power. The sophistication of technology clearly depends on the scientific knowledge of its makers, while in many areas of work skilled or educated labour is more productive than unskilled labour. The productive forces are therefore best defined as the general capacity to produce of a given society.
A similar choice exists between narrower and broader definitions of the relations of production. On this question, however, there have been three main positions. The first defines the relations of production as legal property relations. The second distinguishes between legal ownership and effective possession or control but still restricts the definition of relations of production to relations of effective possession or control of the means of production. The third sees relations of production as the totality of social relations into which individuals enter in the process of production.
The first position suffers from the serious defect of elevating form over content and appearance over reality and has proved a major obstacle to understanding the enormously important phenomenon of state capitalism either in its fully developed form in Russia or its partial form in Western nationalised industries. It should therefore be rejected.
The difference between the second and third positions is best brought into focus by looking at how each definition specifies the relations of production in capitalist society. According to the former the relations of production consist only of the relations between the capitalist class as owners or controllers of the means of production and employers of labour power and the working class as non-owners of the means of production and sellers of labour power. According to the latter they consist of these relations plus relations between workers and workers, between workers and supervisors, between supervisors and managers, between managers and owners, owners and owners and so on.
Here the narrower definition has the advantage of highlighting those social relations which are constitutive of capitalism as a system and of its fundamental classes – the bourgeoisie and proletariat, but it also has certain disadvantages. It can lead either to an oversimplified view of the class structure as consisting solely of capitalists and workers and no intermediate layers, or to a theorisation of those intermediate layers in terms of consumption and lifestyle rather than relations of production. It also leads to a remarkably static view of the relations of production in which these remain unchanged through centuries of economic development. Thus the enormous transformation from early industrial capitalism to contemporary multinational capitalism, from an economy dominated by relatively small individually owned and managed firms to one dominated by giant bureaucratically managed multinational corporations, would be held to involve no change in the relations of production. Such a conclusion stands in clear contradiction to Marx’s famous statement in The Communist Manifesto that, ‘The bourgeoisie cannot exist without constantly revolutionising the instruments of production, and thereby the relations of production, and with them the whole relations of society’. [26]
Finally there is the simple fact that relations between worker and worker, worker and supervisor and so on, clearly are social relations entered into in the process of production, ie relations of production.
For all these reasons it is preferable to adopt the wider and more flexible definition. In doing so, however, it is necessary to keep in mind the distinction between gradual quantitative shifts in the relations of production which do not change which class owns and controls the means of production and fundamental qualitative changes which do. The former changes affect the balance of power within a given mode of production. Only the latter mark the transition from one mode to another.
This brings us to the central question of the determination of the relations of production by the forces of production. As we have seen, Marx, in the 1859 Preface, writes of ‘relations of production which correspond to a definite stage of development of these material productive forces.’ He then argues that:
At a certain stage in their development, the material productive forces of society come in conflict with the existing relations of production ... From forms of development of the productive forces these relations turn into their fetters. Then begins an epoch of social revolution. [27]
However, this whole conception of the primacy of the forces of production has come under attack from various quarters. We have already mentioned what was historically the most significant of these attacks, that of Maoism. The Maoist claim to be constructing socialism, or even full communism, within the framework of the impoverished and predominantly rural country necessitated downplaying the significance of the productive forces. Thus the leading theoretician of Maoism in Europe, Charles Bettleheim, argued that, ‘What is happening in China proves that a low level of development of the productive forces is no obstacle to a socialist transformation of social relations’. [28] In this case the denial of the primacy of the productive forces was associated with an extreme idealism and voluntarism which elevated the role of will power and political leadership in opposition to objective material conditions and social forces in a way that constituted a complete break with historical materialism in all but name. Moreover what happened in China proved that a low level of development of the productive forces was not only an obstacle to socialist transformation but even to the development of state capitalism in one country.
More surprising but also of more theoretical interest is the fact that Alex Callinicos in his Marxism and Philosophy has argued in favour of ‘starting from the relations of production, and treating them, not the forces of production, as the independent variable’. [29] Alex appears to have come to this conclusion out of a desire to avoid the passive technological determinism of the Second International and the less passive but even more mechanical and dogmatic determinism of high Stalinism. In support of his position Callinicos cites Marx’s account in Capital of how capitalist relations of production provided the impetus to the development of the productive forces which led to the industrial revolution. He also argues that the primacy of the productive forces derives from the early undeveloped formulation of historical materialism in The German Ideology rather than the mature version in the later works (with the 1859 Preface rejected as ‘technological determinism’ and ‘to a large extent, a summary of The German Ideology’). [30]
In fairness to Alex it should be said that he no longer holds this position. Nevertheless it is useful to consider these arguments and in considering them it is first of all necessary to recognise that the relations of production certainly do exert a powerful influence on the forces of production. This is both empirically verifiable and allowed for in Marx’s classic formulation. The 1859 Preface indicates two possible kinds of influence of the relations on the forces of production: they can be ‘forms of their development’ (which I take to include positively encouraging their development) or they can become ‘fetters’ (i.e. they can restrict or hold back their development). Indeed Marx’s analysis of the contradictions of capitalism – above all the tendency to overproduction and the tendency of the rate of profit to fall – shows that capitalist relations of production both drive the forces of production forwards and throw them backwards simultaneously with the development tendency predominating in times of booms and the ‘fettering’ tendency predominating in slumps, and the tendency towards slump increasing as the system ages.
Nevertheless there are strong reasons for continuing to assert the primacy of the productive forces and regarding the influence of the relations of productions as a secondary or derivative ‘reaction back’ upon the forces. [31] The most important reason is that if primacy is accorded to the relations of production then no explanation can be given for why the relations of production are what they are in any particular society or epoch. The concept of the relations of production is left, as it were, hanging in the air and the coherence of historical materialism as an overall theory of historical development is destroyed. In the process two other fundamental tenets of classical Marxism are undermined: the theory of revolution as rooted in the productive forces coming into conflict with the relations, and the theory that the fundamental economic prerequisite of socialism is the development of the productive forces to the point where it is possible to provide a decent life for all. [32] The same problem does not arise, however, if the forces of production are seen as primary since both the existence and growth of the productive forces are explained, in the final analysis, by the struggle to meet biologically given human needs, which are themselves the product of natural evolution.
An additional argument in favour of this position is that it conforms to the large majority of the classic accounts of historical materialism by Marx and Engels, not only in the 1859 Preface and The German Ideology but also in The Poverty of Philosophy, The Communist Manifesto, Anti-Dühring, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State and elsewhere. Even the quotation from Capital chosen by Alex as favourable to his position contains a reference to the ultimate priority of the productive forces which is very similar to the formulation in the 1859 Preface:
It is always the direct relationship of the owners of the conditions of production to the direct producers – a relation always naturally corresponding to a definite stage in the methods of labour and thereby its social productivity – which reveals the innermost secret, the hidden basis of the entire social structure. [33] [my emphasis]
Finally Chris Harman has provided persuasive theoretical and empirical backing for the primacy of the productive forces in relation to the important test case of the transition from feudalism to capitalism. The influential American Marxist Robert Brenner has argued that this transition is to be explained primarily in terms of the class struggle in the countryside between lords and peasants (i.e. relations of production) rather than the development of trade, industry and the bourgeoisie in the towns (forces of production). In opposition both to Brenner and the earlier theories of Pirenne, Sweezy and Wallerstein, Harman draws on the work of Le Geff, Kriedle and other historians to vindicate – in more developed form – Marx’s account of ‘the way in which the growth of the forces of production within feudalism threw up new relations of production, relations which came into collision with the old society and led to bourgeois revolution ... centred in the towns ... reinforced by the revolt of the rural classes’. [34]
But if the productive forces are primary and their state of development must be the point of departure for all Marxist historical analysis, their relationship to the relations of production cannot be one of mechanical or automatic determination. Any notion of automatic determination here is refuted by the historical fact of social revolution since social revolution involves precisely a radical transformation of the relations of production on the basis of a given level of development of the productive forces. In Russia the relations of production in 1918 were substantially different from those which had existed in 1916 while the productive forces had, if anything, declined. Moreover Marx’s concept of the forces of production coming into conflict with the existing relations of production would be impossible if there were absolute or mechanical determination of relations of forces. Clearly, therefore, we are again in the realm of relative determinism. The nature of this relative determinism is, I believe, best understood as a combination of constraint and impulse.
On the one hand the level of development of the productive forces sets definite limits to the relations of production possible at a given point of time. Thus in the earliest stages of human history, when the forces of production restricted human beings to nomadic hunting and gathering, exploitative relations of production (ie the division of society into classes) were excluded. The productive forces in Europe in the 11th century, however, excluded the possibility of either primitive communist or modern socialist relations of production. The population (itself a force of production) had long since far exceeded the number that could be supported by hunting and gathering, and surplus was being generated which permitted the ruling class to maintain armed forces easily able to crush any experiment in primitive egalitarianism. At the same time the productive forces were sufficient to support a decent life only for a tiny minority: no matter how production was organised or goods distributed it was not possible to liberate the population as a whole from poverty, hunger and a life of endless toil. In contrast the productive forces in contemporary society exclude either primitive communist or feudal relations of production: they permit only capitalist or socialist relations or, to be exact, relations transitional to socialism.
On the other hand the development of the productive forces in Europe from, at least, the 15th century onwards generated a powerful impulse to the rise of capitalist relations of production developing, as Marx put it, ‘in the interstices of feudal society’. From the early 19th century onwards the development of the productive forces has created an increasingly powerful impulse towards socialism. The increasing socialisation of production, the growth of the world working class, the rise of the world economy, the advances of science and technology (with their immense potential for destruction as well as construction) all press humanity in the direction of social ownership and democratic planning.
However, historical experience has demonstrated conclusively that the development of the productive forces is not in itself enough to determine the transition from one mode of production to another, either from feudalism to capitalism or from capitalism to socialism. It is a necessary but not sufficient condition. For such a transition to occur it is also necessary that a new social class (the rise of which is both determined by, and part of, the growth of the productive forces) should actually overthrow the old ruling class (which owes its position to the old mode of production and has a vested interest in its preservation) and wrest state power from its hands. It is in this sense that the class struggle is the locomotive of history.
 
Base and superstructure
At this point it is possible to make some general comments on the much debated question of the determination of the superstructure of society by the economic base. Speaking at Marx’s graveside Engels stated:
Just as Darwin discovered the law of development of organic nature so Marx discovered the law of the development of human history: the simple fact, hitherto concealed by an overgrowth of ideology, that mankind must first of all eat, drink, have shelter and clothing before it can pursue politics, science, art, religion etc, and therefore the production of the immediate material means of subsistence and consequently the degree of economic development attained by a given people or during a given epoch from the foundation upon which the state institutions, the legal conceptions, art, and even the ideas on religion of the people concerned, have been evolved, and in the light of which they must, therefore, be explained, instead of vice versa, as had hitherto been the case. [35]
The insistence on the primacy of the economic base in relation to the superstructure, on the explanation of the latter by the former ‘instead of vice versa’, on the determination of consciousness by social being, not being by consciousness, is common to all the classic accounts of historical materialism by its founders and is clearly fundamental to Marxism as a whole.
Yet in noting this we should also observe that in the large majority of these statements Marx and Engels formulate the relationship between superstructure and base in terms of ‘correspondence’, ‘conditioning’, or ‘arising from’ rather than strict determination. Thus in the 1859 Preface we find:
... the economic structure of society, the real basis on which rises a legal and political superstructure and to which correspond definite forms of social consciousness. The mode of production of material life conditions the social, political and intellectual life process in general ...
With the change of the economic foundation the entire immense superstructure is more or less rapidly transformed.[my emphasis – JM] [36]
Moreover Engels, in his late letters, repeatedly stresses that neither he nor Marx intended to suggest a mechanical or absolute determination of the superstructure by the base:
According to the materialist conception of history the ultimately determining element in history is the production and reproduction of real life. More than this neither Marx nor I have ever asserted. Hence if somebody twists this into saying that the economic element is the only determining one, he transforms that proposition into a meaningless, abstract, senseless phrase. The economic situation is the basis, but the various elements of the superstructure – political forms of the class struggle and its results, to wit: constitutions established by the victorious class after successful battle, etc., judicial forms and then even the reflexes of all these actual struggles in the brains of the participants, political, juristic, philosophical theories, religious views and their further development into systems of dogmas – also exercise their influence upon the course of the historical struggles and in many cases preponderate in determining their form. [37]
In The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Marx himself gives vivid expression to the way in which ideas can outlive the economic and social conditions from which they arose:
The tradition of all the dead generations weighs like a nightmare on the brain of the living. And just when they seem engaged in revolutionising themselves and things, in creating something that has never yet existed, precisely in such periods of revolutionary crisis they anxiously conjure up the spirits of the past to their service and borrow from them names, battle cries and costumes in order to present the new scene of world history in this time honoured disguise and this borrowed language. [38]
And in his Preface to The History of the Russian Revolution Trotsky draws the connection between this absence of mechanical determinism and the fact of revolution:
The point is that society does not change its institutions as need arises, the way a mechanic changes his instruments. On the contrary, society actually takes the institutions which hung upon it as given for once for all.
The swift changes of mass views and moods in an epoch of revolution thus derive not from the flexibility and mobility of man’s mind, but just the opposite, from its deep conservatism. The chronic lag of ideas and relations behind new objective conditions, right up to the moment when the latter crash over people in the form of a catastrophe, is what creates in a period of revolution that leaping movement of ideas and passions which seems to the police mind a mere result of the activities of ‘demagogues’. [39]
It is therefore clear that any charge against Marxism of mechanical or crude economic determinism completely misses the mark. On the question of base and superstructure, as on the question of forces and relations of production, what historical materialism stands for is relative determinism and the concepts of constraint and impulse are again applicable.
On the one hand the nature of the economic base sets definite limits to the nature of the superstructure so that, for example, a feudal base is incompatible with universal suffrage and parliamentary democracy and obviously could not give rise to the philosophy of John Stuart Mill, the economics of Adam Smith, the novel as the dominant literary form or the paintings of either Rembrandt or Jackson Pollock. On the other hand developments in the base, both in the forces and the relations of production, continually generate pressures for change in the superstructure. Thus the first stirrings of capitalism in Europe generated pressures for a challenge to the Catholic Church which was both a major feudal landowner in its own right and provided ideological legitimation for the feudal order as a whole. The eventual outcome of these pressures was the Reformation in the 16th century and the emergence with Calvinism of a new form of Christianity favourable to the needs of early capitalist accumulation. While the Industrial Revolution in Britain provided an impulse for the enfranchisement, first, of the industrial bourgeoisie and middle class, and then, of the industrial working class (resulting in the Reform Acts of 1832, 1867 and 1884). Similarly a change in the base – the massive rise in paid employment of women during the post-war economic boom provided the impulse for a significant, though partial, change in the dominant social attitude towards women. Though, it must immediately be added, none of these impulses were realised automatically or without bitter conflict, the outcome of which might have been different.
At this point we can consider the difficult and complex question of the extent to which different elements of the superstructure are more or less strictly determined by the base. In general it can be said that those elements of the superstructure which have immediate practical implications such as the law, the judiciary, the police, the military, the education system and so on are more closely tied to the base and in particular to the economic interests of the ruling class than are the more ideological elements such as religious doctrines, philosophy and art. Thus a modern capitalist economy could not coexist with laws which were anti-capitalist in that they either looked back to feudalism by, for example, prohibiting usury (lending money and charging interest) or anticipated socialism by banning the employment of wage labour or legalising the expropriation of the rich by the poor. A capitalist economy can, however, coexist with art that yearns for the feudal past (the Pre-Raphaelites in Victorian England, the poetry of Ezra Pound, the fantasy novels of J.R.R. Tolkien) or makes propaganda for the socialist future (the plays of Brecht, the paintings of Leger and so on). It is also possible to differentiate between art forms with architecture, for example, more directly influenced and more strictly limited by economics than poetry. Certainly capitalism can and does coexist with a wide variety of religions that long pre-date capitalism in their origins (though of course to survive the religions have to adapt themselves to capitalism).
However, all such generalisations require substantial qualification. Engels takes great care to explain the relative autonomy of the legal sphere:
As soon as the new division which creates lawyers becomes necessary another new and independent sphere is opened up which, for all its general dependence on production and trade, still has a special capacity for reacting upon these spheres. In a modern state, law must not only correspond to the general economic condition and be its expression but also must be an internally coherent expression which does not, owing to inner contradictions, reduce itself to nought. And in order to achieve this the faithful reflection of economic conditions suffers increasingly. [40]
Similarly Marx’s analysis of Bonapartism and Trotsky’s of fascism deal with situations in which the capitalist state machine passes out of the direct control of the capitalist class and can therefore impose certain policies which are not in the interests of that class: for example, the Nazi Holocaust which cannot be accounted for by either the economic or political needs of the German bourgeoisie. [41]
Whereas in philosophy and art many of the finest achievements derive their greatness precisely from their close relationship to the economic base. Marxism itself is an example of this in that its power consists not in its autonomy or detachment but in its accurate reflection of the fundamental contradictions in the economic basis of society and its exact expression of the interests of the main productive force in society, namely the proletariat. [42] In art one can cite such paintings as Rembrandt’s numerous portraits of the newly ascendant Dutch bourgeoisie (for example The Anatomy Lesson of Dr Tulp, The Night Watch, and The Syndics) or Turner’s Rain, Steam and Speed which dramatically evokes that great driving force of 19th century capitalism, the locomotive, or the manifestos, poems and paintings of the Futurists which self consciously celebrate the arrival of the automobile, electricity and the 20th century metropolis, while in literature the novels of Defoe, Austen, Balzac and Dickens (to name but a few) all show a direct relationship to economic and social developments.
Clearly, however, it is a consequence of the relative determinist position that in the whole area of base and superstructure and particularly in the ideological sphere all generalisations, all schema – though necessary – are of only limited value and must rapidly make way for concrete analysis.
 
Laws of motion of capitalism
One significant aspect of the overall problem of determinism and of base and superstructure is the extent of the determination of human behaviour by the economic laws of motion of capitalism. The fact that Marx devoted the major part of his life to laying bare these laws in his master work, Capital, shows that he considered them to be of the highest importance in shaping contemporary and future human actions. Moreover the very notion of an economic law of motion implies a high level of determinism.
In fact when it comes to the economic behaviour of individuals and even more so of classes, Marxism is at its most deterministic. Marxism insists that the working class as a whole has no choice but to sell its labour power to the employers [43] and little choice about which employer it sells it to. Equally it insists that capitalists, and capitalist managers, have, because of competition, no choice but to strive to maximise their accumulation of capital and therefore to maximise their rate of exploitation. It argues that the values of commodities, including the value of labour power, and therefore, in the long run, their prices, are objectively rather than subjectively determined and are certainly not arbitrary. [44]
It argues further that competitive capital accumulation on the basis of the laws of value leads inevitably to a tendency for the rate of profit to decline [45], which in turn leads to economic crisis in the form of recessions of increasing frequency and severity.
The validity or otherwise of Marxist economic analysis and its theory of crisis cannot be debated here. [46] I merely wish to stress its highly deterministic character.
Even here we are not talking of absolute or mechanical determinism. Individual workers may become new age travellers or full time revolutionaries. Individual capitalists may become philanthropists and certainly make serious errors in their pursuit of profit. Various factors, foreseen and unforeseen, can counteract the falling rate of profit and thus defer the crisis. [47] There is nothing in Marxist theory which can totally exclude the possibility of a cosmic accident upsetting the whole process. Nevertheless the element of determinism in this area is clearly very strong.
This strong determinism with regard to the laws of motion of capitalism leads to a point of sharp political conflict between Marxism and all varieties of reformism. Reformists of all stripes believe, or at least say they believe, that governments staffed by people of goodwill and sagacity (namely themselves) will be able, without first overthrowing capitalist relations of production, to manipulate the working of the capitalist economy so as to cure its crisis, moderate its exploitation and generally make it work in the interests of working people. Marxists argue that this is a disastrous illusion and that the economic laws of capitalism are far stronger than the good intentions of reformist politicians.
Confronted with the realities of the capitalist economy reformist governments either (and this is the most common scenario) surrender their programmes for reform and meekly adapt themselves to capitalist priorities or if, under mass pressure from below, they are more stubborn, are rapidly thrown into chaos and disarray. The one thing they are not able to do is substantially modify either the logic of the system or its tendency to crisis. Once again this is not the place to argue in any detail the Marxist case on the question of social democratic governments. Suffice to say that the historical record – including the record of seven Labour governments in Britain since 1924, of the Weimar Republic, of Popular Unity in Chile, of Mitterrand in France and Gonzalez in Spain – testifies strongly in favour of Marxist determinism.
Yet at the same time as emphasising this determining power of the laws of motion of capitalism Marxism also takes, at a different level of the argument, an anti-deterministic position with regard to those laws. The general tendency among outright supporters and ideologists of capitalism – its professional economists, politicians and so on, and among capitalists themselves, is to treat these laws, laws of the market as they call them, as eternal and unchanging. Sometimes they are seen directly as laws of nature – it was Margaret Thatcher who said, ‘You can no more defy the laws of the market than you can defy the laws of gravity.’ Alternatively they are seen as emanating from a timeless and fixed human nature – the selfish, atomised, benefit maximising homo oeconomicus of the classical economists. Either way they are presented as outside, and beyond, any possibility of human control and any attempt to resist or challenge them is depicted as simultaneously utopian, harmful and wicked.
Marxism rejects this. It maintains that contemporary economic laws derive neither from nature nor human nature but exclusively from capitalist relations of production which are a product of history, ie of past human actions, and which can be changed by human action. As long as capitalist relations of production remain in place, however, the laws of motion of capitalism will remain in operation and will, in the long run, prevail over all opposition and resistance. [48]
Before leaving the question of the determining role of the laws of capitalism it is necessary to consider the relative freedom of action of the different social classes. Here we confront an apparent paradox. When it is a matter of personal or individual behaviour it is obvious that members of the capitalist class have vastly more freedom than members of the working class. They can dwell, holiday, eat, drink and play where they want. By contrast workers have little or no choice in these areas. But when it comes to social and political action, to action as a class, there is a vital sense in which the working class is freer, less determined, than the bourgeoisie. Historically the bourgeoisie are locked into the system they preside over, prisoners of both its drive to accumulate and its contradictions. They are at home in their alienation, and, as Marx puts it, ‘the capitalist is merely capital personified and functions in the process of production solely as the agent of capital’. [49] The working class, however, can and does resist the imperatives of capital. And, from the moment they resist, workers become more than mere personifications of labour power. They make a start on the road to the transcendence of their alienation and to becoming conscious directors of production, society and history.
The contrast between the captivity of the bourgeoisie and the (relative) freedom of the proletariat also has implications for the intermediate strata commonly referred to as the middle class. Within the left wing of this layer the political strategy of reformism is intimately connected with the personal strategy of advancement up the hierarchy of the professions and institutions. The social worker, the local government officer, the teacher and the journalist tell themselves and others that they have to rise through the management structure to run their department, school, paper or whatever so as to put their ideas into practice and have the power to change things. In reality the higher the individual rises the more they become circumscribed by the logic of capital, the more they lose their freedom to oppose that logic, and in that sense the more determined their behaviour becomes.
 
Determinism and the class struggle
The greater relative freedom of the proletariat, its ability to choose to resist the imperatives of capital, leads directly to the question of determinism and the class struggle. To what extent is the existence, course and outcome of the class struggle objectively determined independently of the will, consciousness and deliberate intervention of workers and revolutionary socialists? This question or series of questions is politically the most important aspect of the whole question of determinism. It is the point at which the philosophical debate bears most directly on socialist practice.
It is, of course, one of the central pillars of historical materialism that the class struggle throughout history derives from exploitative relations of production. Indeed it is exploitation, the appropriation of surplus labour extorted from the immediate producers, which generates the conflict in which class struggle takes shape. As G.E.M. de Ste Croix has put it, ‘Class (essentially a relationship) is the collective social expression of the fact of exploitation, the way in which exploitation is embodied in a social structure.’ [50] In capitalist society it is the extraction of surplus value hidden within the relationship of wage labour which gives rise to the antagonism and struggle between the bourgeoisie and proletariat. There is an objective conflict of interests between the classes in which the capitalists, driven by competition, strive continually to increase the rate of exploitation (by lowering wages, extending the working day and increasing productivity) and the workers, driven by naturally given and socially developed needs, strive to restrict it. This is a battle which goes on every working day of every working week in every workplace throughout the capitalist world and throughout the capitalist epoch and which, in more or less mediated form, permeates every other aspect and level of society. The existence of class struggle is therefore not something invented, created, stirred up or otherwise brought into being by Marx or Marxists, or agitators or troublemakers. It is an economically determined and inevitable feature of capitalist society.
The level of intensity of the class struggle, however, varies enormously. Bourgeois society passes through periods of apparent class peace when class conflict, though continuing, is buried beneath the surface and through periods of open class warfare in the literal sense of revolution and civil war, and through every intermediate level between these extremes.
In analysing the extent to which the level of the class struggle is economically or otherwise determined it is necessary briefly to return to the distinction made earlier between the relative freedom of action of the bourgeoisie and proletariat. The bourgeois and proletarian sides of the class struggle are obviously interrelated but they are not identical or exactly symmetrical. The bourgeois side is strongly economically determined. Clearly political, historical and even individual psychological factors do play a part in influencing both the tactics and ferocity with which it pursues its interests. Nevertheless the compulsion of economics is very powerful and the bourgeoisie has developed a very strong ‘class instinct’, ie a very clear practical awareness of where its interests lie. It is therefore possible to formulate the general rule or ‘law’ that in times of economic crisis when profit rates fall and competition between capitals intensifies the bourgeoisie will step up its assault on working class living standards.
However, when it comes to the proletarian side we cannot say, à la Newton, that every (bourgeois) action meets with an equal and opposite reaction. It is an empirical fact that there has always been resistance to exploitation and oppression even in the most difficult circumstances (even in Nazi Germany and Stalinist Russia, even in the death camps and the gulag). But it is no less a fact that there is always also acquiescence and even collaboration. The relative proportions of these different responses vary enormously and not in any fixed or mechanical relationship to economic conditions.
Clearly the level of development of the productive forces, and their accompanying relations of production, together with the immediate economic conjuncture constitute the point of departure for the level of working class struggle. The degree and nature of industrialisation in a society determines the size of the working class and its objective weight within the economy. It thus also determines the potential strength of the working class in struggle but what it does not, in itself, determine is the extent to which this potential will actually be realised. In the early years of this century the working class in economically advanced Germany and Britain were larger and potentially more powerful than the working class in backward Russia but the level of struggle in Russia was much higher. The immediate economic situation can provide powerful impulses to struggle – inflation, for example, is a strong impetus to the fight for higher wages – but again the response is not automatic.
Trotsky discussed this question on a number of occasions. [51] He argued that the rise of a mass revolutionary workers’ movement and a successful struggle for state power were undoubtedly premised on a generalised crisis of the capitalist order, ie an exacerbation of the fundamental contradiction between the forces and relations of production which produces a prolonged period of instability and rapid alteration of booms and slumps. But he rejects the idea of any ‘automatic dependence of the proletarian revolutionary movement upon a crisis. There is only dialectical interaction’. [52] In particular Trotsky stresses how in certain circumstances, especially where the working class is exhausted after major battles, prolonged unemployment can demoralise and weaken its struggles, whereas a temporary economic revival can raise the level of struggle.
In contrast, the industrial revival is bound, first of all, to raise the self-confidence of the working class, undermined by failures and by disunity in its own ranks: it is bound to fuse the working class together in the factories and plants and heighten desire for unanimity in militant actions. [53]
... At the moment when the factory stops discharging old workers and takes on new ones, the self-confidence of the workers is strengthened: they are once again necessary. [54]
These observations are extremely useful pointers or guidelines but can no more be treated as universally valid generalisations than the mechanical notion that slump equals revolt. Firstly because even in purely economic terms no two booms and no two slumps are the same. Secondly because the relationship between economic conditions and workers’ struggle is mediated by numerous factors – the level and quality of trade union organisation, the level and quality of political organisation, the level of general political consciousness, the level of anger, the behaviour of trade union and political leadership, and the strength, confidence, cleverness and so on, of the capitalist class – all of which are conditioned not only by the current situation but also by the immediate and even by the more distant past, and all of which are involved in a complex interaction.
Thus any satisfactory account of the level and course of the class struggle either in the past or the present must be a concrete analysis which takes economic conditions as its starting point but includes all these elements. The complexity of this means that any attempt to predict the shape of working class struggle even in the immediate future, and certainly beyond, must be undertaken with great caution. Gramsci’s warning is salutary:
In reality one can ‘scientifically’ foresee only the struggle, but not the concrete moments of the struggle which cannot but be the result of opposing forces in continuous movements which are never reducible to fixed quantities since within them quantity is continuously becoming quality. [55]
However, the ultimate purpose of all Marxist analysis of the class struggle is neither to predict its future nor to provide an adequate explanation of its history, but to intervene in it so as to help shape its direction. And it is precisely from the standpoint of intervention that the level of the class struggle must within certain limits be regarded, by either the individual socialist militant or the revolutionary party, as given, ie as objectively determined independently of the will of the individual or the party. As every shop steward or union rep knows (or soon learns) strikes cannot be called at will in the absence of a genuine wish to fight on the part of the workers concerned. This applies even more strongly to general strikes or insurrections and any violation of this law of revolutionary strategy invariably has disastrous consequences. (The classic negative example of this rule is the March Action of 1921 in which the German Communist Party artificially attempted to goad the German working class into revolution and succeeded only in shattering its own membership and authority). [56] By the same token there are times when sections of the working class or even the majority of the class move into struggle regardless of the objections or reservations of even its most advanced leaders. Such a movement was the February Revolution of 1917 when the mass revolt that overthrew Tsarism began, despite an initially reluctant Bolshevik Party. As Trotsky records:
The 23rd of February was International Women’s Day. The social-democratic circles had intended to mark this day in a general manner: by meetings, speeches, leaflets. It had not occurred to anyone that it might become the first day of the revolution. Not a single organisation called for strikes on this day. What is more, even a Bolshevik organisation, and a most militant one – the Vyborg borough-committee, all workers – was opposing strikes.
... On the following morning, however, in spite of all directives, the women textile workers in several factories went on strike and sent delegates to the metal workers with an appeal for support ...
Thus the fact is that the February Revolution was begun from below, overcoming the resistance of its own revolutionary organisations ... [57]
In both these sets of circumstances would-be revolutionary leaders of local or national level have first to adjust themselves to objectively determined reality.
This recognition of necessity is, however, only the starting point of action. Leadership designed to focus the struggle, and raise its level further, is necessary to ensure its success. It is equally part of the experience of every rank and file militant and every political leadership that there are moments when a single speech at a mass meeting, a bold lead by a shop stewards committee or a concerted intervention by a political party can make a significant or even decisive difference to the course of the struggle, either positively or negatively. Thus the decision of the NUM and TUC leadership in October 1992 to march the first great demonstration against pit closures around Hyde Park rather than leading it directly to parliament made an immense difference to the ability of the Tory government to ride out that crisis. Conversely the decision, or rather series of decisions, by the Socialist Workers Party in 1977 to confront the National Front at Lewisham, and to launch the Anti Nazi League, made an enormous difference to the struggle against fascism in Britain.
This brings us to the question of whether the final outcome of the class struggle can be regarded as determined, that is to the old question of the ‘inevitability of socialism’. It has to be admitted that there has been a certain ambiguity in this question within the classical Marxist tradition. Even in The Communist Manifesto itself we find conflicting formulations. On the one hand:
What the bourgeoisie therefore produces, above all, are its own gravediggers. Its fall and the victory of the proletariat are equally inevitable. [58]
On the other:
The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggle ... a fight that each time ended, either in a revolutionary reconstitution of society at large or in the common ruin of the contending classes. [59]
Of course there is an element of rhetorical flourish in that ‘equally inevitable’ just as there is a lack of specificity in ‘the common ruin of the contending classes’. But nearly 150 years on from the Manifesto the rhetoric of inevitability has a hollow ring whereas the concrete form of ‘common ruin’ has become all too clear. From the moment capitalism armed itself with nuclear weapons and thus demonstrated its capacity to destroy itself and humanity with it, talk of the inevitability of socialism became absurd. [60]
However, it is not just a question of the possibility of nuclear holocaust, the experience of 20th century workers’ revolutions has demonstrated the same point. After the Russian Revolution, the German Revolution, the Spanish Revolution and others it is palpably false to see socialist revolution as a wholly determined or guaranteed process. To acknowledge this is not to reduce socialism to a utopia or to regard the victory of the working class as a matter of chance. On the contrary, as Marxism has always argued, there are powerful and objectively determined historical forces working in favour of proletarian victory. These include: its immense numerical superiority over the bourgeoisie; its concentration in workplaces and in cities; the dependence of the bourgeoisie on the working class for all its operations including the operation of its state; and the fact that the working class can rule society without the bourgeoisie but the bourgeoisie cannot exist without the working class, which means that the bourgeoisie has to go on defeating the working class indefinitely but the proletariat has only to defeat the bourgeoisie once (in the world historical sense). These factors make the eventual victory of the proletariat a realistic possibility. They may even make it probable. However they do not guarantee it.
They do not guarantee it because in order to make the transition from subordinate to ruling class the proletariat has to pass through an acute confrontation with the bourgeoisie, in which, for a period, the power of the two classes is almost equal and at which point the bourgeoisie, if given the chance, will strike back at the working class with tremendous force. At this point, therefore, history can go either way. Trotsky, writing on the eve of Hitler’s triumph in Germany, used a striking metaphor to describe such a situation.
Germany is now passing through one of those great historic hours upon which the fate of the German people, the fate of Europe, and in significant measure the fate of all humanity, will depend for decades. If you place a ball on top of a pyramid, the slightest impact can cause it to roll down either to the left or to the right. That is the situation approaching with every hour in Germany today. There are forces which would like the ball to roll down towards the right and break the back of the working class. There are forces which would like the ball to remain at the top. That is utopia. The ball cannot remain at the top of the pyramid. The Communists want the ball to roll down toward the left and break the back of capitalism. [61]
The Russian Revolution passed through just such a moment in September and October of 1917. The counter-revolution in the shape of General Kornilov had attempted to drown the revolution in blood and had been repulsed. It was preparing to strike again. The Bolsheviks had won a majority in the Soviets and the working class was looking to them to turn their words into deeds. The Provisional Government under Kerensky was paralysed and crumbling. The fate of the revolution was poised on a knife edge between the dictatorship of the proletariat and the dictatorship of the counter-revolution.
No one understood this better than Lenin. In a remarkable series of speeches, articles and letters Lenin bombarded the Central Committee of the Bolshevik Party with ever more urgent demands that they ‘seize the time’ and organise the insurrection. The theme of these texts, repeated again and again, is that the revolution has reached a decisive turning point and that ‘procrastination is like unto death’. [62] On 29 September, 1917 Lenin writes:
The crisis has matured. The whole future of the Russian Revolution is at stake. The honour of the Bolshevik Party is in question. The future of the international workers’ revolution for socialism is at stake ...
To refrain from seizing power now, to ‘wait’ ... is to doom the revolution to failure. [63] [emphasis in original]
On 24 October he writes:
The situation is critical in the extreme ...
I exhort my comrades with all my heart and strength to realise that everything now hinges on a thread ... The government is wavering. It must be destroyed at all costs!
To delay will be fatal. [64]
Reflecting on this episode, and also on the equally crucial ‘April Days’ when Lenin reoriented the Bolshevik Party away from the idea of completing the bourgeois revolution and in favour of soviet power, Trotsky concluded that Lenin’s role in the victory of the revolution had been indispensable. Without Lenin, he wrote, ‘there would have been no October Revolution; the leadership of the Bolshevik Party would have prevented it from occurring’. [65]
The significance of this conclusion for the question of determinism as a whole is brought out by Isaac Deutscher who criticises Trotsky on precisely this point. In The Prophet Outcast Deutscher charges Trotsky with exaggerating the role of Lenin, with succumbing, in this instance, to the Lenin ‘cult’ and with presenting an argument, ‘which goes strongly against the grain of the Marxist intellectual tradition’. [66] He cites as his authority, and as ‘highly representative of that tradition’, Plekhanov’s The Role of the Individual in History which argues that ‘influential individuals can change the individual features of events and some of their particular consequence but they cannot change their general trend which is determined by other forces’ [67] [emphasis in original].
On the specifics of the issue the evidence strongly favours Trotsky in that it is extremely unlikely that any other revolutionary leader in Russia in 1917 could have done what Lenin did, ie win the Bolshevik leadership to an insurrectionary perspective. [68] But what is important is that the logic of the Plekhanov/Deutscher argument extends beyond the particular case of Lenin to the whole historical role of party leadership, for it was not as an individual inspirer of the masses that Lenin made his decisive contribution but in and through the Bolshevik Party. As I have written elsewhere:
If the decisions or influence of individuals cannot be decisive then what of the decisions of party leaderships, which are made up of individuals or indeed parties as a whole, which compared to the basic forces of revolution, i.e. classes, are still relatively small groups? Deutscher believes that such a view contradicts the fundamental Marxist view that major historical changes are effected by mass social forces. What he misses is the dialectical point that historical development is the product of contradiction, of great social forces moving in opposite directions and that at key historical turning points these social forces may balance each other almost exactly.
It is precisely in such situations that apparently small factors such as the quality of leadership or the decisions of a central committee can decisively shift the balance and therefore the course of history one way or the other. What is dangerous about the deterministic view is that it is only in such situations of balance that the proletarian revolution can occur. Unlike the bourgeoisie, the proletariat cannot steadily accumulate strength until it is economically, politically and culturally more powerful than its adversary. Its situation as a toiling, exploited and propertyless class means that a situation of ‘balance’ is the best and the highest position that the proletariat can achieve under capitalism. If that ‘moment’ is lost the power of the bourgeoisie and capital will inevitably reassert itself. [69]
Plekhanov and Deutscher stand here, as elsewhere, as representatives of a strongly determinist interpretation of Marxism which slides all too easily into passive fatalism and which it is one of the main purposes of this article to reject. [70]
Further confirmation of the anti-determinist position is provided by the fate of the German Revolution. The German Revolution, viewed as an overall process, lasted five years from the end of 1918 to the end of 1923, but it was in 1923 that it came to a head. In the summer and autumn of that year all the objective forces making for an acute revolutionary situation came together: a generalised economic, social and political crisis greatly sharpened by the French occupation of the Ruhr, leading to catastrophic inflation; sudden and massive pauperisation of the majority of the population; a large and powerful working class movement; a rapid disillusionment with the reformist leaders and organisations; a massive spontaneous strike wave; a mass revolutionary party (the KPD) rapidly gaining the support of the majority of the working class. And yet this outstanding revolutionary opportunity was allowed to go begging. The KPD failed throughout the summer of 1923 to draw up any coherent plan of action for the struggle for power or to give a strong revolutionary lead. Continuously looking to Moscow for advice, it continued its vacillation between forming local coalition governments with social democrats and playing with insurrection right through to the fiasco of an isolated uprising of a few hundred Communists in Hamburg in October which was crushed in 48 hours. As Trotsky observed, ‘We witnessed in Germany a classic demonstration of how it is possible to miss a perfectly exceptional revolutionary situation of world-historic importance’. [71]
It is impossible to explain the victory in Russia and the defeat in Germany by means of a theory of absolute economic or social determinism. The difference lay in the subjective factor, the quality of revolutionary leadership, in that Heinrick Brandler and the other leaders of the KPD failed to take the initiative at the crucial moment. Of course, with hindsight, it is possible to offer reasons why the German leadership failed – they were being restrained and misadvised by Zinoviev (and Stalin) in Moscow; they were demoralised and conservative as a result of their mistakes in the March action. However, the interrogation of each of these reasons leads back to events and circumstances that could easily have been different: if Lenin had not suffered a stroke and had been in command in Moscow; if the Russian leadership had acceded to Brandler’s request that Trotsky should go to Germany; if Luxemburg, by far the greatest of the KPD leaders, had not been murdered in 1919. But to accept the possibility of revolutionary victory in Germany in 1923 is to accept the possibility that subsequent world history would have been completely different – no fascism in Germany, no Stalinism in Russia and the real possibility of world revolution. [72]
To summarise, we can say that on the question of class struggle Marxism takes the same relative determinist position that was argued for on abstract grounds earlier in this article. It treats the existence of the class struggle as extremely strongly determined, its general level as strongly but by no means completely determined and its final outcome as hanging in the balance.
However, it hangs in the balance between strongly determined alternatives, ultimately between socialism and barbarism. Capitalism is of course continuously barbaric – think of the Somme, Auschwitz, Hiroshima, the Gulf War, Rwanda and many other examples – but in the socialist tradition the term barbarism has another, related but distinct, meaning. ‘It may denote the total destruction of civilisation by the decline of society into an ahistorical era’ [73] or Marx’s ‘common ruin of the contending classes’. It is in the latter sense that I use it here, for the highly determined dynamic and contradictions of capitalism are such that if capitalism is allowed to survive indefinitely it will destroy us all.
This analysis has very clear implications for socialist practice. It means that in every concrete situation there is a definite limit on what we by our conscious action can achieve. At the same time every action, no matter how small, which assists the working class struggle also contributes, albeit only in small measure, to making its eventual victory more likely. By far the most effective action that socialists can take is to combine and co-ordinate their efforts in a political party which both works to advance the class struggle to the maximum in the here and now and prepares for the moment or moments of decisive confrontation in the future.
Clearly it is not possible to ‘arrange’ in advance to have a Lenin, or a Trotsky or a Luxemburg present at the appropriate time, but building a strong revolutionary party is still the most, or rather the only, effective way of achieving an effective leadership. For as Lenin writes:
It is, in fact, one of the functions of a party organisation and of party leaders worthy of the name, to acquire, through the prolonged, persistent, variegated and comprehensive efforts of all thinking representatives of a given class, the knowledge, experience and – in addition to knowledge and experience – the political flair necessary for the speedy and correct solution of complex political problems. [74]
And as Trotsky put it:
Bolshevism is not a doctrine (i.e. not merely a doctrine) but a system of revolutionary training for the proletarian uprising. What is the Bolshevisation of Communist Parties? It is giving them such a training, and effecting such a selection of the leading staff, as would prevent them from drifting when the hour for their October strikes. ‘That is the whole Hegel, and the wisdom of books and the meaning of all philosophy ...’ [75]
 
Conclusion: the long view
Bourgeois ideology, as we noted in the opening section of this article, oscillates between idealist voluntarism, which rejects the determining role of material conditions and social relations, and mechanical materialism which sees human beings as passive objects and denies the role of conscious human practice. Both these modes of thought are generalisations arising from contradictory aspects of the social being of the bourgeoisie and the social nature of capitalism. Idealist voluntarism reflects the position of the bourgeoisie as a ruling class, living off the labours of others, which imagines that its ideas and its will are the demiurge of history. Mechanical materialism reflects the subordination of the bourgeoisie itself to the economic laws of capitalism and its view of the working masses as mere factors of production.
Marxism rejects both these positions by taking as its starting point the social being of the working class. The working class encounters directly and inescapably the determining effects of both physical nature, the weight of the stone, the resistance of the metal, the cold of the winter, the heat of the sun, and of economic and social relations, the pressure of poverty, the necessity to sell its labour power, the impact of unemployment, the invisible but real obstacles to social mobility. Yet, at the same time, the working class is continuously and directly involved in the conscious effort to transform both nature and social relations. Potentially it has the collective power to overturn the entire social system and establish a new society in which it will simultaneously produce and consciously direct production. It is on this foundation that Marxism transcends idealism and mechanical materialism in dialectical materialism which finds its highest expression in conscious revolutionary practice. Conscious revolutionary practice is activity which makes use of the fullest possible understanding of all the natural and social forces constraining and shaping human behaviour in order to tip the balance in favour of the working class and rescue humanity from the abyss.
In every historical situation there is a tension between necessity and freedom, between what is objectively determined and what we can affect or change, but the balance between necessity and freedom is not fixed or stable. At the dawn of human history and for a long time thereafter the element of necessity was heavily dominant. Human behaviour was massively dominated by forces beyond our control, by the interaction between external nature and our own physical constitution. Yet also present from the beginning – indeed it is what marks the beginning – is the embryo of human freedom, namely conscious social labour. The whole of history is the struggle to expand human freedom through the development of the power of human labour. [76]
However this development has not been smooth or harmonious. It has proceeded dialectically, which is to say through contradictions. The raising of the productivity of social labour involved the division of society into antagonistic classes and the subordination of the labour of the majority to the direction and exploitation of a small minority. This process comes to a head under capitalism which leads to an unprecedented development of the productive forces and, therewith, mastery over nature, yet subjects the entire globe, including and especially the capitalist class itself, to the impersonal and inhuman laws of the market, the first of which is accumulation for accumulation’s sake.
The socialist revolution is this resolution of this contradiction. It is, in Engels’ phrase, ‘humanity’s leap from the realm of necessity to the realm of freedom’. [77] The realm of necessity is not, of course, abolished. Natural laws and forces continue to operate on human beings and compel them to labour [78], and in its first phase socialism is ‘still stamped with the birth marks of the old society from whose womb it emerges’. [79] Nevertheless with the establishment of workers’ power the balance between necessity and freedom begins to shift decisively in favour of freedom. With each step taken towards the international abolition of classes and the unification of humanity, human beings take increasing control of their own destiny. As material scarcity is progressively overcome, so the ‘tyranny of economics’ is ended. What was hitherto the ‘ultimately determining factor’ in history, namely the production of the necessities of human life, while not disappearing, will play an ever decreasing role in shaping human behaviour. A new society will be established in which ‘the free development of each is the condition of the free development of all’. [80] At this point historical materialism, having achieved its goal, also reaches its limit.

Notes
1. F. Engels, Speech at the Graveside of Karl Marx, Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Vol. II (Moscow 1962), p. 168.
2. K. Marx and F. Engels, The Manifesto of the Communist Party (Beijing 1988), p. 50.
3. K. Marx, cited in F. Mehring, Karl Marx (London 1966), pp. 207–8.
4. K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy, cited in D. McLellan, The Thought of Karl Marx (London 1971), p. 38.
5. For a fuller analysis of Kautskyism, see J. Molyneux, What is the Real Marxist Tradition? (London 1985).
6. A. Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks (London 1971), p. 336.
7. C. Guevara, Guerrilla Warfare (New York 1967).
8. See especially V.I. Lenin, Left Wing Communism – an Infantile Disorder (Peking 1965).
9. See, for example, Y. Gluckstein, Mao’s China (London 1957); N. Harris, The Mandate of Heaven (London 1978); T. Cliff, Permanent Revolution, in International Socialism 61 (first series).
10. See P. McGarr, Order out of Chaos, in International Socialism 48, especially pp. 140–142.
11. R. Miliband, Class Power and State Power (London 1983), p. 32.
12. K. Marx, Theses on Feuerbach, Marx-Engels, Selected Works, Vol. 2 (Moscow 1962), p. 403.
13. A. Gramsci, op. cit., p. 336.
14. K. Marx, Theses on Feuerbach, op. cit., p. 403.
15. An account of these developments, for the layperson such as myself, is provided by P. McGarr, op. cit. McGarr also discusses their implications for determinism and argues convincingly a) that chaos theory constitutes a real advance in our scientific understanding of the world; b) that it does not represent a ‘threat’ or ‘problem’ for genuine Marxism.
16. Ibid., p. 147.
17. A. Gramsci, op. cit., pp. 336–337.
18. L. Trotsky, My Life, (New York 1970), p. 224.
19. J.F. Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge (Mimosa and Manchester 1984), p. xxiii.
20. K. Marx and F. Engels, The German Ideology (London 1985), p. 48.
21. Ibid., pp. 42 and 50.
22. Ibid., p. 42.
23. K. Marx, Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, in D. McLellan, Karl Marx: Selected Writings (Oxford 1977), p. 389.
24. K. Marx, cited in D. McLellan, The Thought of Karl Marx (London 1971), p. 38.
25. Ibid., p. 38.
26. K. Marx and F. Engels, The Manifesto of the Communist Party (Beijing 1988), p. 36.
27. K. Marx, Preface, in D. McLellan, op. cit., p. 389.
28. C. Bettleheim, Class Struggles in the USSR, 1917–23 (Hassocks 1976), p. 62. For a critique of Bettleheim, see A. Callinicos, Marxism, Stalinism and the USSR, International Socialism 5.
29. A. Callinicos, Marxism and Philosophy (Oxford 1983), p. 112. The main part of Alex’s argument for this proposition is to be found in ibid., pp. 48–52.
30. Ibid., p. 51.
31. This concept of a ‘reaction back’ is taken from Engels to C. Schmidt, October 27 1890, in Marx-Engels Selected Works, Vol. II, op. cit., p. 494, where it is used to describe the influence of the law on the economy.
32. In The German Ideology Marx famously asserted that ‘this development of the productive forces ... is an absolutely necessary practical premise because without it want is merely made general and with destitution the struggle for necessities and all the old filthy business would necessarily be reproduced’, op. cit., p. 56. Moreover both Trotsky and Cliff grounded their analysis for the degeneration of the Russian Revolution in this insight.
33. K. Marx, Capital, Vol. III (Moscow 1966), p. 791, cited in A. Callinicos, op. cit., p. 50. Alex’s attempt to defend the primacy of the relations of production by counterposing the ‘mature’ historical materialism of Capital to the ‘crude’ version of The German Ideology is not consistent. He tells us that ‘Marx resolved this unclarity by introducing in The Poverty of Philosophy (1847) the concept of the relations of production’ (p. 49) and that ‘with the explicit formulation of the concept of relations of production ... historical materialism can be said to be fully constituted’ (p. 51). Yet, as we have seen, The Poverty of Philosophy is committed to the primacy of the production forces. See footnote 22 above.
34. C. Harman, From Feudalism to Capitalism, International Socialism 45, p. 82.
35. F. Engels, Speech at the Graveside of Karl Marx, in Marx-Engels, Selected Works, Vol. II, op. cit., p. 167.
36. K Marx, Preface, op. cit..
37. F. Engels to J. Bloch, September 21–22, 1890 in Marx-Engels, Selected Works, Vol. II, op. cit., p. 488. For alternative formulations and elaborations of the same ideas see F. Engels to C. Schmidt, 5 August 1890, ibid., pp. 486–88, F. Engels to F. Mehring, 14 July 1893, ibid., pp. 496–501.
38. K. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (New York 1968), p. 15.
39. L. Trotsky, The History of the Russian Revolution (London 1977), p. 18.
40. F. Engels to C. Schmidt, 27 October 1890, op. cit., p. 493.
41. Though there are still very definite limits to this autonomy. The Nazi state remained a capitalist state in that it presided over a capitalist economy, preserved capitalist relations of production and could not have been used to expropriate the capitalist class.
42. This analysis of Marxism, in opposition to the Althusserian view of it as autonomous theory or science, is outlined more fully in J. Molyneux, What is the Real Marxist Tradition?, op. cit.. The development of Marxism in the years 1843–1848 was highly determined in that it could not have emerged in an earlier period before the development of capitalism had reached a degree of maturity and before the proletariat had at least begun to make its presence felt. But it cannot he seen as absolutely determined. Without the individual genius of Marx it might have taken considerably longer for scientific socialism to have received coherent formulation.
43. It might be argued that though this was true in Marx’s day, when it was a case of work or starve, it ceases to be true in the context of a welfare state. However, it is clear that no capitalist society would or could allow benefits to rise to the point where more than a tiny minority of the working class would voluntarily choose not to work.
44. Marx’s labour theory of value is that the value of a commodity is determined by the amount of socially necessary labour required for its production. The relation of price to value is complex but essentially the value of a commodity is a notional average around which its actual price fluctuates.
45. See K. Marx, Capital, Vol. III, op. cit., Part III.
46. For the most impressive statement, defence and application of Marxist theory of crisis to contemporary capitalism, see C. Harman, Explaining the Crisis (London 1987).
47. See K. Marx, Capital, Vol. III, op. cit., ch. xiv.
48. Though not, of course, in every specific instance.
49. K. Marx, Capital, Vol. II, op. cit., ch. xiv.
50. G.E.M. de Ste Croix, The Class Struggle in the Ancient Greek World (London 1981), p. 51.
51. The key passages from his writings have been collected and published as L. Trotsky, The interaction between booms, slumps and strikes, International Socialism 20.
52. Ibid., p. 135.
53. Ibid., p. 139.
54. Ibid., p. 142.
55. A. Gramsci. op. cit., p. 438.
56. For an account of this episode and Lenin’s assessment of it, see T. Cliff, Lenin, Vol. 4 (London 1979), ch. 6 and ch. 7.
57. L. Trotsky, The History of the Russian Revolution, op. cit., pp. 121–122.
58. K. Marx and F. Engels, The Manifesto of the Communist Party, op. cit., p. 49.
59. Ibid., pp. 32–33.
60. Which has not of course prevented it. Most notably the Posadasist Tendency – a fragment of the Fourth International – combined the ‘inevitability’ of socialism with the ‘inevitability’ of imperialist war and concluded that the Soviet Union should launch a pre-emptive nuclear strike on the West, secure in the knowledge that socialism would ‘inevitably’ arise from the ashes.
61. L. Trotsky, The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany (New York 1971), p. 137.
62. V.I. Lenin, Selected Works, Vol. 6 (London 1936), p. 297.
63. Ibid., pp. 230–232.
64. Ibid., pp. 334–335.
65. L. Trotsky, Diary in Exile (London 1958), p. 54. This is not a chance or offhand judgement. Trotsky made it on several occasions. See The History of the Russian Revolution, op. cit., pp. 343–44, and his Letter to Preobrazhensky, cited in I. Deutscher, The Prophet Outcast (Oxford 1970), p. 241.
66. Ibid., p. 242.
67. Cited in ibid., p. 244.
68. Trotsky himself is by the far the strongest alternative candidate for this role but his status as a newcomer to the party would almost certainly have disbarred him. It should be remembered that this still counted against him six years later in 1923.
69. J. Molyneux, Leon Trotsky’s Theory of Revolution (Brighton 1981), pp. 64–65.
70. For how Deutscher’s passive fatalist Marxism led to his capitulation to Stalinism see T. Cliff, The End of the Road: Deutscher’s Capitulation to Stalinism, in T. Cliff, Neither Washington nor Moscow (London 1982).
71. L. Trotsky, The Lessons of October, in The Challenge of the Left Opposition (1923–25) (New York 1975), p. 201. For a full account of the German disaster see C. Harman, The Lost Revolution: Germany 1918–23 (London 1982).
72. This example seems to me to refute the argument of Ralph Miliband that individuals can have an important effect on ‘generated’ history but not on ‘transgenerational’ history. See R. Miliband, op. cit., pp. 143–152.
73. T. Cliff, Russia – A Marxist Analysis (London n.d.), p. 128.
74. V.I. Lenin, Left Wing Communism – An Infantile Disorder (Moscow 1968), p. 52.
75. L. Trotsky, The Lessons of October, op. cit., p. 256.
76. It is a terrible irony and mark of human alienation that the profoundly true and profoundly Marxist statement, ‘Arbeit macht frei’, adorned the gates of the Nazi death camps.
77. F. Engels, Anti-Dühring (Peking 1976), p. 367.
78. ‘Just as the savage must wrestle with nature to satisfy his wants, to maintain and reproduce life, so must civilised man, and he must do so in all social formations and under all possible modes of production.’ K. Marx, Capital, Vol. III, op. cit., p. 820.
79. K. Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme, Marx-Engels, Selected Works, Vol. II, op. cit., p. 23.
80. K. Marx and F. Engels, The Manifesto of the Communist Party, op. cit.
 



Part One: What is Marxism
1. The class basis of Marxism
2. The scientific status of marxism
3. From practice to theory – the unity of Marxism
Part Two: The transformations of Marxism
1. Kautskyism
2. Stalinism
3. Third World nationalism
4. The authentic Marxist tradition


Part one
What is Marxism?
As in private life one distinguishes between what a man thinks and says of himself and what he really is and does, still more in historical struggles must one distinguish the phrases and fancies of the parties from their real organism and their real interests, their conception of themselves from their reality. Karl Marx, The 18th Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte
“All I know,” said Marx, “is that I’m not a Marxist.” What in the 1870s was a neat dialectical joke has since been transformed into a major political problem. The one hundred years since Marx’s death have seen the emergence of innumerable divergent and conflicting “Marxisms”. The centenary of that death seems an appropriate moment to attempt to untangle this particular knot, to establish the criteria for accepting claims to the title of Marxism and thus to answer the question “What is the genuine Marxist tradition?” But first let us be clear about the dimensions of the problem.
It is not just that people who call themselves Marxists hold different views on certain questions (say “the tendency of the rate of profit to fall” or the class nature of the Soviet Union): that is something to be expected in any living democratic movement. The real problem is that frequently the “Marxists” are to be found imprisoning, killing, and making war on each other, and, more fundamentally, that in all the great social conflicts of our age self-proclaimed “Marxists” are to be found on opposing sides of the revolutionary barricades. Think of Plekhanov and Lenin in 1917, of Kautsky and Luxemburg in 1919, of the Communists and the POUM in Barcelona in 1936, of Hungary in 1956 and of Poland in 1981. It is this which compels us to pose the question of what defines Marxism.
There are, of course, some who would reject the question altogether, denying that the search for a “true” Marxism has any meaning and simply accepting as Marxist all those who claim the label. On the one hand this is a convenient response for the bourgeoisie and its cruder ideologists, in that it permits them to condemn all Marxism and Marxists by association with Joe Stalin and Pol Pot, the butcher of Cambodia. On the other hand it also suits the academic Marxologists, enabling them to produce numerous profitable “guides to the Marxists”, offering cribs to every school of thought from the Austro-Marxists to the Althusserians.
Such an approach is essentially contemplative. Action, especially political action, requires decisiveness in theory as well as practice. Marxists who want to change the world, not just to make a living from interpreting it, have no choice but to face the problem and to draw a dividing line between the genuine and the false.
One way of trying to draw such a dividing line might be to identify Marxism with the works of Marx and to measure the followers simply by their faithfulness to the word of the master. Again this is a scholastic, even religious, approach. It fails to take account of the fact that if Marxism is, as Engels said, “not a dogma, but a guide to action”, then it must be a living, developing theory, capable of continuous growth, which has to analyse and respond to an ever changing reality – a reality which has in fact changed enormously since Marx’s day. Even if, for historical reasons, we name the theory after the individual who did most to establish it, we cannot, at the price of total impotence, reduce or confine it to what that individual himself wrote. As Trotsky observed, “Marxism is above all a method of analysis – not analysis of texts but analysis of social relations.” [1]
This quotation from Trotsky points in the direction of an alternative solution to the problem – one adopted by Hungarian Marxist George Lukacs. In History and Class Consciousness Lukacs asked “What is Orthodox Marxism?” and answered as follows:
Orthodox Marxism ... does not imply the uncritical acceptance of the results of Marx’s investigations. It is not the “belief” in this or that thesis, nor the exegesis of a “sacred” book. On the contrary, orthodoxy refers exclusively to method. [2]
This is a much more serious proposal in that it takes account of the need for development, and it contains an important element of truth in that the dialectical method is without doubt central to Marxism. Nonetheless it is inadequate as a solution to our problem. It is not possible to establish such a rigid demarcation between Marx’s method and his other analyses, nor to reduce the essential contents of Marxism solely to method. [3] This is shown by the very example Lukacs gives to illustrate his proposition.
Let us assume [writes Lukacs] for the sake of argument that recent research had disproved once and for all every one of Marx’s individual theses. Even if this were to be proved, every serious “orthodox” Marxist would still be able to accept all such modern findings without reservation and hence dismiss all of Marx’s theses in toto – without having to renounce his orthodoxy for a single moment. [4]
Quite the contrary is the case. If, for example, in defiance of Marx’s whole analysis of the dynamic of capitalist development, capitalism were to evolve into a new form of world bureaucratic society without internal competition and contradictions, which precluded the possibility of either socialism or barbarism, then Marxism would clearly be refuted, and the proponents of such a perspective – Max Weber, Bruno Rizzi and James Burnham – would be vindicated. As Trotsky concluded when considering this hypothetical perspective, “nothing else would remain except only to recognise that the socialist programme, based on the internal contradictions of capitalist society, ended as a Utopia.” [5]
What the foregoing argument might seem to suggest is that Marxism should be defined as a method combined with certain essential analyses and propositions. But this apparent solution in reality only pushes the problem one stage back. By what criterion can it be decided which analyses and propositions are fundamental and which are secondary? Moreover such an approach bears with it the danger of theoretical sectarianism, of defining Marxism as “the correct line on everything”, and so arriving at the position that Luxemburg was not a Marxist when she disagreed with Lenin about the party, that Lenin was not a Marxist when he maintained the bourgeois nature of the Russian Revolution, and so on.
How then can we break out of this circle? Not by first seeking to extract from Marx’s work certain theses, but by using Marxist theory to view Marxism as a totality.
 
1. The class basis of Marxism
For Marx “It is not social consciousness that determines social being, but social being that determines social consciousness.” [6] Consequently the understanding and definition of any philosophy, theory, or ideology is first and foremost a matter of disclosing the “social being” that constitutes its foundation.
Thus Marx treats religion in general as “the self-consciousness and self-awareness of man who either has not yet attained to himself or has already lost himself again.” [7] “This state, this society,” he writes, “produces religion’s inverted attitude to the world, because they are an inverted world themselves.” [8] He reveals the earthly family as the secret of the Holy Family. [9] Similarly Engels analyses early Christianity as “the religion of slaves and emancipated slaves ... of peoples subjugated or dispersed by Rome.” [10]
In the Communist Manifesto Marx defines the various existing schools of “socialism” directly by reference to the class interests they represent, giving us in turn feudal socialism, petty-bourgeois socialism, bourgeois socialism and so on. And, at a later date, Trotsky showed that the key to fascist ideology as well as the fascist movement lay in the class position of the petty-bourgeois crushed between capital and labour. These examples can be multiplied indefinitely; the point is that the same method of analysis must be applied to Marxism itself – and this of course was the procedure of Marx and Engels themselves.
Engels begins Anti-Dühring with the assertion that “Modern socialism is, in its content, primarily the product of the recognition, on the one hand, of the class antagonisms prevailing in modern society between proprietors and non-proprietors, between capitalists and wage-workers, and on the other, of the anarchy ruling in production.” [11] We can complete Engels’ formulation by adding that Marxism is the recognition of these contradictions from the point of view of the proletariat, the industrial working class. As Marx puts it in The Poverty of Philosophy: “Just as the economists are the scientific representatives of the bourgeois class, so the Socialists and Communists are the theoreticians of the proletarian class.” [12] And in the Communist Manifesto: “The theoretical conclusions of the Communists are in no way based on ideas or principles that have been invented, or discovered, by this or that would-be universal reformer. They merely express, in general terms, actual relations springing from an existing class struggle, from an historical movement going on under our very eyes.” [13]
Also in the Communist Manifesto is the following immensely important passage:
The Communists are distinguished from the other working-class parties by this only: 1. In the national struggles of the proletarians of the different countries, they point out and bring to the front the common interests of the entire proletariat, independently of all nationality. 2. In the various stages of the development which the struggle of the working class against the bourgeoisie has to pass through, they always and everywhere represent the interests of the movement as a whole. [14]
This amplifies and clarifies the definition of Marxism as the theory of the working class, establishing that what is involved is the articulation of the interests not of this or that section of the class but of the working class as a whole regardless of nationality – and today we might add of race or of sex. It thereby serves as the starting point for the identification and criticism of opportunism, at the root of which lies the sacrifice of the overall interests of the class to the temporary interests of particular national, local or craft groups within it.
What we have proposed is not only a social but also an historical definition. Such a definition also explains why Marxism arose when it did. Exploitation and oppression existed for thousands of years and capitalism in its early forms for centuries, but Marxism could not emerge until capitalism had developed the productive forces, and therewith the proletariat, to the point where the latter’s potential to overthrow capitalism could be perceived. We should note that Marx arrived at Marxism only on the basis of his contact with revolutionary workers’ circles in Paris in late 1843. It was then that Marx discovered “the formation of a class with radical chains”, and first declared his allegiance to the proletariat. When the proletariat “proclaims the dissolution of the hitherto existing world order,” wrote Marx at the time, “it merely declares the secret of its own existence, since it is in fact the dissolution of this order.” [15]
This approach to the origins of Marxism differs markedly from that offered by Kautsky and taken up by Lenin in What Is To Be Done? as part of his argument that socialism must be introduced into the working class “from without”. Kautsky wrote that “socialism and the class struggle arise side by side and not one out of the other ... the vehicle of science is not the proletariat but the bourgeois intelligentsia” [16] and Lenin argued that “in Russia, the theoretical doctrine of social democracy arose altogether independently of the spontaneous growth of the working class movement; it arose as a natural and inevitable outcome of the development of thought among the revolutionary socialist intelligentsia.” [17] I have attempted elsewhere [18] to refute this position, to show its harmful consequences, and to demonstrate that it was characteristic of Lenin’s thought only up to his experience of the revolutionary working class in 1905. Suffice it to say here that the Kautsky-Lenin theory is an example of the contemplative materialism criticised by Marx in the Theses on Feuerbach, and that, in the Communist Manifesto, Marx offers his own explanation of the role of the socialist intelligentsia. A section of the ruling class, “in particular a portion of the bourgeois ideologists who have raised themselves to the level of comprehending theoretically the historical movement as a whole”, cuts itself adrift and “goes over to the proletariat” [19] Clearly one cannot “go over” to a class which is not in existence and which has not yet made its presence felt in the battle – as was the case with the Russian working class at the time Kautsky and Lenin were considering.
Finally, when considering the class basis of Marxism, it is necessary to emphasise that Marxism is not just the theory of the proletariat’s resistance to capitalism and its struggle against capitalism; it is also, and above all, the theory of its victory. This point was made by Marx himself when he disclaimed all credit for discovering classes and class struggle:
Long before me bourgeois historians had described the historical development of this class struggle and bourgeois economists the economic anatomy of the classes. What I did that was new was to prove: (1) that the existence of classes is only bound up with particular historical phases in the development, (2) that the class struggle necessarily leads to the dictatorship of the proletariat, (3) that this dictatorship itself only constitutes the transition to the abolition of all classes and to a classless society. [20]
And the same point is made with even greater force by Lenin when, in The State and Revolution, he insists that “A Marxist is solely someone who extends the recognition of the class struggle to the recognition of the dictatorship of the proletariat ... This is the touchstone on which the real understanding and recognition of Marxism should be tested”. [21] Lenin’s assertion was directed above all at Kautsky, who had spent decades presenting himself as the last word in Marxist orthodoxy yet turned his back on the actual workers’ revolution in Russia. However, it retains all its relevance today when there is no shortage of intellectuals “interested in”, or even adhering to, Marxism as a method of interpreting society but who show no interest at all in the theory, still less the practice, of the struggle for workers’ power.
Thus far, analysis of Marxism as the theory of the proletariat has shown that this conception contains three elements; Marxism as the theory of the common interests of the entire class internationally; Marxism as the product of the birth of the modern proletariat and the developments of its struggle against capitalism; Marxism as the theory of the victory of that class. The definition that most succinctly summarises these elements is that Marxism is the theory of the international proletarian revolution.
 
2. The scientific status of Marxism
To many people the definition of Marxism as the theory of a particular social class is incompatible with its claims to be scientific. The argument runs both ways. On the one hand there are those who recognise Marxism to be based on a definite social group and consequently deny its status as science. The foremost representative of this position is the sociologist Karl Mannheim. [22] On the other hand there are those who proclaim Marxism as science and therefore deny that it derives from the standpoint of the proletariat. The most important contemporary proponent of this view is Althusser, for whom such a definition reduces Marxism to “the level of ideology”. These objections are the product of a double confusion: first as to the nature of natural science, second as to the relationship between natural science and social science.
Natural science is seen as providing exact, “objective” and non-socially determined knowledge, and therefore is held to be the model for “objective” social science. But this view of natural science is itself a social product. In the last analysis it derives from the alliance between science and the bourgeoisie which was necessary for the battle against feudalism and for the development of modern manufacturing. Just as the bourgeoisie depicted the laws of capitalism as natural and eternal so it depicted the achievements of science as absolute truth. The history of science, however, shows it to consist of a series of provisional relative truths which are produced under the stimulus of developing practical human needs, and which in turn demonstrate their truth in practice, by making possible the performance of definite tasks. [23] Natural science is therefore not absolute but historical and changing.
All social science, including Marxism, is, of course, subject to these same limitations, but there is also a fundamental difference between natural and social science. Natural science possesses an objectivity [24] which is not available to social science. There are two main reasons for this.
Firstly, knowledge is always a relationship between knower and known, between subject and object. In natural science the object of knowledge, nature, exists outside of human beings. Society however is human beings, the ensemble of human relations. [25] Nature and the laws of nature are not the creation of humanity. Society and social laws are. The world of nature can be altered by men and women but only on the basis of natural laws which cannot be altered. Social laws however can be changed.
The consequence of these differences is that all human beings stand in roughly the same relationship to the laws of nature but in markedly different relationships to the laws of society. Thus, as a result of the law of gravity, a worker and a capitalist dropped from the Leaning Tower of Pisa will strike the ground at the same speed and with the same consequences. The law of value however does not have the same consequences for the worker and the capitalist – it produces poverty for one and riches for the other. Which is why the idea of “proletarian” as opposed to “bourgeois” natural science is a piece of Stalinist nonsense. [26] But “to expect [social] science to be impartial in a society of wage-slavery is as silly and naive as to expect impartiality from employers on the question of whether the worker’s wages should be increased by decreasing the profits of capital”. [27]
Secondly, the purpose of knowledge is to assist in changing reality. This is equally true of natural and social science. The bourgeoisie has an interest in changing, indeed is continually compelled to change, the natural world in order to accumulate capital. It therefore needs natural science. In relation to society, however, the predominant interest of the bourgeoisie is not to change it but to preserve it as it is. Consequently the basic need of the bourgeoisie is not for social knowledge but for social apologetics, for ideology. [28]
Thus much of what passes for bourgeois social science is not science of any description. It is not practical or operational even for the bourgeoisie – but simply justification and mystification. Good examples are the marginal utility theory of value in economics and the pluralist theory of power in politics. Of course the bourgeoisie does need to change society within certain limits, the limits of the capitalist mode of production, and so bourgeois social science does yield a certain limited amount of real knowledge – knowledge which can also be used against capitalism. But this knowledge is always set within, and cramped and distorted by, a theoretical framework which obstructs real understanding of society as a whole. The only class which is both interested in, and capable of, arriving at an understanding of society as a totality, is the class that is interested in and capable of changing it as a totality – namely the proletariat. As Marx put it, “The existence of revolutionary ideas in a particular period presupposes the existence of a revolutionary class.” [29]
Thus the class basis of Marxism, far from compromising its standing as science, is precisely what makes its scientific character possible.
A further argument against this view, really an extension of the argument considered above, is that it wrongly narrows down and limits the applicability of Marxism. This argument has been advanced by the older Lukacs. In his 1924 study of Lenin Lukacs began with the statement that “Historical materialism is the theory of proletarian revolution”, [30] but in his 1967 Postscript he dismisses this proposition as a product of “the prejudices of the time” and protests at such an attempt “to reduce to a single dimension and to cramp the real and methodological wealth – the social universality – of historical materialism, by such a definition.” [31]
This objection is false because the definition of Marxism as a class theory in no way restricts it to the analysis of just the proletarian struggle or even just capitalist society (though that is of course its central task). It is perfectly possible to analyse the whole of human history up to the present from the standpoint of the proletariat. Witness, for example, Engels’ article on “The Part Played by Labour in the Transition from Ape to Man”. The central idea of this article is that labour “is the prime basic condition of all human existence and ... that, in a sense ... labour created man himself”. [32] This could be arrived at only on the basis of an understanding of the labour of the modern working class [33], and indeed was so derived for it is present in embryo in the 1844 Manuscripts and The German Ideology [34], before Marx and Engels had conducted any anthropological researches and before Darwin.
Moreover, in this same article Engels does not fail to point out the political conclusion that follows from his proposition – the necessity of “a complete revolution in our hitherto existing mode of production”. [35] The “social universality” demanded by Lukacs is possessed by Marxism precisely because it is based on the interests of the proletariat, the universal class – universal in the sense that it is the bearer of the future and liberation of all humanity, and in the sense that, needing neither a class above it to rule it nor a class below it to exploit, it can become all humanity. Lukacs’ objection signifies not his broadened or deepened conception of Marxism but simply his own abandonment of a revolutionary class position through his absorption by Stalinism.
 
3. From practice to theory
To complete the argument that the essence of Marxism is that it is the theoretical expression of the proletarian revolution, it is necessary to demonstrate the connections leading from the conditions of existence of the proletariat and the tasks confronting it in the struggle (the social practice that is the proletariat) to the main propositions of Marxist theory. To do this comprehensively and rigorously is beyond the reach of this small book, all we can do is to trace the outline of some of the most important of these connections.
Let us begin with those aspects of Marxism that might be called its political principles and programme. Firstly, internationalism. There can be no doubt as to the central role played by internationalism in the thought of Marx, but Marxist internationalism owes nothing to an abstract moral (in reality bourgeois liberal) commitment to “the international brotherhood of peoples”. [36] Rather it is grounded in the existence of the proletariat as an international class, created by the capitalist world market, and engaged in an international struggle against that system.
The statement in the Communist Manifesto that “The working men have no country”, and that “national differences and antagonisms between people are daily more and more vanishing, owing to the development of the bourgeoisie, to freedom of commerce, to the world market, to uniformity in the modes of production and to the conditions of life corresponding thereto”, has often been criticised as an exaggeration or an outright error, in the light of the continuing hold of nationalist ideology over the proletariat. Nonetheless it remains true at two levels. First as a statement of tendency rather than accomplished fact. Secondly as a statement about the proletariat relative to other social classes. The modes of production (and the cultures) of Japan, Brazil and Britain have infinitely more in common today than they did a century ago. In relation to the peasantry it was not even possible to speak seriously of international consciousness or organisation. The internationalism of the bourgeoisie, despite its creation of the world economy and its plethora of international organisations, remains qualitatively inferior to the international potential of the proletariat. The highest level it can rise to is the international bloc or alliance set against rival international blocs and even these are continually disrupted by national antagonisms.
The basic characteristic of Marxist internationalism is, as we have noted, the priority of the whole (the interests of the world working class) over the part. To make this more concrete: a revolutionary worker who has never left his home town, speaks only his native language, and yet opposes his “own” government in time of war is far more of an internationalist than the learned professor who has travelled the world, speaks half a dozen languages, is steeped in the knowledge of different cultures, and yet in time of war supports his own government. Again, because of the priority of the whole, Marxist internationalism is perfectly compatible with recognition of the right to national self-determination and support for national liberation struggles, if the interests of the international class demand it. [37]
Secondly, take the principle of state ownership of the means of production. To many (especially the bourgeoisie, but also many would-be Marxists) this has been seen as the fundamental principle of Marxism and of socialism in general. Usually, when those who take this view are socialists, they reason as follows. Capitalism, which equals private ownership, is irrational and unjust, it causes economic crises, poverty, war etc. If production were state-owned and there was state planning of the economy, it would be an altogether better, more rational, arrangement and these evils would be ended. The struggle of the proletariat is then seen as a means by which this end can be achieved. Should an alternative means to this end present itself, say peasant guerrilla war or parliamentary legislation, then that makes no real difference.
Marxist reasoning is quite different. The proletariat is locked in class struggle against the bourgeoisie which exploits and oppresses it. The only way it can win that battle and emancipate itself is to defeat the bourgeoisie politically and take possession of the means of production. This it can do only by creating its own state. This is how the question is presented in the Communist Manifesto:
We have seen above, that the first step in the revolution by the working class is to raise the proletariat to the position of ruling class, to win the battle of democracy. The proletariat will use its political supremacy to wrest, by degrees, all capital from the bourgeoisie, to centralise all instruments of production in the hands of the State, i.e. of the proletariat organised as the ruling class; and to increase the total of productive forces as rapidly as possible.
For the state socialists state ownership is the end, the working class the means. For Marxism the emancipation of the class is the end, state ownership the means. This difference – the “two souls of socialism” as Hal Draper has called it – has been of immense significance in the past hundred years and we shall return to it repeatedly.
The ultimate aim of Marxism – the classless society –has of course been an age-old human aspiration. What distinguishes Marxism is that it derives the classless society, as a realistic possibility, from the development of the proletariat, “a class which owing to its whole position in society, can only free itself by abolishing altogether all class rule, all servitude and all exploitation.” [38] To cite the Communist Manifesto again:
All preceding classes that got the upper hand, sought to fortify their already acquired status by subjecting society at large to their conditions of appropriation. The proletarians cannot become masters of the productive forces of society except by abolishing their own previous mode of appropriation and thereby also every other previous mode of appropriation. They have nothing of their own to secure and to fortify; their mission is to destroy all previous securities for, and insurances of, individual property.
In terms of theory the transition from capitalism to communism – the dictatorship of the proletariat – was considered to be (as we have noted) merely (!) the extension of the proletarian class struggle to the point of victory. However, the specific form of this dictatorship was discovered neither by Marx nor any other Marxist theorist, but by revolutionary workers themselves. First by the Parisian workers in the Commune of 1871, who showed that rather than taking over the existing state machine it was necessary to smash it, and whose actions indicated the first principles of workers’ democracy – payment of all officials at workers’ wages, election and recall of all delegates, replacement of the standing army by the armed workers, etc. Second by the workers of Petrograd (and then all Russia) who created the organisational form uniquely suited to the expression of workers’ power – the soviet or workers’ council. The great merit of the soviet, it should be noted, is that it is based not on the worker as individual citizen in a geographical area, but on the worker as part of a collective in the workplace, the unit of production, and that it arises within capitalism as a natural development of the workers’ struggle against capitalism – its historical point of departure was an enlarged strike committee. It should also be noted that Marxist theory on this question (Marx’s The Civil War in France, Lenin’s The State and Revolution, Gramsci’s articles in Ordine Nuovo) is a direct generalisation of the most advanced experience of the class.
Now we must turn from the programme of Marxism to its theoretical foundations: the materialist conception of history and the critical analysis of capitalism.
What is the basis of historical materialism? This question can be approached analytically (by considering the concepts and propositions of this theory) or historically (by tracing its genesis and development in the works of Marx). Of these the analytic approach is more important as the historical genesis of a theory might include all sorts of accidental factors and detours.
Let us begin with the question of materialism versus idealism.
Idealism – belief in the priority of mind (”spirit”, “ideals”, “God”, etc.) over matter – and the idealist conception of history (history as determined by the development of ideas, consciousness, etc.) has, itself, a material basis. It lies in the division between mental and manual labour and the emergence of a ruling class freed from manual labour, in other words living off the labour of others.
Division of labour only becomes truly such from the moment when a division of material and mental labour appears. (The first form of ideologists, priests, is concurrent.) From this moment onwards consciousness can really flatter itself that it is something other than consciousness of existing practice, that it really represents something without representing something real; from now on consciousness is in a position to emancipate itself from the world and to proceed in the formation of “pure” theory, theology, philosophy, ethics, etc. [39]
By contrast materialism is the “natural” theory of a producing class struggling for its emancipation. [40] But of course we cannot simply identify historical materialism with materialism. Materialism preceded Marxism by more than two thousand years and in the eighteenth century materialism was the standpoint of the rising bourgeoisie. What distinguishes Marxist materialism from this bourgeois materialism? Marx expressed it thus:
The chief defect of all hitherto existing materialism (that of Feuerbach included) is that the thing, reality, sensuousness, is conceived only in the form of the object of contemplation, but not as sensuous human activity, practice, not subjectively. [41]
In other words bourgeois materialism is mechanical. It treats human beings as passive, as mere products or effects of material circumstances – as objects. In doing so it reflects the actual position of men and women in capitalist society – the worker as an appendage of the machine, labour as a “factor” of production equivalent to other factors (land, machines, etc.), living labour as subordinate to and a “part” of dead labour. Mechanical materialism, however, is incapable of complete consistency; in consistent form it would be a total determinism and fatalism and it is impossible to act in the world on this basis. Therefore it always contains a more or less hidden exemption clause for itself whereby idealism re-enters through the back door, as the “knowledge”, “science”, or sometimes “will” of the elite:
The materialist doctrine concerning the changing of circumstances and upbringing forgets that circumstances are changed by men and that it is essential to educate the educator himself. This doctrine must, therefore, divide society into two parts, one of which is superior to society. [42]
Marx overcame this antinomy through the concept of practice. “The coincidence of the changing of circumstances and of human activity or self-changing can be conceived and rationally understood only as revolutionary practice.” [43] The model for this concept of practice was human labour, the means whereby humanity shapes and changes nature, and creates itself. Hegel’s outstanding achievement, Marx writes:
... is, first, that Hegel grasps the self-creation of man as a process ... and that he therefore grasps the nature of labour, and conceives objective man (true because real man) as the result of his own labour. [44]
But, Marx goes on, “Labour as Hegel understands and recognises it is abstract mental labour.” [45] Marx was able to go beyond Hegel, to stand him on his feet and recognise labour as concrete practical activity as the basis of man and history (”this simple fact hitherto concealed by an overgrowth of ideology” [46]) because, and only because, he had before him in the proletariat the first class of immediate producers able to transform society and become its master. It is this conception of the role of labour, of production, that constitutes the methodological and empirical point of departure of the Marxist theory of history. From it are developed the key concepts of “forces of production”, “relations of production” and “mode of production” which in turn culminate in the theory of the social revolution:
In the social production of their life, men enter into definite relations that are indispensable and independent of their will, relations of production which correspond to a definite stage of development of their material productive forces. The sum total of these relations of production constitutes the economic structure of society, the real foundation, on which rises a legal and political superstructure and to which correspond definite forms of social consciousness ... At a certain stage of their development, the material productive forces of society come in conflict with the existing relations of production, or –what is but a legal expression for the same thing – with the property relations within which they have been at work hitherto. From forms of development of the productive forces these relations turn into their fetters. Then begins an epoch of social revolution. [47]
At this point one important confusion must be cleared up. Historical materialism has frequently been subject to a mechanical materialist distortion in which the dialectic of forces and relations of production is interpreted simply as an antagonism between the technical instruments of production (”forces”) and the system of property ownership (”relations”) which operates independently of human activity, thus arriving at a theory of technological determinism. In this interpretation both Marx’s key concepts undergo a reduction in their meaning. For Marx the forces of production signify not only the instruments in the sense of tools, machines etc., but the total productive capacity of society including the productive activity of the working class. “Of all the instruments of production, the greatest productive power is the revolutionary class itself.” [48] Property ownership, on the other hand, is “but a legal expression of relations of production.” Thus the contradiction between the forces and relations of production is not separate from the class struggle but is the very ground on which the latter arises.
This theoretical demonstration that historical materialism is history viewed from the standpoint of the proletariat is, as we have noted, more important than the question of how Marx happened to develop the theory but, in fact, its historical genesis parallels the theoretical logic almost exactly. The first comprehensive statement of historical materialism was The German Ideology of 1845. This work was immediately preceded by two major texts, The Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844, and the Introduction to a Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right. The 1844 Manuscripts begin not with “philosophy” or with “alienation” but with the class struggle. The opening sentence reads: “Wages are determined by the bitter struggle between capitalist and worker.” [49] The economic analysis that follows is, by Marx’s later standards, primitive but it is carried out explicitly from the point of view of the worker. It aims to show “from political economy itself, in its own words” that:
the worker sinks to the level of a commodity, and to a most miserable commodity; that the misery of the worker increases with the power and volume of his production; that the necessary result of competition is the accumulation of capital in a few hands, and thus a restoration of monopoly in a more terrible form; and finally that the distinction between capitalist and landlord, and between agricultural labourer and industrial worker, must disappear, and the whole of society divide into the two classes of property owners and the propertyless workers. [50]
In seeking to explain this state of affairs Marx is led to an analysis of the nature of workers’ labour. Workers produce the wealth of the capitalists and their own misery because their labour is alienated. Thus Marx arrives at the conception of the dual role of labour: labour as the means by which people create their life and their world, and alienated labour as the means by which they vitiate their life and create a world which stands over and against them – a dual role which implies the potential for human liberation with the abolition of alienated labour, and which thus anticipates both the starting point and conclusion of the materialist conception of history.
However, if we move back one stage further to the Introduction to the Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right (early 1844) we find already present what later appears as the result of the analysis of alienated labour and the result of historical materialism, namely the revolutionary role of the proletariat. “When the proletariat announces the dissolution of existing social order, it only declares the secret of its own existence, for it is the effective dissolution of this order.” [51] And, as we have already seen, Marx’s recognition of this role was itself the product of his own experience of revolutionary workers’ circles in Paris. Thus both theoretically and biographically Marx’s general conception of history and society can be traced back to its material basis – the proletarian struggle.
The Marxist analysis of capitalism (usually referred to as “Marxist economics” though really it is a “critique of political economy”) was designed to provide a firm scientific foundation for the workers’ movement by revealing the law of motion of the capitalist mode of production. That the entire analysis is conducted from the standpoint of the revolutionary working class should be obvious, after all its major themes include: an explanation of how workers are exploited; a demonstration that the whole system is founded on that exploitation; a prediction that because it is founded on exploitation this system must inevitably break down. [52] Since however this aspect of Marxism has, more than any other, been presented as “objective”, “value-free”, “class-free”, a few observations on the genesis and logic of Marx’s critique of political economy seem justified.
Marx’s critique is, of course, an application of the theory of historical materialism to the capitalist mode of production, and like historical materialism itself, is rooted in an analysis of labour [53] – an analysis of labour as alienated. It cannot be emphasised too strongly that basically Marx’s theory of alienation is not a theory of how the worker “feels” about work, or of the general state of human consciousness, but a theory of alienated labour – in other words of that labour which the worker is compelled to make over to another, to sell. Alienated labour is wage labour, not just a state of mind but “an economic fact”. [54] However, it is also an economic fact that can only be perceived by looking at labour from the point of view of the worker. Indeed Marx was the first “philosopher” and the first “economist” in the history of the world to analyse the labour process from the standpoint of the worker. Just how central the theory of alienated labour is to the Marxist analysis of capitalism can be seen from two of Marx’s propositions. First that “although private property appears to be the basis and cause of alienated labour, it is rather a consequence of the latter”. [55] Second that the differentia specifica of capitalism is that under it labour power becomes a commodity.
A long theoretical road lies between the 1844 Manuscripts and Capital, between alienated labour and the theory of surplus value. It is a road on which the early generic critique of capitalism is painstakingly transformed into a precise analytic tool with which to lay bare all the workings of the capitalist economy. But in the process the original concept is neither “forgotten” nor “rejected”. It remains at the heart of the analysis. Consider the following passages:
1) All these consequences follow from the fact that the worker is related to the product of his labour as to an alien object. For it is clear on this presupposition that the more the worker expends himself in work the more powerful becomes the world of objects which he creates in face of himself, the poorer he becomes in his inner life, and the less he belongs to himself. It is just the same as in religion. The more of himself man attributes to God, the less he has left in himself. [56]
2) It cannot be otherwise in a mode of production in which the labourer exists to satisfy the needs of self-expansion of existing values, instead of, on the contrary, material wealth existing to satisfy the needs of development on the part of the labourer. As in religion man is governed by the products of his own brain, so in capitalistic production, he is governed by the products of his own hand. [57]
3) The alienation of the worker in his object is expressed as follows in the laws of political economy: the more the worker produces the less he has to consume, the more value he creates the more worthless he becomes; the more refined his product, the more crude and misshapen the worker; the more civilized the product the more barbarous the worker; the more powerful the work the more feeble the worker; the more the work manifests intelligence, the more the worker declines in intelligence and becomes a slave of nature. [58]
4) ... within the capitalist system all methods for raising the social productiveness of labour are brought about at the cost of the individual labourer; all means for the development of production transform themselves into means of domination over, and exploitation of, the producers; they mutilate the labourer into a fragment of a man, degrade him to the level of an appendage of a machine, destroy every remnant of charm in his work and turn it into a hated toil; they estrange from him the intellectual potentialities of the labour-process in the same proportion as science is incorporated in it as one independent power; they distort the conditions under which he works, subject him during the labour-process to a despotism the more hateful for its meanness; they transform life-time into working time, and drag his wife and child beneath the wheels of the Juggernaut of capital. [59]
Passages 1) and 3) are from the 1844 Manuscripts and 2) and 4) are from Capital; twenty-three years later the same basic idea, at times almost the same language. And these are only a few of numerous passages that could be quoted from all Marx’s major theoretical works from The German Ideology to Theories of Surplus Value. [60]
Finally some observations on the Marxist theory of crisis, in particular its most important component, the declining rate of profit. The tendency of the rate of profit to decline is not an individual thesis, a separate proposition, which can be abstracted from the rest of Marx’s thought, rather it is a point of convergence of all his major theories. It derives directly from the theory of surplus value, according to which the source of profit is the unpaid labour time of the workers, and from the proposition that under capitalism living labour falls progressively under the domination of accumulated dead labour (a theme already present in 1844). At the same time the tendency of the rate of profit to decline is the concrete economic expression of the conflict between the forces and relations of production – the proof that capitalist relations of production have become a fetter on the forces of production, that “the real barrier of capitalist production is capital itself”. [61] Moreover, and this brings us back to our starting point, it was a theory which could only be formulated from the standpoint of the proletariat. The classical bourgeois economists observed the phenomenon of the declining rate of profit but were unable to theorise it for to do so would have been to recognise the historically limited, transitory, nature of capitalism. [62]
To some “Marxists” it has seemed that Marx’s analysis of the contradictions of capitalism is separate from his commitment to proletarian revolution. A recent proponent of this view is Lucio Colletti [63], but the idea dates back to the Second International. Thus Rudolph Hilferding wrote that: “It is one thing to recognise a necessity, but quite another to place oneself at the service of that necessity,” [64] with the conclusion that to get from the “is” of capitalist breakdown to the “ought” of socialism required a supplementary ethical commitment (usually from the “eternal” ethical principles of Kant). Hilferding however has reversed the real logic of Marxism. It was the commitment to the proletariat that made possible the disclosure of capitalism’s contradictions, and the “ought to” of this commitment itself derived from the prior external existence of the proletariat which had already begun its struggle for self-emancipation.
To sum up the whole argument: in theory the proletarian revolution appears as the consequence of the theories of historical materialism, and surplus value etc., but in reality it is also their foundation. The empirical confirmation of this proposition is found in the fact that as a rule workers’ revolutions begin spontaneously – Paris 1848 and 1871, Petrograd 1905 and 1917, Germany 1918, Spain 1936, Hungary 1956, France 1968, and so on. The role of Marxism is not to create or launch the revolution but to guide it to victory.
We are now in a position to grasp both the essential unity of Marxism and its developing nature – on the basis of the proletarian struggle against capital. These two great social forces, locked in battle, are continually changing and developing, as is the balance of forces between them and their interaction with other classes. Marxism must therefore change and develop too, but it must do so without departing from the standpoint of proletarian revolution. If it does so depart then it ceases to be Marxism. Lenin once described Marxism as “a block of steel”. The metaphor is of strictly limited validity, but it is greatly preferable to the widespread view that Marxism consists of a series of detachable parts which can be discarded and replaced at will. More accurate is Lenin’s contention that Marx “laid the cornerstones of the science which socialists must advance in all directions, if they do not want to lag behind events”. [65] It is the nature of revisionism that it attempts to displace these cornerstones (which are not arbitrary but theoretical expressions of the social being of the proletariat) and in so doing departs from the standpoint of the proletariat to that of a different class.


Part two
The transformations of Marxism
It should already be clear that, by the criteria already established, many of the ideologists and theoretical systems that have claimed the title of Marxism in the past hundred years are not Marxist at all. Before proceeding to demonstrate this in relation to specific examples it is necessary to make some preliminary observations on the social position and consciousness of the proletariat under capitalism.
In potential the proletariat transcends capitalism, but so long as capitalism exists it remains an oppressed and exploited class. In normal times therefore the consciousness of the majority of workers is dominated by bourgeois ideology (”The ruling ideas are the ideas of the ruling class”). Yet at the same time workers are impelled by their economic position to resist the attacks of capital and to fight for improvements in their lot, even when they are not ready to challenge the system as a whole. Corresponding to this contradiction there have emerged hybrid ideologies which combine elements of bourgeois and elements of socialist ideology – the most obvious example to hand is British Labourism.
However, these hybrid ideologies also have their own distinct material base in the class whose social position is itself part bourgeois and part proletarian, namely the intermediate stratum known usually in Marxism as the petty bourgeoisie. The category of petty bourgeois has a general validity, but it must not be allowed to obscure the fact that in the modern world it covers a number of social layers whose conditions of existence are markedly different. The most important of these are: the “old” petty bourgeoisie of small shopkeepers and other small employers; the “new” middle class of salaried employees in positions of authority over the working class; the trade union and labour movement bureaucracy; and in most countries, the peasantry. Taken together these groups “surround” the proletariat (they are in much closer daily contact with it than is the bourgeoisie) and exert an influence on its consciousness. Each of the groups, however, tends to generate its own version of petty bourgeois ideology and to exert its own kind of pressure on the workers. The consciousness of the proletariat, and with it Marxist theory, exists therefore in a permanent state of siege and the history of Marxism has been a history of battles with the hybrid ideologies of the petty bourgeoisie: hence Marx’s polemics against Proudhon and Bakunin, Engels’ against Duhring, Plekhanov and Lenin against the Narodniks, and so on.
The problem which concerns this article however is conflicts within “Marxism”, or rather between theoretical and political tendencies that claim to be Marxist. The question that must be posed is whether the most important of these conflicts are also struggles between the standpoint of the proletariat and that of the petty bourgeoisie or other alien classes. If this is a phenomenon that can be established it also needs to be explained. Lenin suggested that “The dialectics of history is such that the theoretical victory of Marxism forces its enemies to disguise themselves as Marxists.” [66] But although this explanation contains an important kernel of truth it is somewhat over-conspiratorial. It is more historically accurate to suggest that the process usually runs on these lines: leaders or movements arrive at a perspective of proletarian revolution and adopt Marxism, then for a variety of reasons (in the last analysis the pressure of capitalism) they move away from this perspective but retain the label and language of Marxism – either through self-deception or a desire to preserve their radical credentials or both – while transforming its real content. Once this process has occurred this “transformed” Marxism can be passed on to other leaders and movements that have never had anything to do with proletarian revolution. [67] But this is to anticipate results that have first to be demonstrated by historical analysis.
The history of Marxism since Marx has been dominated, in terms of material power and numbers of adherents, by three tendencies: firstly, the social democracy of the Second International; secondly Stalinism; and thirdly, Third World nationalism. Clearly it is out of the question to present, within the confines of this small book, a comprehensive analysis of any one, let alone all three, of these tendencies. I shall therefore approach each in terms of the most important features of its most important representatives.
 
1. Kautskyism
The leading party of the Second International was German Social Democracy, the SPD. Founded in 1875 at the Gotha Conference, which united Marx’s German supporters with the followers of Lassalle, [68] the party developed through a period of semi-legality (Bismarck’s anti-socialist laws) into a position, by the turn of the century, of considerable strength within the German state. This was a period of general advance for German capitalism within which it was possible for the developing working-class movement to win concessions and improvements in its lot. Of course these gains were the result of struggle –capitalism never gives anything without some fight – but they required no overall confrontation, no life or death class battle. (In fact the level of strikes in Germany was very low. [69]) As a whole it was a time of relative social peace and the German working class took advantage of this to build the largest, best organised socialist party in the world – a party with hundreds of thousands of members, thousands of party organisations, and over eighty daily papers, as well as a multitude of social and cultural organisations.
From the late 1890s this party was divided into an “orthodox Marxist” majority and a (growing) “revisionist” minority. The latter, led by Eduard Bernstein, maintained that capitalism, contrary to Marxist theory, was gradually overcoming its contradictions and that therefore the SPD could and should be no more than a party of democratic social reform. Since the revisionists were more or less openly anti-Marxist they are not essentially relevant to this article: it is the “orthodox” wing that concerns us here.
The SPD officially committed itself to Marxism at its congress at Erfurt in 1891 when it adopted the Erfurt Programme drafted by the “Pope of Marxism”, Karl Kautsky. This programme, together with the commentary on it, also by Kautsky [70], remained the basic statement of the movement’s world outlook, just as Kautsky remained its leading theorist, until the First World War. Without doubt the Erfurt Programme was intended, and generally accepted, as a statement of completely orthodox Marxism. Its first section is “an analysis of present day society and its development”, [71] and consists of a condensed and simplified exposition of the theory of capitalist development outlined by Marx in The Communist Manifesto culminating in the proposition that “private ownership of the means of production has become irreconcilable with their effective use and complete development”. [72] Its second section calls for the resolution of this contradiction by “the conversion of private ownership into social ownership and conversion of commodity production into socialist production carried on for and by society”. [73] The third section deals with “the means which are to lead to the realisation of these objects” [74], namely the class struggle of the proletariat. With regard to the nature of this struggle the programme tells us:
The struggle of the working class against capitalist exploitation is necessarily a political struggle. The working class cannot develop its economic organisation and wage its economic battles without political rights. It cannot accomplish the transfer of the means of production to the community as a whole without first having come into possession of political power. [75]
We are here still on the grounds of orthodoxy. Time and again Marx insisted that “the struggle of class against class is a political struggle”, that “to conquer power had therefore become the great duty of the working classes”. [76] But what was to be the content of this “political struggle”, this “conquest of political power”? For Marx, as we have seen, it was above all the destruction of the bourgeois state and the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat – the concrete example of which was the Paris Commune. What it was for Kautsky and the SPD is shown clearly in Kautsky’s commentary on the programme – namely an exclusively parliamentaty struggle. To demonstrate just how exclusively parliamentarist the SPD strategy was, a lengthy quotation is unfortunately necessary:
Like every other class, the working class must strive to influence the state authorities, to bend them to its purposes.
Great capitalists can influence rulers and legislators directly, but the workers can do so only through parliamentaiy activity [my emphasis throughout] ... By electing representatives to parliament therefore the working class can exercise an influence over the governmental powers.
The struggle of all the classes which depend upon legislative action for political influence is directed, in the modern state, on the one hand toward an increase in the power of the parliament (or congress), and on the other toward an increase in their own influence within the parliament. The power of parliament depends on the energy and courage of the classes behind it and on the energy and courage of the classes on which its will is to be imposed. The influence of a class within a parliament depends, in the first place, on the nature of the electoral law in force. It is dependent further on the influence of the class in question among the voters, and, lastly, upon its aptitude for parliamentary work ...
The proletariat is, however ... favourably situated in regard to parliamentary activity ... Their unions are to them an excellent parliamentary school; they afford opportunities in training in parliamentary law and publicspeaking ... Moreover it finds in its own ranks an increasing number of persons well fitted to represent it in legislative halls.
Whenever the proletariat engages in parliamentary activity as a self-conscious class, parliamentarism begins to change its character. It ceases to be a mere tool in the hands of the bourgeoisie. This very participation of the proletariat proves to be the most effective means of shaking up the hitherto indifferent divisions of the proletariat and giving them hope and confidence. It is the most powerful level that can be utilised to raise the proletariat out of its economic, social and moral degradation.
The proletariat has, therefore, no reason to distrust parliamentaty action. [77]
This parliamentary perspective was adopted in response to the dramatic electoral gains of the SPD – its vote rose from 550,000 (9.7 per cent) in 1884 to 1,427,000 (19.7 per cent) in 1890 – and it constituted a definite shift to the right from earlier positions. In 1881 Kautsky had written that, “Social Democracy harbours no illusions that it can directly achieve its goal through elections, through the parliamentary road” and that “the first step of the coming revolution” would be to “demolish the bourgeois state”. [78] But from the 1890s onwards the parliamentary road remained the dominant strategy of both Kautsky and the SPD. Thus, when in the controversies with the revisionists within his own party, Kautsky appears as the defender of “revolution” it is a conception of “parliamentary revolution” that he is defending: in other words that the workers’ party will remain in opposition, refusing all coalitions or participation in bourgeois governments until such time as it has won an overall majority in parliament and forms the government, whereupon it will use its position to legislate the introduction to socialism. [79] That this strategy involved taking over, not smashing, the capitalist state was emphasised by Kautsky himself in his 1912 polemic against Pannekoek:
The objective of our political struggle remains what it has been up to now: the conquest of state power through the conquest of a majority in parliament and the elevation of parliament to a commanding position within the state. Certainly not the destruction of state power. [80]
Underpinning the parliamentary strategy was a view of the transition to socialism as the more or less inevitable outcome of economic development. The growth of capitalism would mean the growth of the proletariat. As the proletariat grew so its consciousness would rise and that would mean more votes for Social Democracy, until such time as there would be an overwhelming majority for socialism. “Economic development”, wrote Kautsky, “will lead naturally to the accomplishment of this purpose.” [81] The whole process would go ahead smoothly, inevitably, and without any life or death struggles, provided only that the party leadership did not fall into adventurism and provoke premature battle. The only actual activity required was organisation and education:
Building up the organisation, winning all positions of power, which we are able to win and hold securely by our own strength, studying the state and society and educating the masses: other aims we cannot consciously and systematically set either to ourselves or to our organisations. [82]
The question we must now pose, following the methodology adopted in the first part of this article, is: what was the social basis of this ideology of passive expectancy? In one sense, clearly, the social base was the period of detente between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie which accompanied the prosperity and advance of German capital at the end of the nineteenth and beginning of the twentieth century. At the same time, however, within this general situation this ideology expressed the interests, not of the working class, but of the social layer whose very existence was a product of this social truce: namely the vast Social Democratic and trade union bureaucracy, the army of privileged officials, who had arisen to administer their beloved organisations.
Nothing illustrates this better than the attitude of these trade union and party leaders to that fundamental question of the class struggle, the mass strike – a question that became urgent in Germany as a result of the role of the mass strike in the Russian Revolution of 1905. [83] The trade union leaders were implacably opposed to the mass strike and, at the Cologne Congress of the trade unions in May 1905, adopted a resolution condemning it. The party, however, at Jena in September 1905, passed a resolution “accepting” the mass strike in principle without specifying what should be done about it. Then the outbreak of a mass movement in Saxony for the widening of the franchise demanded the resolution of this contradiction in practice:
On 1 February 1906 a secret conference of executives of the party and the unions was held. This gathering promptly revealed the real balance of forces between the two organisations. The party capitulated to the unions, committing itself to trying to prevent a mass strike with all its might. [84]
This was followed by a compromise at the Mannheim Party Congress in September 1906, where the unions and the party reached agreement on the basis of “common theoretical acceptance of the possibility of recourse to the mass strike in the indeterminate future”, and then only with “the adherence of the leaders and the members of the unions.” [85] Kautsky’s role in this process was that of a “left” critic of the union leaders. He complained of their narrow economistic outlook and called for the supremacy of the Social Democratic spirit in the unions, but he refused to break with them and simultaneously attacked the real advocates of the mass strike (such as Rosa Luxemburg) as “fabricators of revolution”. [86] When faced with a choice Kautsky sacrificed the demands of the class struggle to the unity of the party and trade union organisations.
The labour movement bureaucracy is part of the petty bourgeoisie. It stands between labour and capital and its objective role is that of mediator between the classes. In relation to the mass of workers it is privileged in terms of income, job security, working conditions and life style. However its position, and consequently its political behaviour, is different from that of the traditional petty-bourgeoisie of small businessmen, shopkeepers, self-employed, and so on. The latter, as owners of private property, are in normal times more or less completely under the hegemony of the big bourgeoisie. In times of crisis, when they are squeezed between labour and capital, they can be pulled behind the working class by a powerful revolutionary movement that shows its determination and capacity to resolve the crisis of capitalism. In the absence of such a movement they can swing far to the right and form the mass base of fascism.
By contrast the labour bureaucracy is organisationally bound to the working class and therefore, as a social layer, cannot swing so far to the right (which is why the theory of “social fascism” is such nonsense). At the same time however it has a much closer relationship to the ruling class than does the small employer. Its role as “representative” (parliamentary or union) brings it into daily contact with the bosses and their state, and it depends for its mass support on the concessions it can obtain from them. Threatened equally by fascism, which would destroy its “organisations”, and revolution, which would destroy its negotiating role, it is profoundly conservative. It fears, above all, mass actions that might “get out of hand”, disrupt the organisations, provoke a ruling class offensive, and undermine its delicate balancing act between the classes. Its political need is for an ideology that combines socialism in words with passivity and compromise in deeds. It needs the working class to sustain the organisations that pay its salaries, and as a stage army that can be wheeled into battle to gain concessions which in turn retain support for the organisations, but it needs the working class in its place and under control. The ideology of German Social Democracy fitted these needs like a glove. Kautsky’s “Marxism” was a theoretical system that in all crucial questions adapted itself to the needs of the bureaucracy.
This was true even at the level of philosophy. For mechanical materialism, the philosophical outlook characteristic of Kautsky and the Second International as a whole, is, as we have shown, a bourgeois position at bottom. It treats the working class as a merely passive product of material circumstances, and therefore excludes the active revolutionary role of the workers, and particularly of the party. [87]
Once this social basis of Second International Marxism has been grasped (and what was true for Kautsky and the SPD was even more true for most of the other socialist parties), the capitulation to chauvinism in the First World War presents no particular problems of analysis. On the one hand the various bureaucracies had developed a vested interest in the prosperity and imperial power of their respective national capitals – the greater that prosperity the more easily they could negotiate concessions. On the other hand they could not risk an unpopular stand that would jeopardise their legality, their organisations, and their support. Thus on 4 August 1914, the SPD’s vote for war credits was a betrayal – of all the fine anti-war and internationalist rhetoric of the previous years – but it was also the continuation and culmination of well-established political practice. [88]
In conclusion, to describe Kautskyism as a variant of Marxism, or as one aspect of the Marxist tradition, is to mistake form for content. In content it was the theory of a different class. In content the anti-Marxist Bernstein and the “orthodox” Marxist Kautsky stood much closer to each other than either did to the revolutionary theory of Marx. They differed not on what political practice should be but on how it should be described. We will leave the last word to Kautsky himself. In his 1932 obituary of Bernstein he wrote that their polemics at the turn of the century were “only an episode”, that they had come together “during the World War” and that subsequently on all questions, of war, of revolution, of the evolution of Germany and of the world, “we have always adopted the same point of view.” [89]
 
2. Stalinism
Stalinism’s point of departure was very different from that of Kautskyism. Stalinism emerged within the Bolshevik Party in the years following the Civil War and rose to dominance in the Soviet Union through a series of bitter inner party struggles in the 1920s, finally achieving absolute control in 1928–29. Theoretically, therefore, it evolved out of Leninism, the development of Marxism which expressed and guided to victory the workers’ revolution of October 1917. Leninism’s principal characteristics were its revolutionary intransigence, its fierce internationalism, its analysis of and opposition to imperialism, its insistence on the destruction of the bourgeois state by workers’ power based on soviets, and its conception of the party as an interventionist vanguard organisation.
However, the material situation in which Stalinism was born was almost the opposite of that expressed in its theoretical starting point. The Russian working class, which in 1917 had reached the highest level of consciousness and revolutionary struggle yet seen anywhere in the world, had, by 1921, virtually ceased to exist. In the course of the Civil War the vast majority of the most militant and politically conscious workers had either been killed in battle or raised to the position of state officials. Under the combined impact of the Civil War, the Revolution itself, and the World War that preceded it the Russian economy had collapsed utterly. Gross industrial production fell to 31 per cent of its 1913 level, large scale industrial production to 21 per cent, production of steel to 4.7 per cent, the transport system was in ruins, epidemics and famine raged. The total of industrial workers fell from about three million in 1917 to one and a quarter million in 1921, and those that remained were politically exhausted. As Lenin put it in 1921:
[The] industrial proletariat ... in our country, owing to the war and to the desperate poverty and ruin has become declassed, i.e. dislodged from its class groove and has ceased to exist as a proletariat. [90]
The Bolshevik party found itself suspended in a vacuum. To administer the country it had to take over and use a vast army of Tsarist officials and against all its intentions it itself became bureaucratised. Bureaucracy is essentially a hierarchy of officials not subject to popular control from below. In Russia the social force that Marxists (above all Lenin) counted on to prevent the development of bureaucracy, an active revolutionary working class, had been cut from under the feet of the party. In this situation it was impossible to implement the Marxist programme in pure form. For a period it was possible to mount a holding operation, relying on the hardened socialist commitment of the Bolshevik old guard, to cling to the basic revolutionary aspirations while making the necessary practical compromises (for example the New Economic Policy or NEP) and waiting for help from the international revolution. This in essence was the course taken by Lenin. But failing the international revolution (and it did fail) a stark choice had eventually to be made. Either remain loyal to the theory and goal of international proletarian revolution, with the possibility of losing state power in Russia, or cling to power and abandon the theory and goal. The situation was extremely complex and the participants did not see it in these clear terms, but, essentially, Trotskyism was the product of the first choice and Stalinism of the second. [91]
But of course Stalinism did not ditch Leninism or Marxism openly. In order to retain the aura and prestige of Leninism, Stalinism had to perform two interconnected operations.
First the transformation of Marxism-Leninism from a developing practice-oriented doctrine into a fixed dogma, the equivalent of a state religion, was necessary. Stalin’s aspiration in this direction appears clearly in his “Oath to Lenin” delivered shortly after Lenin’s death:
In leaving us, Comrade Lenin ordained us to hold high and keep pure the great title of member of the party. We vow to thee, Comrade Lenin, that we shall honourably fulfil this thy commandment ... In leaving us, Comrade Lenin ordained us to guard the unity of our party like the apple of our eye. We vow to thee Comrade Lenin that we shall fulfil honourably this thy commandment, too ... In leaving us, Comrade Lenin ordained us to guard and strengthen the dictatorship of the proletariat. We vow to thee Comrade Lenin, that without sparing our strength we shall honourably fulfil this thy commandment too ... [92]
Also expressions of this tendency were Stalin’s Foundations of Leninism – a rigid schematic codification of Lenin’s principles – and the vast mass of self-styled Marxist texts and formal Soviet academic commentaries that continue to pour from the party’s publishing houses to this day. In this form Stalinist Marxism was completely severed from the practice of the working class and thus became completely lifeless. (It is anything but an accident that, oppositionists apart, not a single Marxist thinker of any stature has emerged from Stalinist or post-Stalinist Russia.) No longer concerned with changing reality, its function was to mask it. Stalinist Marxism became ideology in the fullest sense of the word.
If for this purpose Stalin would have liked to preserve Leninism untouched, embalmed like Lenin’s body in the mausoleum, he was nonetheless unable to. The gap between theory and reality became so wide that “certain amendments” to the theory were unavoidable if even the appearance of their correspondence was to be maintained. [93] Thus a second operation – the revision of Leninism and Marxism to bring it into line with actual Stalinist practice – arose as a necessary consequence of the first. It is by focussing on this process that we can gain the clearest insight into the real structure of Stalinist Marxism and the interests it represented.
By far the most important such amendment was the theory of socialism in one country, first promulgated by Stalin in autumn 1924. The introduction of this theory needs to be considered from a number of angles: how it was done, why it was done, the social interests it served, and its consequences.
First Stalin’s method. “Socialism in one country” marked a dramatic break with the internationalist position formulated by Marx and Engels as early as 1845 and 1847 [94] and tirelessly repeated by Lenin in relation to the Russian Revolution. [95] It also contradicted what Stalin himself had written in The Foundation of Leninism as late as April 1924:
The main task of socialism – the organisation of socialist production – still remains ahead. Can this task be accomplished, can the final victory of socialism in one country be attained without the joint efforts of the proletariat of several advanced countries? No, this is impossible. [96]
Stalin “solved” this contradiction by rewriting this passage to read the opposite (”After consolidating its power and leading the peasantry in its wake the proletariat of the victorious country can and must build a socialist society” [97]) and having the first edition withdrawn from circulation. There was no new analysis, simply the assertion of a new orthodoxy (retrospectively grafted on to Lenin). Indeed, apart from this one passage the rest of the text was left unchanged, including passages which clearly reflected the earlier perspective. [98] Only later were “analyses” concocted to justify the new line.
This procedure was not an isolated example, rather it was typical. When Social Democracy (according to Stalin) changed from an ally (1925–27) to “the main enemy” (1928–33) and then back to an ally again (1934–39), the change of line was not based on any new analysis of Social Democracy. It was simply a fiat to which analysis had to accommodate itself afterwards. The “secret” of this method is not that Stalin had no analysis but that the analysis he had could not be spoken publicly, because its real criteria, and real purposes, had ceased to be those of the theory whose language it retained.
What then was Stalin’s reason for introducing socialism in one country in 1924? Clearly it was a response (a defeatist response) to the failure of the German Revolution in 1923 and the relative stabilisation of capitalism that followed. Stalin had never been much interested in world revolution (he was by far the most insular of the leading Bolsheviks) and now he wrote it off entirely, but this alone does not explain why he didn’t simply continue to pay lip service to the old internationalism. The answer is that socialism in one country fitted exactly the needs and aspirations of the bureaucrats now dominating the country. They longed for business as usual, uncomplicated by international revolutionary adventures. At the same time, they needed a banner around which to group themselves, a slogan defining their goal. As Trotsky put it, socialism in one country “expressed unmistakeably the mood of the bureaucracy. When speaking of the victory of socialism, they meant their own victory.” [99] It was to the bureaucracy what “All power to the soviets” was to the working class in 1917.
As we have seen, Stalin introduced his new theory with the minimum of fuss (precisely to disguise its newness) yet in reality it marked a decisive shift in orientation which had the most far-reaching consequences. The Soviet Union was isolated in the face of a hostile capitalist world – a world which had already demonstrated its eagerness to strangle the Revolution by its intervention in the Civil War, and which, as Lenin emphasised, remained economically and militarily stronger than the young workers’ state. The strategy of the early years of the Revolution – the strategy of Lenin and Trotsky – included, of course, the most determined military defence but ultimately it relied on stimulating international revolution to overthrow capitalism from within. The policy of socialism in one country changed this emphasis. It replaced reliance on the international class struggle with reliance on the power of the Soviet Union as a nation state, and this decision had its own implacable logic.
The defence of the Soviet state demanded armed forces equal to those of its enemies and in the modern world that meant an equivalent industry and an equivalent surplus. Engels had already grasped this crucial fact of 20th century economics and politics in 1892:
From the moment warfare became part of the grande industrie (iron clad ships, rifled artillery, quickfiring and repeating cannons, repeating rifles, steel covered bullets, smokeless powder etc.) la grande industrie, without which all these things cannot be made, became a political necessity. All these things cannot be had without a highly developed metal manufacture. And that manufacture cannot be had without a corresponding development in all other branches of manufacture, especially textiles. [100]
Stalin’s grasp on this reality was no less firm:
No comrades ... the pace must not be slackened! On the contrary, we must quicken it as much as is within our powers and possibilities.
To slacken the pace would mean to lag behind; and those who lag behind are beaten. We do not want to be beaten. No, we don’t want to. The history of old ... Russia ... she was ceaselessly beaten for her backwardness ... For military backwardness, for cultural backwardness, for political backwardness, for industrial backwardness, for agricultural backwardness ...
We are fifty or a hundred years behind the advanced countries. We must make good this lag in ten years. Either we do it or they crush us. [101]
But Russia was poor, compared with its rivals desperately so, and its productivity of labour was low. To industrialise it required massive investment and without international aid there was only one possible source for this investment, the labour of its workers and peasants. A massive surplus had to be extracted and ploughed back into industrial growth. But with the majority of the population living not much above subsistence level there was no way such a surplus could be extracted and set aside voluntarily by collective decision of the associated producers. It could be done only through forcible exploitation and that in turn required an agency to apply this force – a social class freed from the burdens, but reaping the benefits, of the process of capital accumulation – a class playing the same historical role as the bourgeoisie had done in western Europe. Thus the consequence, in practice, of socialism in one country was its direct opposite, state capitalism in one country.
Socialism in one country also had theoretical consequences. It could not be confined, much as Stalin may have wished it, to a minor amendment to the orthodoxy. In Russia the overwhelming majority of the population were not workers but peasants. Marx and Lenin, although they recognised the possibility of a revolutionary alliance between workers and peasants to overthrow the capitalists and landlords, always insisted that the peasantry was not a socialist class. “The peasant movement ... is not a struggle against the foundations of capitalism but a struggle to cleanse them of all survivals of serfdom.” [102] But if Russia, by itself, was to accomplish the transition to socialism, then this attitude to the peasantry had to be revised. So for a period Stalin (and his ally Bukharmn) advanced the notion of the peasantry “growing into” socialism. In practice of course the peasantry was crushed by the forced collectivisation of 1929–33, for it constituted an obstacle not only to socialism but also to state capitalism, but not before the blurring of the distinction between the working class and the peasantry had passed into Stalinist ideology.
Another casualty was the theory of imperialism. This had been developed by Luxemburg, Bukharin and Lenin as an analysis of the latest stage of world capitalism and it asserted, above all, the primacy of the world economy over all its constituent national parts. Socialism in one country necessarily denied this. Indeed, in seeking to defend his theory against the objections of the Left Opposition, who pointed out that Marx and Engels had explicitly rejected “national” socialism, Stalin was led to argue that while socialism in one country was impossible under the industrial capitalism of Marx’s day, it was possible under imperialism which was characterised by the “law of uneven development”. [103] In this way Stalinism deprived the Leninist theory of imperialism of its real analytical content and reduced it to mere anti-colonialism, not at all a distinctively Marxist position.
Finally the logic of socialism in one country played havoc with the Marxist theory of the state. By 1934 Stalin was claiming that socialism had been established in Russia. This was on the basis that with the transformation of the peasantry into state employees, classes no longer existed – the bureaucracy of course was not a class for Stalin. According to Marxism, the state, as an instrument of class rule, was destined to wither away under socialism, but Stalin’s state had not the slightest intention of withering away, and this was a fact that no amount of propaganda could hide.
Stalin fielded this particular contradiction by asserting that Marx and Engels had expected the state to wither away because they viewed socialism as an international phenomenon, whereas when socialism existed only in one country the state had to be strengthened. [104] It was the kind of circular argument that works well when anyone who points out the circularity is a candidate for the firing squad.
But if this argument justified the existence of the state it still left unsolved the problem of the class nature of this state. It could not be a specifically workers’ state if Russia was a classless society – and precisely this was involved in the claim that Russia was socialist. The only solution was the notion that the Soviet state had become a state of “the whole people”, a thoroughly bourgeois view of the state vigorously attacked by Marx in his Critique of the Gotha Programme and by Lenin in The State and Revolution. Moreover it was a view of the state adopted by the Stalinist bureaucracy for exactly the same reason that the bourgeoisie has always viewed their state as a state of the whole people, namely its refusal to acknowledge its own existence as a ruling class.
It is useful at this point to note the ideological similarities and differences between Stalinism and Kautskyism. Both involved a systematic separation of theory and practice, in contrast to the Marxist aim of the unity of theory and practice. Both evinced a strong attachment to the state in contrast to the sharp hostility of Marx and Lenin. Both collapsed from internationalism to nationalism. Yet the differences are equally striking. Kautskyism blunted Marxism in theory and then further blunted it in practice; it spoke of social revolution (through parliament) and practised conciliation with the bourgeoisie. Stalinism retained a more revolutionary rhetoric and practised the complete opposite: it spoke of insurrection and the dictatorship of the proletariat and practised the outright suppression of the working class. Kautskyism was awed and attracted by the power of the state and therefore unwilling to contemplate its destruction. Stalinism developed a positive cult of state worship. Whereas for Marx and Lenin the dictatorship of the proletariat was already a “semi-state” or “no longer a state in the proper sense of the word” [105], for Stalinism the road to socialism (and even communism) lay through strengthening the state ad infinitum. Kautskyism capitulated to nationalism in 1914 shamefacedly and under the cover of “peace” slogans. Stalinism, having formally inserted nationalism into Marxism with “socialism in one country”, degenerated into the crudest possible Great Russian chauvinism, even exalting Russia’s Tsarist imperialist past. [106]
These similarities and differences reflected similarities and differences in the social bases of the two ideologies. Both were ideologies of bureaucracies that had risen from the working class movement, but in the case of Kautskyism the bureaucracy stood midway between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie, whereas the Stalinist bureaucracy, with the old bourgeoisie annihilated and effectively declassed, actually found itself in power. Kautskyism consequently appeared as a moderate, cautious “Marxism” which pushed to the fore the elements of Marxism “acceptable to the bourgeoisie”. [107] Whereas Stalinism appeared as an arrogant, ruthless “Marxism” with little or no regard for the feelings of the bourgeoisie but which transformed the content of this theory into its extreme opposite. However, just as Kautskyism had more in common with its opponent Bernstein than it did with Marxism, so, at bottom, Stalinism, for all its verbal denunciations, stood far closer to Kautskyism than it did to the revolutionary theory of Marx and Lenin.
The parallels with Social Democracy become even clearer once we examine Stalinism as an international phenomenon. So far the focus of our attention has been on Stalinism within Russia but it also had a major impact beyond Russia’s borders, first and foremost through the parties of the Communist International (the Comintern), all of which rapidly absorbed the Stalinist world outlook. This impact itself needs a note of explanation.
From the outset the Comintern was dominated by its Russian section; as was only to be expected given that they were its founders and had the authority of the successful Revolution behind them. But in the early years there was full and free debate and western Communist leaders felt able to challenge the Russians even if the latter’s point of view generally prevailed. However, the defeat of the European revolutionary wave between 1919 and 1923 undermined the confidence of the western parties and emphasised their sense of inferiority to the seemingly victorious Russians. This, combined with the in-creased use of bureaucratic pressure and material aid, confirmed and intensified Russian domination of the Comintern to the point where it could be used to divert the International fundamentally from its original purpose of world proletarian revolution.
The ideological medium through which this shift was effected was again the theory of socialism in one country. If the main task, the establishment of socialism, could be achieved in one country, then the international revolution became a kind of optional extra or bonus, a distant goal to be rcndered occasional homage, rather than an immediate necessity guiding practical activity. One consequence of this was the establishment of a tendency to reduce the role of the Communist Parties to “frontier patrols” for the Soviet state. Their first duty was to hinder any possibility of military intervention against Russia and to this end they were induced to act as reformist pressure groups on their respective bourgeoisies, downplaying revolutionary politics for fear of alienating potential friends and allies.
The first fruits of this orientation were the subordination of the Chinese Communist Party to the “progressive” bourgeois nationalist Kuomintang, which resulted in the smashing of the Chinese Revolution of 1925–27 by that same Kuomintang; and the subordination of the British Communist Party to the “left” leaders of the TUC General Council, who were simultaneously posing as “friends of the Soviet Union” in the Anglo-Soviet Trade Union Committee and betraying the General Strike of 1926. Later fruits included the Popular Fronts of the mid1930s, with their sacrifice of the Spanish Revolution (and therefore the Spanish Republic) to Franco, for the sake of a potential Soviet alliance with bourgeois democratic Britain and France, and, eventually, the dissolution of the Comintern itself in 1943, as a gesture of good will to the Allies in the Second World War.
However, if the parties of the Comintern were to be manipulated in this way they had to be transformed organisationally as well as ideologically. The mass of members of the Communist Parties were, undoubtedly, sincere workers who had joined their parties in order to overthrow capitalism. If they accepted the theory of socialism in one country it was precisely because they did not understand its implications. Moreover, their class position would continually impel them to act in ways that transcended the role of Soviet frontier patrols. Consequently to impose this role on them, the parties of the Comintern had to be removed from the control of their members – they had to be bureaucratised, staffed by a hierarchy of officials who could be relied upon to subordinate the interests of the working class (and of their own worker members) to the interests of the ruling bureaucracy in Russia. With the power, prestige and funds available to it Stalinism did not find this a difficult task. By the end of the 1920s the Comintern and its parties were entirely in the hands of thoroughly “reliable” Stalinist apparatchiks.
Yet it must also be understood that there was an inherent limit to this process. If the Comintern parties were to be effective frontier patrols, more effective than the Soviet diplomatic corps, then they had to dispose of certain forces, they had to have mass support, and for historical reasons that support would be predominantly working class. To gain and retain that support they would have to be, to a certain extent, responsive to the needs of that class. Thus, just as the Social Democratic bureaucracy mediates between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie to the advantage of the latter, so the bureaucracies of the Communist Parties mediated between the interests of their local proletariat and the interests of Russian state capitalism, also to the advantage of the latter.
At the same time, however, socialism in one country generated a second, and contradictory, tendency within international communism. Since it was a nationalist theory as applied to Russia, it opened the doors to nationalism within every Communist Party. As Trotsky put it at the time:
If it is at all possible to realise socialism in one country, then one can believe in that theory not only after but before the conquest of power. If socialism can be realised within the national boundaries of backward Russia, then there is all the more reason to believe that it can be realised in advanced Germany ... It will be the beginning of the disintegration of the Comintern along the lines of social-patriotism. [108]
At first this nationalist tendency lay dormant, overshadowed by loyalty to Russia. But the very process of working as Soviet frontier patrols, of building bridges to the nationalist bourgeoisie in the backward countries (China) or the reformist trade union leaders (Britain) or the “democratic” bourgeoisie (the Popular Fronts in Spain and France) itself fostered the nationalist infection. That the nationalist tendency remained subordinate to the frontier patrol tendency up until the Second World War was shown by the general Comintern acceptance of the Soviet line that the war was an imperialist war (a line dictated by Stalin’s temporary alliance with Hitler). The nationalist tendency then received a massive boost from the Soviet switch in 1941 (induced by the German invasion of Russia) to the line that the war was now an anti-fascist people’s war, which demanded the complete cessation of independent working-class struggle and required Communists to act as super-patriots.
After the war the nationalist tendency grew apace. In those countries where Communist Parties came to power by their own efforts (China, Yugoslavia, Albania) it triumphed completely and led to open breaks with Moscow. It remained weakest in those parties installed in power by the Red Army (Poland, Hungary, East Germany among others) and in parties that were small, persecuted or exiled and thus dependent on Soviet patronage (for example the Greek and the Portuguese). It became dominant in parties with a mass working-class base which aspired to a role in government (most notably the Italian). [109] The phenomenon of Eurocommunism was the ideological reflection of this process.
Set aside for the moment the question of Stalinism in the under-developed countries and consider the elements we have traced in the evolution of western Stalinism: reformist pressure group politics, dependence on trade union leaders, alliances with the “left” of the bourgeoisie, nationalism and bureaucratic organisations. What is this but a carbon copy of the elements that made up Social Democracy? Small wonder then that the ideological positions of western Stalinism – national parliamentary roads to socialism, explicit rejection of the dictatorship of the proletariat, and so on – have become increasingly indistinguishable from those of Social Democracy. The parallel extends even to the division of Left and Right Eurocommunism. Left Eurocommunism is more or less a return to Kautskyism in that it envisages a more or less rapid parliamentary transition to socialism, backed by mass pressure of course. [110] Right Euro-communism is more or less equivalent to Bernsteinism in that it envisages nothing more radical than coalitions (the Italian “historic compromise”) and thus is to the right of traditional Social Democracy’s left wing. (Compare the current positions of the “Marxist” Eric Hobsbawm and the “non-Marxist” Tony Benn in Britain).
To conclude: Stalinist “Marxism” has taken two forms. The first, in Russia, was the ideology of the counter-revolutionary bureaucracy which established itself, in the name of socialism, as a state capitalist ruling class. The second, principally in Europe, has evolved from being the ideology of bureaucratic agents of the first into the ideology of a section of the labour movement bureaucracy in its own right. These two forms are different and cannot simply be equated – but on the fundamental question, the international workers’ revolution, the self-emancipation of the world working class, they are united in their opposition. Neither is in any sense part of the genuine Marxist tradition.
In the Third World, Stalinist “Marxism” has evolved somewhat differently.
 
3. Third World nationalism
The first Marxist to recognise the significance of Third World national liberation movements was Lenin. His analysis of imperialism demonstrated the “colonial and financial enslavement of the vast majority of the world’s population by an insignificant minority of the richest and advanced capitalist countries” [111] and showed that this enslavement would inevitably provoke a wave of revolts and wars of liberation. What Lenin envisaged was a world alliance between the proletarian revolution, principally in the west, and the national liberation movements, principally in the east, to crush imperialism in a pincer movement. He insisted therefore that it was of the utmost importance for Communists to support these nationalist movements, especially in struggles against their “own” imperialism.
At the same time Lenin realised that this strategy carried with it the danger of blurring the Marxist distinction “between the interests of the oppressed classes, of working and exploited people and the general concept of national interests as a whole, which implies the interests of the ruling class”. [112] Lenin’s theses on this question at the Second Congress of the Comintern, therefore, stressed the following:
... the need for a determined struggle against attempts to give a communist colouring to bourgeois-democratic liberation trends in the backward countries ... The Communist International must enter into a temporary alliance with bourgeois democracy in the colonial and backward countries, but should not merge with it, and should under all circumstances uphold the independence of the proletarian movement even if it is in its most embryonic form. [113]
Lenin also warned against “the deception systematically practised by the imperialist powers” of setting up states which were formally politically independent, but economically and militarily wholly dependent. His conclusion was that:
Under present-day international conditions there is no salvation for dependent and weak nations except in a union of Soviet republics ... Complete victory over capitalism cannot be won unless the proletariat, and following it, the mass of working people in all countries and nations throughout the world voluntarily strive for alliance and unity. [114]
Under Stalin, however, the policy of the Comintern, dictated by the need to win friends for the Soviet Union, proceeded in precisely the direction warned against by Lenin. The classic case, of course, was China, where the Chinese Communist Party not only entered the bourgeois nationalist Kuomintang party, but also accepted a prohibition on criticising the principles of Sun Yat-sen, its founder, and handed its own membership list over to the Kuomintang leadership. Chiang Kai-shek was made an honorary member of the Communist International.
The process of giving bourgeois nationalist movements a “communist colouring” and merging Communism with bourgeois nationalism received a further intensification after the Second World War, when selective support for national liberation movements in the opposing camp became an important element in the Soviet Union’s global power struggle with the United States. [115] By the 1950s and 1960s a situation had been reached where, on the one hand, almost every nationalist regime and movement in the Third World called itself “socialist” and many claimed to be “Marxist”, while on the other hand large sections of the left in the advanced countries, including the non-Stalinist left and including some of Trotskyist lineage, had come to regard the national liberation movements and the socialist revolution as practically synonymous.
Precisely because they are nationalist these liberation movements are so diverse in their practice and theory that no one of them can serve for the purposes of analysis as “representative” of the rest (as the SPD could for the Second International). At the same time an account of all, or even a number of the ideological systems arising from these movements is ruled out on grounds of space. What is proposed, therefore, is to examine Third World nationalist “Marxism” in terms of what has been a central theme for almost all its incarnations – guerrilla war for national independence – and to do so with special reference to China and Cuba, the two “purest” cases of this type of revolution. They have the added interest that Maoism began within Stalinism proper, developed its own independent strategy and then broke with Russia after it had achieved power, whereas Castroism began as non-Communist and non-Marxist, only moving into the Soviet camp and adopting a “Marxist” ideology after it had achieved power. This procedure, inadequate as it is, should nonetheless be sufficient to reveal the essence of this kind of “Marxism”, its class basis.
Guerrilla warfare involves, in the first place, a relocation of the centre of the revolutionary struggle from the town to the countryside. The first “Marxist” to take this step was Mao and he did it in response to the crushing of the Chinese working class by the Kuomintang in 1927. The motive was to save the remnants of the Chinese Communist Party from Chiang Kai-Shek’s reign of terror in the cities [116] and this led Mao first to Kiangsi, and then, when this was attacked in force, on the incredible Long March to Yenan in the north west, one of the most backward and remote parts of China. This practical consideration, the greater difficulty experienced by the army and police in tracking down revolutionaries in the countryside, has remained of prime importance for advocates of guerrilla war. Thus Che Guevara, after commenting that “illegal workers’ movements face enormous dangers”, writes: “The situation in the open country is not so difficult. There, in places beyond the reach of the repressive forces, the inhabitants can be supported by armed guerrillas.” [117]
However, guerrilla warfare involves not only a shift in the location of the struggle but also a shift in its social content. The worker cannot become a guerrilla without ceasing to be a worker, and for the working class as a whole or even a substantial proportion of it rural guerrilla warfare is an evident impossibility. Which social class, then, is to replace the working class as the agent of revolution? The principal answer of the theorists of guerrilla war is: the peasantry. [118]
More than enough has already been said in the first part of this book to show that such a substitution of the peasantry for the proletariat is incompatible with Marxism, but it is worthwhile stressing that in no way is this just a matter of contradicting Marx’s (and Lenin’s) specific judgements on the revolutionary capacities of the peasants. For Marxism, as we have shown, the proletariat is fundamental. The working class is not the instrument of the revolution; on the contrary the revolution is the instrument of the working class, for the working class alone is linked to and embodies the forces and relations of production which can carry humanity forward to a higher, classless, stage of society.
Thus, just as it was impossible to insert socialism in one country into Marxism without necessitating a whole series of subsequent revisions, so the theory of peasant socialist revolution demolishes the entire structure of historical materialism. The peasant is the product not of capitalist but of pine-capitalist relations of production. If the peasantry is the socialist class then socialist revolution should have been possible at any time in the past thousand years. Capitalism and the industrial revolution would be unnecessary stages in human history and the determining role played by the development of the forces of production would be done away with completely. All that is needed is will power and correct ideas.
Precisely this notion manifests itself in the arguments of the Maoists, and their intellectual fellow travellers such as Charles Bettelheim, that socialism can be constructed in China or elsewhere however backward and impoverished the economic starting point, provided the political leadership is correct. [119] It appears also in the Castro-Guevara-Debray position that it is not necessary to wait for the objective conditions of revolution to mature, because the revolutionaries (guerrillas) can, themselves, create them. [120] The result is not Marxist materialism but rampant idealism.
One attempt to get round this problem, essayed by those such as Mao who felt some ideological loyalty to the Marxist tradition (refracted through Stalinism), was to speak always of “proletarian leadership” of the peasantry. [121] But since the proletariat played no role at all in the Chinese Revolution (”it is hoped”, wrote Mao in 1949, “that workers and employees in all trades will continue to work and that business will operate as usual” [122]) this could only mean leadership by the “proletarian” party. And since the Chinese Communist Party had practically no working class-members [123], this in turn could only mean leadership by “proletarian” ideology. Once again we are back to idealism. Ideology, detached from its social base, is transferred onto another social class and supposedly remoulds it.
In fact extreme idealism and its vulgar version, the “great man” theory, permeates Maoism. Examples range from the notion that the Soviet Union changed from the dictatorship of the proletariat to the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie with the change of leadership from Stalin to Krushchev, to the use of the terminology of class (bourgeois, landowner, and so on) as moral labels, [124] to the absurd cult of “Mao Tse-tung thought” and the cult of Mao himself, “the great helmsman”, “the sun that never sets”. [125]
It is important to note that whereas the cult of Stalin arose only after he was in power, the cult of Mao dates from before the conquest of power. This is because the revolutionary working class will tolerate no mystical leader cult and so Stalin had to smash the working class before he could impose his rule upon it, whereas peasant-based revolts typically view their leaders as semi-divine. Indeed one has only to think of the cults of Kim Ii Sung, Ho Chi Minh, Fidel Castro, Che Guevara and others to see that this crude idealism is not only a common feature of national liberation “Marxisms” but also a characteristic they share with openly non-Marxist nationalist movements (witness Gandhi, and the cult of Sun Yat-sen in the Kuomintang).
Marx is here stood on his head. It is not social being that determines social consciousness, but social consciousness (leadership) that determines social being. If the theorists of peasant guerrilla war were consistent, they would renounce Marxism altogether. Indeed if the central claims of these theorists – that guerrilla war is the road to socialism – are true, then Marxism is refuted in its most basic propositions. However, setting aside for the moment the idea that China, Cuba, Vietnam and so on are socialist, the idealist character of guerrilla-ist theories suggests immediately that the relationship between the guerrilla army and the peasantry is not at all what is claimed: for idealism itself has social roots – the existence of classes or strata who, living off the labour of others, come to believe it is their ideas that are the key to society.
To elucidate this problem it is necessary to return to Marx’s analysis of the French peasantry in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte:
The small-holding peasants form a vast mass, the members of which live in similar conditions but without entering into main-fold relations with one another. Their mode of production isolates them from one another instead of bringing them into mutual intercourse ... In so far as millions of families live under economic conditions of existence that separate their modes of life, their interests, and their culture from those of the other classes, and put them in hostile opposition to the latter, they form a class. In so far as there is merely a local interconnection among these small-holding peasants, and the identity of their interests begets no community, no national bond and no political organisation among them they do not form a class. They are consequently incapable of enforcing their class interests in their own name ... They cannot represent themselves, they must be represented. Their representative must at the same time appear as their master, as an authority over them, as an unlimited governmental power that protects them against the other classes and sends them rain and sunshine from above. [126]
Marx has here put his finger on the fundamental characteristic of the peasantry, determined by the social conditions of its existence – its incapacity for self-emancipation. The peasantry can fight, and does so with extraordinary ferocity, but it cannot become the ruling class of society. The village can defeat the city in any number of battles, but it cannot win the war, for the village cannot run the city and that is where the productive forces are located. This was true of Wat Tyler in 1381, of Emiliano Zapata in Mexico, and of the countless peasant revolts that recur throughout Chinese history. [127] To cohere into a national political force the peasantry requires the leadership of an external urban-formed class, or section of a class. For Lenin, Marx and Trotsky this leadership was to be the working class, not by “going to the countryside” but by fighting to overthrow the state in the cities. For Mao, Castro, Guevara and others, it was the cadres and command of the guerrilla army, who were drawn (and could only be drawn) almost exclusively from the urban intelligentsia.
What is the relationship between the leadership and the peasantry in the guerrilla war? First of all the rank and file of the guerrilla army will be overwhelmingly peasant in composition but only a tiny minority of the peasantry will participate in this way (in Cuba Castro’s armed forces were a few thousand at most; in China the numbers were huge – 300,000 at the beginning of the Long March, 20,000 at its end, several million at the high point of the war – but still only a tiny fraction of China’s 500 million peasants). The fact that the essence of guerrilla warfare is mobility and hit-and-run tactics makes this unavoidable.
And these same tactics ensure that the peasant guerrilla ceases to be a peasant and becomes a professional soldier, his actions and ideology detached from their class origin and remoulded under military discipline by the middle class army command. The relationship is thus quite different from that between workers and intellectuals in a Leninist party, where the worker members remain workers and where the participation of intellectuals, necessary as it is, is conditional on their acceptance of the standpoint and discipline of the proletarian struggle. [128]
The relation of the guerrilla army to the peasantry as a whole is also quite different from the relationship between the Leninist party and the working class. The latter is concerned to lead the working class as a whole in a struggle to realise working class interests. The former is concerned to act on behalf of the mass of the peasantry. The guerrilla army needs the support of the peasantry certainly, and in return offers assistance, protection, and the bait of land reform. Guevara, unwittingly, gave a pure expression to the idealist elitism inherent in the strategy of guerrilla war:
We have already described the guerrilla fighter as one who shares the longing of the people for liberation and who, once peaceful means are exhausted, initiates the fight and converts himself into an armed vanguard of the people. From the very beginning of the struggle he has the intention of destroying an unjust order and therefore an intention, more or less hidden, to replace the old with something new. We have also said already that in ... almost all countries with deficient economic development it is the countryside that offers ideal conditions for the fight. Therefore the foundation of the social structure that the guerrilla fighter will build begins with changes in the ownership of agrarian property. [129]
First comes the guerrilla fighter with his ideals of a just social order, “a true priest of reform” as Guevara calls him; second the choice of terrain on military grounds; third the programme of agrarian reform. Guevara continues:
The peasant must always be helped technically, economically, morally and culturally. The guerrilla fighter will be a sort of guiding angel who has fallen into the zone, helping the poor always and bothering the rich as little as possible in the first phases of the war. [130]
Similarly Mao’s Red Army was under strict instructions in its dealing with the peasantry to: “Be courteous and help out when you can. Return all borrowed articles. Replace all damaged articles ... Pay for all articles purchased etc.” [131] What has to be grasped here is the power relationship between peasant and guerrilla that makes these moral injunctions necessary because in reality it is a continual temptation to behave otherwise. Imagine any workers’ organisation, when sending its members to the factory gates, giving the orders: “No mugging of the workers. No forcing them to buy our paper!”
The real basis of this elitism is not just the superior culture of the guerrilla command, nor even its possession of arms, but a divergence in class aims. The fundamental class aim of the peasantry is possession of the land. The fundamental aim of the revolutionary intelligentsia who form the guerrilla leadership is the capture of state power to achieve national liberation. The latter uses the former to propel itself, and not the peasantry, into power. That this applied to the army and party of Mao is shown by the way in which the Chinese Communist Party continually held back the spontaneous peasant struggle for land in order to maintain the national coalition in the war against Japan. [132]
The struggle of an oppressed nation for liberation, whether it is against formal colonial status as in Algeria or against a regime that is a client for imperialism as in Cuba, is progressive and must be supported, but it remains essentially a bourgeois democratic task. The nation state is the product of capitalism, and the mission of the proletariat is to overcome the division of the world into states. Consequently Marxist support for national liberation differs in motivation and method from bourgeois and petty bourgeois support. For the latter national liberation is a struggle to establish its territory, its own corner of the globe to rule, and is therefore regarded as an overriding end in itself, around which all “national” classes should unite. For Marxists national liberation is only a means, a struggle to clear away national oppression since this constitutes an obstacle to the voluntary unification of the international working class in an eventual “union of workers’ republics”. It is therefore a struggle in which the proletariat must retain its class independence in order to carry the revolution beyond the social and national resting place with which the bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie will be content, in a process of permanent revolution.
From what we have seen it is clear that the strategy of guerrilla war (except as an ancillary to the workers’ revolution) is incompatible with this proletarian internationalist perspective, and it is equally clear from their theory and their practice that none of the Third World nationalist “Marxists” have succeeded in transcending the nationalist position. This, apart from all other arguments, indicates that the class basis of their “Marxism” is not the proletariat but the petty bourgeoisie. [133]
One further aspect of the problem remains to be considered. Once achieved, national liberation (if it is not transcended in international revolution) must be consolidated and maintained in the arena of fiercely competitive world capitalism. The petty bourgeois guerrilla elite propelled to power by peasant war thus finds itself in essentially the same position as the Bolshevik elite after the destruction of the working class in the Civil War, with the difference that it is not organically linked to the world working class through an international revolutionary party. [134] Therefore it has no choice but the Stalinist option, the struggle for economic growth through the accumulation of capital, based on the exploitation of the workers and peasants, which in turn means it must consolidate itself as a new ruling class. [135]
In this situation two things happen. Firstly the cult of the noble guerrilla sacrificing himself for his people becomes transformed into an ideology of working class (and peasant) self-sacrifice for the nation. Socialism becomes a doctrine of asceticism (dignified in the west by Bettelheim and others, as a critique of economism). Secondly, the seemingly radical, fluid structures of the nationalist revolution settle into the Stalinist mould of the bureaucratic one-party state. The parallelism of Third World nationalism and Soviet Stalinism is thus more than a matter of shared ideological and organisational origins (present in China but not in Cuba), or necessary dependence on Russian aid (the case in Cuba but not in China since the early l960s), it comes from a common class situation and common economic tasks.
To conclude. Third World nationalist “Marxism”, like Kautskyism and Stalinism, is in its origins an ideology not of proletarian revolution but of a section of the petty bourgeoisie which stands between labour and capital. In the case of Kautskyism and Stalinism it was the labour movement bureaucracy which had raised itself above its working-class base. In Third World nationalism it is the middle class intelligentsia oppressed by imperialism. Unlike Kautskyism and Stalinism it has a certain “revolutionary” content where the task of national liberation remains to be achieved. Like Stalinism in Russia and East Europe (but not Kautskyism or Stalinism in the west) it is able under certain conditions [136] to transform itself into the ruling class. As an ideology it is, in formal terms, much further from Marxism than either Kautskyism or Stalinism, and could only be accepted as a Marxism, or a version of Marxism because of the prior work of Stalinism in burying the genuine tradition under a mountain of distortion, and because of the extreme weakness of proletarian Marxism in the 1950s and 1960s.
Thus, for all their differences, Kautskyism, Stalinism and Third World nationalism have much in common – above all a commitment to the national state (nationalism and state ownership) and rejection of the self-emancipation of the working class. These are features, arrived at by a different historical route, which Engels as far back as Anti-Duhring analysed as key characteristics of the ultimate stage of capitalist development:
The modern state, no matter what its form, is essentially a capitalist machine, the state of the capitalists, the ideal personification of the total national capital. The more it proceeds to the taking over of the productive forces, the more does it actually become the national capitalist, the more citizens does it exploit. The workers remain wage workers – proletarians. The capitalist relation is not done away with. It is rather brought to a head. [137]
What has happened, therefore, to these “Marxisms” is that in abandoning the class positions of the proletariat they have ended up supporting the next stage of capitalism.
We have now completed our survey of the principal [138] transformations of Marxism since Marx’s death, and can return to our starting point – the authentic Marxist tradition.
 
4. The authentic Marxist tradition
The authentic Marxist tradition is not difficult to identify. It runs, from Marx and Engels, through the revolutionary left wing of the Second International (especially in Russia and Germany), reaches its height with the Russian Revolution and the early years of the Comintern, and is continued, in the most difficult circumstances possible, by the Left Opposition and the Trotskyist movement in the 1930s. The history and theory of this tradition has been so copiously analysed, defended and, where necessary, criticised by members of our own political tendency, [139] that only a few general observations are required here.
It is a tradition whose leading representatives, after its founders, are clearly Lenin, Luxemburg and Trotsky, but they are surrounded by many figures of only slightly lesser stature – Mehring, Zetkin, the early Bukharin, James Connolly, John McLean, Victor Serge, Alfred Rosmer, and so on, as well as hundreds of thousands of working class fighters.
It is a tradition which has sought always to unite theory and practice and therefore has never rested content with received wisdom or fixed dogma but has sought to apply Marxism to a changing world. Its most important contributions include theories of the party (Lenin), the mass strike (Luxemburg), permanent revolution (Trotsky), imperialism and the world economy (Luxemburg, Bukharin, Lenin and Trotsky), the counter-revolutionary role of Stalinism (Trotsky), fascism (Trotsky) and the restoration of the activist, dialectical element in Marxist philosophy (Lenin, Gramsci and Lukacs).
It has been for most of its existence, with the exception of the revolutionary years of 1917–23, the tradition of a tiny minority. This is unfortunate but unavoidable. The ruling ideas are the ideas of the ruling class and the mass of workers reach revolutionary consciousness only in revolutionary struggle. The permanent co-existence of a mass Marxist movement with capitalism is therefore impossible. Its very presence constitutes a threat to the capitalist order which, if it is not realised, will be removed. It is therefore a tradition whose advances and retreats reflect, in the last analysis, the advances and retreats of the working class.
It is not a monolithic tradition, but is characterised by vigorous debate (think of Luxemburg and Lenin on the party and the national question, or Lenin and Trotsky on the nature of the Russian Revolution, or the internal debates of the Bolshevik Party before and after 1917). Nor is it a tradition free from error (witness Trotsky’s workers’ state analysis of Russia). But it is united by the class basis on which it stands, the world working class [140], and therefore has been in an important sense cumulative, with each Marxist generation building on the achievements of its forebears.
It is also our tradition. The traditions which the Socialist Workers Party in Britain and its international affiliates have sought to continue and develop over more than thirty years. Historical circumstances have not yet confronted us with the flames of war, revolution and counter-revolution. These are the conditions which put movements and theories to the test, revealing their inadequacies but also allowing them to achieve their full stature. Consequently, our achievements, theoretical and practical, appear small beer compared with those of our predecessors. Nonetheless, our major theoretical contributions and distinctive political positions – the state capitalist analysis of Stalinist states, the theory of deflected permanent revolution in the Third World, the analysis of the arms economy boom and the new economic crisis, the critique of the trade union bureaucracy – have two things in common: they have been developed as responses to real problems faced by the workers’ movement in the struggle to change the world, and they have taken as their starting point and emphasise as their conclusion the fundamental principle of Marxism – the self-emancipation of the working class. In Left Wing Communism Lenin wrote that “correct revolutionary theory ... assumes final shape only in close connection with the practical activity of a truly mass and truly revolutionary movement”, and the achievement of that unity is, of course, the major task that faces us in the future.

Notes
1. Trotsky, The Permanent Revolution and Results and Prospects (New York 1969), p. 1.
2. Lukacs, History and Class Consciousness (London 1971), p. 1.
3. Ironically this reduction of Marxism to method has resurfaced recently in the speeches and writings of the Militant group in the British Labour Party (see for example Laurence Coates in Socialist Worker, 8 January 1983). For the Militant group, of course, it is not a question of a theoretical position but a political device to avoid embarrassing questions about revolution, the dictatorship of the proletariat and such like.
4. Lukacs, op. cit., p. 1.
5. Trotsky, In Defence of Marxism (London 1966), p. 11.
6. Marx, Preface to a Critique of Political Economy, in Selected Works, vol. 1 (Moscow 1969), p. 503.
7. Karl Marx, Selected Writings, ed. D. McLellan (Oxford 1978), p. 63.
8. ibid., p. 63.
9. See the Theses on Feuerbach.
10. Engels, On the History of Early Christianity, in Marx and Engels, Basic Writings on Politics and Philosophy (New York 1978), p. 209.
11. Engels, Anti-Dühring (Peking 1976), p. 18.
12. Karl Marx, Selected Writings, op. cit., p. 212.
13. ibid., p. 231.
14. ibid., p. 231.
15. Towards a Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right: Introduction (1844), in ibid., p. 73. We should also record the important role played by Engels at this time, on the basis of his experience of the English working class in Manchester.
16. Cited in Lenin, What Is To Be Done? (Moscow 1969), p. 40.
17. ibid., p. 32.
18. See J. Molyneux, Marxism and the Party (London 1978) p. 46–50.
19. Karl Marx, Selected Writings, op. cit., p. 229.
20. Marx to Weydemeyer, 5 March 1852, in ibid., p. 341.
21. Lenin, Collected Works (Moscow 1962), vol. 25, p. 412.
22. See K. Mannheim, Ideology and Utopia (London 1976). Mannheim identified the independent intellectuals as the group most able to transcend their own social position and arrive at a synthesis of all differently socially-determined viewpoints. Nigel Harris has noted the parallel between this notion and the “explicit intellectual elitism of Kautsky (copied by the early Lenin)”, Beliefs in Society (London 1971), p. 222.
23. See the second of Marx’s Theses on Feuerbach. For an expanded version of this argument, with the necessary examples from the history of science, see Peter Binns, What are the tasks of Marxism in philosophy? in International Socialism 2:17.
24. Provided that one understands “objective” to mean, as Gramsci put it, “humanly objective” and not “an extra-historical and extra-human objectivity”. See Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks (London 1971), p. 445–6.
25. Capitalist society, because it is based on alienated labour, takes on the appearance of an entity independent of men and women and beyond their control. The bourgeois sociologist Emile Durkheim, who regarded society as a moral reality external to the people who constituted it and advocated “treating social facts as things”, and the Stalinist philosopher Louis Althusser, who maintains that “history is a process without subjects” both commit the same error of reification – an intellectual process which is merely the reflection of the material reality of alienation.
26. Though in the future it may be possible to broadly distinguish between the science of the bourgeois epoch and the science of the socialist epoch.
27. Lenin, The Three Sources and Three Components of Marxism (Moscow 1981), p. 7.
28. The bourgeoisie was not always in this position. In its early days, when it was struggling to establish itself as the ruling class, it did need to change society. Hence the great achievements of its theorists in philosophy (from Descartes to Hegel), politics (from Machiavelli to Rousseau) and economics (Smith and Ricardo). Hence Marx’s famous distinction between the classical political economists, who made genuine scientific discoveries and the later “hired prize-fighters” of the bourgeoisie.
29. Marx, The German Ideology (New York 1947), p. 40.
30. Lukacs, Lenin (London 1970), p. 9.
31. ibid.,p.90.
32. Marx and Engels, Selected Works (Moscow 1962), vol. II, p. 80.
33. Marx made the same methodological point when he wrote that “Human anatomy contains the key to the anatomy of the ape.” Marx, Grundrisse (Harmondsworth 1973), p. 105.
34. For example: “(Men) begin to distinguish themselves from animals as soon as they begin to produce their means of subsistence.” Karl Marx, Selected Writings, op. cit., p. 160.
35. Marx and Engels, Selected Works, op. cit., vol. II, p. 91.
36. See Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme, in ibid., pp.  27–28.
37. For the same reason support for national self-determination is not an automatic principle. There are instances where it runs counter to the overall interests of the working class and is therefore reactionary. Examples are: Slav nationalism in the nineteenth century (in Marx’s judgement), Serbian self-determination in World War I, Welsh and Scottish nationalism today.
38. Engels, Karl Marx, in Marx and Engels, Selected Works, op. cit., vol. II, p. 164.
39. Karl Marx, Selected Writings, op. cit., pp. 167–8.
40. “There is no need of any great penetration to see from the teaching of materialism on the original goodness and equal intellectual endowment of men, the ommpotence of experience ..., the influence of environment on man ... etc, how necessarily materialism is connected with communism and socialism.” Karl Marx, Selected Writings, op. cit., p. 154.
41. Marx, 1st Thesis on Feuerbach.
42. Marx, 3rd Thesis on Feuerbach.
43. ibid.
44. Karl Marx, Early Writings, ed. T.B. Bottomore (London 1963), p. 202.
45. ibid., p. 203.
46. Engels, Speech at the graveside of Karl Marx, in Marx and Engels, Selected Works, op. cit., vol. II, pa.167.
47. Marx, Preface to a Critique of Political Economy, in Karl Marx, Selected Writings, op. cit., vol. II, p. 167.
48. ibid., p. 214.
49. Marx, Early Writings, op. cit., p. 69.
50. ibid., p. 120.
51. ibid., p. 59.
52. “Break down” not in the sense of dissolving of its own accord, but in the sense of falling into profound crisis which creates the possibility of its overthrow.
53. It is not just a technical point, still less an accident, that Capital is built on the labour theory of value, or that the dual character of the commodity is derived from the dual character of labour (concrete and abstract labour).
54. Marx, Early Writings, op. cit., p. 129.
55. ibid., p. 132.
56. ibid., p. 122.
57. Marx, Capital (London 1974), p. 582.
58. Marx, Early Writings, op. cit., p. 604.
59. Marx, Capital, vol. I, op. cit., p. 604.
60. For many of these passages and a decisive refutation of the young Marx/old Marx thesis see Istvan Meszaros, Marx’s Theory of Alienation (London 1975), pp. 217–53. For a flawed, but brilliant analysis of the centrality of alienated labour for the whole structure and logic of Capital see Raya Dunayevskaya, Marxism and Freedom (New York 1964).
61. Marx, Capital, vol. III (Moscow 1966), p. 250.
62. Lukacs, History and Class Consciousness, op. cit., pp. 53–4 and pp. 63–4 and Dunayevskaya, Marxism and Freedom, op. cit., p. 143.
63. See Lucio Colleti, Marxism: Science or Revolution in From Rousseau to Lenin.
64. Hilferding, Preface to Finance Capital, cited in p.  Binns, op. cit., p. 123.
65. Lenin, Our Programme, 1899.
66. Lenin, The Historical Destiny of the Teaching of Karl Marx, 1913.
67. This argument owes much to Nigel Harris’ account of the transformations of Marxism in Beliefs in Society, op. cit., as do a number of arguments that follow.
68. That the seeds of reformism were present in the SPD from the beginning is evident from Marx’s Critique of the Gotha Programme, and from Marx and Engels’ Circular Letter, Selected Correspondence (Moscow 1965), p. 327.
69. Between 1900 and 1905 there was an average of only 1,171 strikes per year involving an average of 122,606 strikers per year. (Figures calculated from Sozialgeschichtliches Arbeitsbuch, Materialien zur Statistik des Kaiserreichs 1870–1914 (Munich 1975), p. 132.
70. Karl Kautsky, The Class Struggle (Erfurt Programme) (New York 1971).
71. ibid., p. 7.
72. ibid., p. 8.
73. ibid., p. 88.
74. ibid., p. 7.
75. ibid., p. 159.
76. Marx, The First International and After (Harmondsworth 1974), p. 80.
77. Kautsky, The Class Struggle, op. cit.
78. Cited in M. Salvadori, Karl Kautsky and the Socialist Revolution (London 1979), p. 22.
79. Note the striking similarity, between this and the strategy advocated by Militant inside the British Labour Party, with its notion of an “enabling act” to permit the rapid nationalisation of the “top 200 monopolies” – with the difference that Kautsky already had his mass party “pledged to socialist policies”, whereas Militant is still trying to get it.
80. Cited in M. Salvadori, op. cit., p. 162.
81. Kautsky, The Class Struggle, op. cit., p. 189.
82. Kautsky, cited in Lenin, Marxism on the State (Moscow 1976), p. 78.
83. See Rosa Luxemburg’s brilliant analysis, The Mass Strike, the Political Party and the Trade Unions.
84. M. Salvadori, op. cit., p. 108.
85. ibid., p. 111. Note the parallel with Kautsky’s view that “the problem of the dictatorship of the proletariat could be safely left to the future”.
86. ibid., p. 110.
87. For a further development of these themes, see John Molyneux, Leon Trotsky’s Theory of Revolution (Brighton 1981), Introduction.
88. If one is looking for a materialist explanation of why things turned out differently in Russia (not so much of Lenin’s individual position but as to why that position had much more support than the stand taken by his fellow internationalists, Luxemburg and Liebknecht) then the absence of a developed labour bureaucracy in Russia is an important factor.
89. Cited in M. Salvadori, op. cit., p. 324.
90. Lenin, Collected Works (Moscow 1962), vol. 33, p. 65.
91. I speak of choices because the Bolshevik cadre did have to choose between power and principles (those that vacillated lost both), but given the circumstances it was inevitable that the vast majority would choose power (provided that there was no revolution elsewhere to completely change the terms of the equation).
92. Cited in Isaac Deutscher, Stalin (Harmondsworth 1976), p. 272.
93. As an individual Stalin was remarkably fitted to fashioning this mask, as hypocrisy, lies and deception seem to have been, or become, an organic necessity for his personality.
94. See Marx’s statement in The German Ideology that “communism is only possible as the act of the dominant peoples ‘all at once’ and simultaneously, which presupposes the universal development of productive forces and the world intercourse bound up with communism,” Karl Marx, Selected Writings, op. cit., p. 171. See also Engels, The Principles of Communism (London n.d.), p. 15.
95. “The final victory of socialism in a single country is of course impossible. Our contingent of workers and peasants which is upholding Soviet power is one of the contingents of a great world army.” Lenin, Collected Works, op. cit., vol. 26, pp. 470–1. Most of Lenin’s statements on socialism in one country are assembled by Trotsky in The History of the Russian Revolution (London 1977), Appendix II, pp. 1219–57.
96. Cited in Trotsky, The Third International After Lenin (New York 1970), p. 36.
97. Stalin, The Foundations of Leninism (Peking 1975), p. 212.
98. See ibid., p. 28–9.
99. Trotsky, The Revolution Betrayed (London 1967), p. 212.
100. Engels’ letter to Danielson, September 1892, cited in N. Harris, Of Bread and Guns (Harmondsworth 1983), p. 168.
101. Stalin, speech to business executives, 1931, cited in Isaac Deutscher, op. cit., p. 328.
102. Lenin, Collected Works, op. cit., vol. 10, p. 411.
103. See J. Stalin, On the Opposition (Peking 1974), p. 595–619.
104. See J. Stalin, Marxism and Problems of Linguistics (Peking 1976), p. 48.
105. Engels, cited by Lenin in The State and Revolution (Peking 1970), p. 76.
106. See Isaac Deutscher, op. cit., pp. 472–9.
107. Lenin, The State and Revolution, op. cit., p. 6.
108. Trotsky, The Third International After Lenin, op. cit., p. 72.
109. Other factors involved in this process were: Soviet Stalinism’s declining need for western Stalinism once it had achieved nuclear parity; its loss of ideological authority after Kruschev’s denunciation of Stalin in 1956, and the cumulative effects of the Yugoslav and Chinese schisms and the Hungarian and Czechoslovak revolts of 1956 and 1968.
110. There are even a few (though mostly these are left critics outside the Communist Parties) who revive the centrist notion of combining workers’ councils and parliament. This was the policy, under mass pressure, of the Mensheviks in 1917 and the USPD (left Social Democrats) in the German Revolution of 1919, and on both occasions was used to weaken the soviets and demobilise the working class.
111. Lenin, Theses on the National and Colonial Question, in Theses, Resolutions and Manifestos of the First Four Congresses of the Third International (London 1980) p. 77.
112. ibid., p. 77.
113. ibid., p. 80.
114. ibid., pp. 80–81.
115. It should be noted that Stalinism adopted a completely different attitude to the oppressed nations in its own camp. Whether it was within the Soviet Union, or in Eastern Europe, or in its “sphere of influence” (Afghanistan), these national movements were ruthlessly suppressed.
116. The difficulties of the Chinese Communist Party were compounded by the ultra-left “third period” line of the Comintern at this time, which demanded the immediate preparation of armed uprisings. See N. Harris, The Mandate of Heaven (London 1978) pp. 16–18.
117. C. Guevara, Guerrilla Warfare (New York 1967) p. 16. Also “the guerrilla fighter will carry out his action in wild places of small population.”
118. Though often this identification of the peasantry is disguised by the use of the term “the people” in similar fashion to the Narodniks and Socialist Revolutionaries of Tsarist Russia.
119. “What is happening in China proves that a low level of development of the productive forces is no obstacle to a socialist transformation of social relations.” C. Bettelheim, Class Struggles in the USSR, 1917–1923 (Hassocks 1976), p. 42. For critiques of Bettelheim see N. Harris, Mao and Marx, International Socialism (first series) 89, and A. Callinicos, Maoism, Stalinism and the USSR, International Socialism (new series) 2:5.
120. “It is not necessary to wait until all conditions for making revolution exist; the insurrection can create them.” C. Guevara, op. cit., p. 15.
121. Unlike such advocates of peasant revolution as Frantz Fanon or Malcolm Caldwell, who developed explicitly anti-proletarian theories. See F. Fanon, The Wretched of the Earth (Harmondsworth 1970) especially p. 86, and M. Caldwell, The Revolutionary Role of the Peasants, International Socialism (first series) 41.
122. Cited in T. Cliff, Permanent Revolution, International Socialism (first series) 61, p. 21.
123. “The Party admitted that workers comprised only 10 per cent of the membership in 1928, 3 per cent in 1929, 2.5 per cent in March 1930 ... and virtually nothing at the end of it. From then until Mao’s final victory the party had no industrial workers to speak of”, ibid., p. 20.
124. A good example of this is the denunciation of the Dung Xiao Ping faction in 1976 as “leaders of the party linked to the bourgeoisie of our society, as well as landowners, rich peasants, counter-revolutionaries, bad elements, and badly re-educated bourgeois right wingers”, to be followed in 1977 by the denunciation of the “Gang of Four” as “typical representatives in our party of landowners, rich peasants, counter-revolutionaries, bad elements, as well as other old and new bourgeois elements”. Cited in David Buxton, Another Goodbye to all that, Radical Philosophy, Summer 1979, p. 32.
125. For evidence of this see Y. Gluckstein, Mao’s China (London 1957), p. 378.
126. Karl Marx, Selected Writings, op. cit., pp.  317–8.
127. For details see Y. Gluckstein, op. cit., pp. 174–8.
128. This was one of the main points on which Lenin broke with the Mensheviks in 1903. See Lenin, One Step Forward, Two Steps Back (Moscow 1969), p. 66, and J. Molyneux, Marxism and the Party, op. cit., p. 53.
129. C. Guevara, op. cit., p. 43.
130. ibid., p. 43.
131. Some of the “Eight Points” memorised and repeated daily by every Red Army soldier. The rest are all of a similar character.
132. For documentation of this see Y. Gluckstein, op. cit., pp. 180–84, and N. Harris, The Mandate of Heaven, op. cit., pp. 24–8.
133. How it came about that the petty bourgeoisie in some of the backward countries was able to play this role (contrary to the expectations of the theory of permanent revolution) is analysed in T. Cliff, Permanent Revolution, op. cit., and N. Harris, Perspectives for the Third World, International Socialism (first series) 42.
134. Another difference is that it is not encumbered by the legacy of institutionalised workers’ power and therefore does not face the opposition that Stalinism faced, nor need it carry through the counter-revolution that Stalinism did. Hence its relatively benign appearance compared with the purges and camps of Russia in the 1930s.
135. See Lenin’s comment on these two aspects of national liberation. “Rousing the masses from feudal slumber, their struggle against all national oppression, for the sovereignty of nations, is progressive. Hence it is the bounden duty of a Marxist to uphold the most resolute and most consistent democratism in all parts of the national question. This task is mainly a negative one. But the proletariat cannot go beyond this in supporting nationalism, for beyond begins the ‘positive’ activity of the bourgeoisie, which is striving to fortify nationalism.” Lenin, Critical Remarks on the National Question, October–December 1913.
136. These being the extreme weakness and disintegration of the bourgeoisie proper and the passivity of the working class.
137. Marx and Engels, Selected Works, vol. II, op. cit., p. 149.
138. It was originally intended to include an analysis of so-called “Western Marxism” as identified by Perry Anderson, but, as so often, this essay has grown in the writing, and considerations of space now rule this out. Suffice it to say that with the exception of the early Lukacs and Gramsci (who arose in the Bolshevik tradition) all the leading figures of “Western Marxism” (Marcuse and the Frankfurt school, Della Volpe and Colletti, Althusser, Poulantzas etc.), whatever their philosophical differences, are united by their rejection of international proletarian revolution, by their location within the upper ranks of the intelligentsia, and usually by their attachment to one or another form of Stalinism.
139. For example, T. Cliff, Rosa Luxemburg (London 1959), T. Cliff, Lenin 4 vols. (London 1975–9), D. Hallas, Trotsky’s Marxism (London 1980), A. Callinicos, The Revolutionary Ideas of Karl Marx (London 1983). These authors – and the present author – are all members of the British Socialist Workers Party.
140. It could be argued that where these errors were important, for example Luxemburg on the national question or Trotsky on Russia, they constituted a tendency to depart from the standpoint of the proletariat. However the point is that these errors constituted secondary rather than dominant features of these Marxists’ total world outlook.



Althusser: The Detour of Theory
Gregory Elliot
Verso £10.95
ALTHUSSERIANISM, the interpretation of Marxism developed by the French Communist philosopher Louis Althusser, was born in the early sixties. It was a product of the crisis in the international Communist movement occasioned by Khrushchev’s denunciation of Stalin in 1956 and by the subsequent Sino-Soviet split.
The cracking of the Stalinist monolith opened up a space, for the first time in 30 years, for critical and independent thought by Communist intellectuals. One of their responses, widespread in both Eastern and Western Europe, was to revive the themes of alienation and humanism via a concentration on Marx’s early works, especially the Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844, and an emphasis on the Hegelian roots of Marxism.
Althusser rejected this approach wholesale, condemning it as bourgeois and rightist. Instead he proposed a “return to Marx” which he hoped would yield the basis for a “left” critique of Stalinism, while at the same time being covertly sympathetic to Maoism.
What he produced was a version of Marxism incorporating the following key elements:

A periodisation of Marx which viewed the early works as Hegelian rather than Marxist and maintained the existence of an “epistemological break’’ in 1845 in which Marx decisively abandoned the problem of humanism and alienation.
 
The insistence that Marxism was a theoretical anti-humanism which took as its point of departure not “man” but the analysis of the existing social structure; this entailed the claim that history is “a process without a subject”.
 
An attack on economism and economic determinism which took the form of an analysis of the social structure as consisting of relatively autonomous “levels” each with its own dynamic, determined by the economy only “in the last instance”.
 
A view of theory as having a high degree of autonomy from politics and constituting a practice (“theoretical practice”) in its own right which provides internally its own criteria of validation. Theory produces scientific knowledge which stands in contrast to ideology – the necessary realm of illusion in which people live their lives.

This whole package was presented to the world in language of high pomposity which constantly proclaimed its own gravity, authority and scientific “rigour”. In fact his system constituted, in E.P. Thompson’s phrase, an “orrery of errors”, underlying which was the attempt to provide a coherent philosophical justification not for Marxism but for Stalinism, albeit in modified form.
While it is true that there is enormous development in Marx’s thought between the 1844 Manuscripts and Capital, this in no way involved an abandonment of the concept of alienated labour, as can be textually proved from both the Grundrisse and Capital itself.
Althusser’s attempt to write alienation out of Marxism was essentially a defensive reaction. The concept of alienated labour was anathema to Stalinism because it posed the question of disalienation through the control of the means and process of production by the producers themselves.
Marxism indeed rejects demagogic appeals to “humanity as a whole”, insisting that humanity is divided into antagonistic classes with irreconcilable interests; nevertheless Marxism remains a humanism in two senses.
Firstly, the theoretical point of departure for historical materialism is the existence of real living human beings, “their activity and the material conditions under which they live” (Marx, The German Ideology); secondly, for Marx the proletariat is a “universal class” which through emancipating itself emancipates humanity.
It is therefore not true that history is a process without a subject. Marx is explicit on this point: “History is nothing but the activity of man pursuing his aims” (The Holy Family).
Human beings make their own history, though not of course in circumstances of their own choosing. Nor, as long as capitalism based on alienated labour persists, are human beings in control of their history; rather they are dominated by the products of their own labour.
The proletariat however has the capacity to abolish this alienation and transform human beings from the slaves of capital into the conscious masters of their own collective destiny, which is why for Marx they are the real subject of history.
Althusser’s attack on economism and his theory of society’s different autonomous levels also had a concealed Stalinist motivation. It was designed to provide a more credible explanation than Khrushchev’s facile “cult of the personality” theory of how Russia remained fundamentally socialist despite the Stalinist deformation of the superstructure.
However this attempt to theoretically reconstruct Stalinism was by no means the whole Althusserian story. More importantly, in the seventies Althusser became a veritable guru in the ranks of left wing academics. The reason for this lay in the elitism which necessarily derived from his Stalinism.
The left academics of the seventies were products, directly or indirectly, of the student revolt of the sixties. They had rebelled against the simplicities of conservative social science in the name of Marxism but as the movement subsided and their careers advanced they were in the process, not of reneging outright but of quietly making their peace with bourgeois society.
Their need was for a version of Marxism that would cover their retreat while making it look like an advance. Althusserianism fitted the bill perfectly.
The inflated view of theory flattered the “intellectuals” sense of their own importance. The “autonomy of theory” and “theoretical practice” justified not doing anything: “Come to the picket/demonstration/sit-in!’’ “Sorry I’m involved in theoretical practice.”
The obsessive anti-economism and thinly disguised idealism facilitated a growing accommodation to bourgeois sociology in its Weberian pluralist form. This in turn dovetailed with the feminist inspired emphasis on status as opposed to class.
What is more, the whole package could be presented as the last word in super-sophisticated Marxism straight from the Left Bank complete with added ingredients of ultra-fashionable French structuralism.
However as the seventies rolled on the downturn in class struggle set in and deepened. The Portuguese revolution ran into the sands; the Italian revolutionary left self-destructed; the Social Contract undermined the militancy of British workers; and the inspiration of Vietnam gave way to the horrors of Khmer Rouge Kampuchea. The whole intellectual climate shifted to the right and the left academics, with a few honourable exceptions, completed their transition from revolution to respectability and in some cases reaction.
Althusserianism had served its purpose and was now redundant – the pupils abandoned their master. France led the way: structuralism gave way to post-structuralism, Marx was replaced by Nietzsche and Mao by Solzhenitsyn. The “new philosophers” rediscovered the old cold war [theory] that Marxism meant Stalinism and the Gulag. Britain followed more moderately behind, but the direction was the same.
Althusser’s personal collapse followed hard on his theoretical eclipse. In 1977 he announced the eruption of “a general crisis of Marxism”, claiming that the theoretical unity of Marxism and particularly Capital was “in large part fictitious”. Then in the autumn of 1980, in an episode of the mental illness from which he had long suffered, he killed his wife, thus bringing to a close his theoretical activities. The story of Althusser’s rise and fall is told at much greater length in Gregory Elliott’s book, a scholarly and painstaking account based on the totality of Althusser’s work.
Elliott’s standpoint is critical – he notes and endorses many, though not all, of the points made in this review-yet also sympathetic. He repeatedly stresses Althusser’s merits and importance as well as his “limitations”.
There is something of a contradiction here. If it is true, as Elliot himself shows (in a very gentlemanly way), that virtually all Althusser’s key theses and distinctive positions were false and dangerous, why does he still claim that “nonetheless his achievement is very considerable ... to the undoubted benefit of Marxist and socialist culture”?
The answer is that he is writing within the accepted academic framework and this shapes his standards of assessment. He measures Althusser against the likes of Sartre, Colletti, Habermas and Laclau and not against either the classical or contemporary revolutionary Marxist tradition, or the demands of the class struggle. He is thus able to define his position as “anti-anti-Althusserian”.
In this he reflects the wider positions of those from the New Left Review stable, who have stood out against the new revisionist trend on the left despite die decline in influence this has caused. While this is very much to their credit, it is not enough.
In theory, as in revolutionary practice, being “anti-” bad things is not sufficient for the real development of Marxism. Despite the feet that it has not reneged NLR shows no signs of breaking from the fundamental vices which separate it from revolutionary Marxism – academicism and semi-Stalinism.
Elliott’s book is not too bad, but for a better Marxist analysis of Althusser the reader is referred to Chris Harman’s Philosophy and Revolution in International Socialism 2 : 21. It is shorter, sharper, more thorough-going – and considerably cheaper.
 







Throughout this century the Labour Party has dominated the left and the working class movement in Britain. Therefore the need to develop an understanding of this party, of its history, and its role in the class struggle could not be more obvious. John Molyneux reviews a new book by Tony Cliff and Donny Gluckstein which, he argues, does just that.





The Labour Party: A Marxist History
T. Cliff and D. Gluckstein
Bookmarks £7.95
THE CULTIVATION of illusion about the future, about what the next Labour government can and will achieve, which is the reformist politician’s bread and butter, requires as its compliment the cultivation of illusion about the past.
Consequently the history of the Labour party is enveloped in myths and legends, sentimental tales about the founders of “this great movement of ours”, about Keir Hardie and Nye Bevan.
The Labour Party: A Marxist History by Tony Cliff and Donny Gluckstein cuts through these myths like a knife through butter.
Firstly, the myth of Labour’s socialist past. Cliff and Gluckstein show that in fact “Labour’s politics have never changed in essentials”. From first to last Labour has been a reformist party attempting to satisfy working class inspirations within the existing framework of society.
The ideological basis of this endeavour had nothing to do with genuine socialism but was a confused mixture of religion, liberalism and Fabianism. Thus, Hardie, so often cited as the first socialist MP, stood as a Labour candidate only because he was rejected by the Liberals. As he stated in his election manifesto “I have all my life given an independent support to the Liberal party.”
Fabianism, which more than any other trend gave Labour its doctrine, had a thoroughly elitist bourgeois outlook. It too derived from liberalism and was permeated by imperialism, racism, state worship and contempt for, “those underbred and undertrained workingmen”, as Beatrice Webb put it.
Next, the myth of Labour as the party of the working class and trade unions. While it is true that most workers and most trade unionist vote Labour, Cliff and Gluckstein show that it is not true that the Labour party has ever either expressed, led, encouraged or played a positive role in trade union and industrial struggles of the working class.
The formation of the Labour party was based not on an upsurge in the class struggle (the rise of New Unionism after 1888) but in the defeat of that upsurge, and as an alternative to working class self-activity. It was created, not by rank and file trade unionists but by the trade union bureaucracy without any rank and file involvement at all.
The party has always counter-posed “political action” (by which it means voting Labour) to tile class struggle, either directly or indirectly opposing the latter.
As to Labour being the party of reform, the authors point out that many who accept that Labour cannot bring socialism, nonetheless cling to the idea that “at least it does something in the here and now”, or even more minimally that “at least it is better than die Tories”.
However, Cliff and Gluckstein show Labour’s reformism does not mean that it is able to deliver reforms. In opposition it fights not for concrete gains but to win office. In office it is freed from pressure from below but subject to immense pressure from the state, the ruling class, and the logic of capitalism, pressure to which it invariably capitulates.
Of the seven Labour governments only one, the Attlee government, has enacted serious reforms while the rest have viciously attacked the workers who elected them.
What is more, Labour, by exploiting its links with the trade union bureaucracy and the loyalty of workers, is frequently able to attack workers more effectively and with less resistance than the Tories.
Thus the MacDonald government of 1929-31, which was deliberately increasing unemployment, could have easily been voted out, but was sustained because, in the words of Liberal leader Herbert Samuel,
“in view of the fact that the necessary economies would prove most unpalatable to the working class, it would be to the general interest if they could be imposed by the Labour government.”
Then there is the myth that Labour can be captured by the left. Generations of socialists have remained loyal to Labour in the hope that they can win it for the left. Cliff and Gluckstein show such hopes are doomed to disappointment.
Ideologically the Labour left is not fundamentally distinct from the right. It has always shared the same basic reformist premises: parliamentarianism, electoralism, nationalism and class collaboration.
In Labour’s effort to mediate between workers and capital the left stands for a different balance not a different road. When it comes to the crunch, the left invariably capitulates to the right who, after all, are the more consistent exponents of the reformist logic.
Organisationally the left has always been based in the constituency parties which are less tied to electoralism than the parliamentary party and less locked into mediation with capital than the union officials. It is, “ironic and not entirely accidental that the constituency party is also by far the most powerless of all the groups that make up the party”.
In the process of demolishing these major myths through systematic and overwhelming documentation, Cliff and Gluckstein also dispose of numerous minor ones, including those cultivated by many would be Marxists and Trotskyists.
The myth of “socialist” Clause 4, in fact drafted by the arch right winger Sidney Webb, “as a conscious means of staving off revolution” in the wake of 1917; the myth that witch hunts (a perennial feature of Labour history) show the strength of the left as opposed to the advance of the right; the myth that workers in struggle automatically turn to the Labour party (disproved by the examples of 1919 and 1970–4).
Under the Cliff-Gluckstein microscope not a single prominent Labour figure emerges with their socialist credentials intact.
What damns them is not scandal or “inside information” but simply the detailed and honest examination of their political records. Overwhelmingly they condemn themselves with their own words. This applies particularly to such heroes of the left as Hardie, Bevan and Benn.
The overall effect of this remorseless dissection is that the Labour party is left politically naked, without a fig leaf to cover its shame. Not since Trotsky’s writings on Britain in the twenties has Labourism been subjected to such an intellectual mauling.
However, devastating as the exposure of Labour is, it would be a gross disservice to this book to suggest that it is primarily or mainly a work of exposure. Rather it is an analysis, using the Marxist method of how and why the Labour party behaves as it does and the exposure results from the analysis.
Cliff and Gluckstein understand that, as Gramsci put it, “To write the history of a party is to write the history of a class from a certain angle.” Not for a second do the authors lose sight of the class struggle. Their starting point is always the objective role of Labour in the conflict between the two fundamental classes of capitalist society.
They show the Labour party embodies a permanent contradiction – it is a “capitalist workers party”, an agent of bourgeois interest and bourgeois ideas. However it is an agent within the working class which therefore adopts those ideas to incorporate the grievances of the workers.
In Labour ideology the interests of capital appear masked as the interests of the nation which allegedly stands above class. In this way Labour articulates the claims of the working class as a legitimate element within the nation deserving of consideration. However, Labour subordinates those claims of the working class, as a “part” is subordinated to the whole.
One of the outstanding features of this book is its meticulous analysis of the way Labour responds at every point in its history, to those competing pressures of labour and capital, class and nation. It shows how the pressures operate differently when capitalism is in boom or crisis, when Labour is in government or opposition, when the working class is in retreat or on the attack.
It shows how they have different effects on the twin pillars of Labour, the political bureaucracy and the trade union bureaucracy, thus producing recurring conflicts between them while the fundamental interdependence remains.
As a result of this understanding the uncompromising critique of Labourism never falls into sterile ultra-leftism. For all its repeated sell outs and betrayals Labour remains a reformist not a reactionary party. It consistently subordinates the working class to the nation (i.e. capital), but the connection to the working class remains and this fundamentally differentiates it from the Tories (or the Liberal/SDP variants).
Cliff and Gluckstein’s brutal realism concerning the failing of Labour does not however blind them to the capacity of the party to survive. Their analysis of Labour since Attlee, shows it is trapped in a profound circle of decline – in electoral base, in membership, in activists and in the ability to deliver even the mildest of reforms. Nevertheless it is far from being on the verge of collapse. Although Labour’s reformism, its mix of class and nation, inevitably sacrifices the interests of the working class, it also continues to parallel the contradictory reformist consciousness of the majority of the working class. “As long as workers wish to create a better world, but lack the confidence to do it themselves, Labour will retain a decisive influence.”
Reformist consciousness, and with it the influence of Labour, will only be finally destroyed when it is replaced by revolutionary consciousness and the influence of a revolutionary party. Therefore, how this can by achieved is another of Cliff and Gluckstein’s central concerns. As they say;
“On a mass scale reformism will never be undermined by appealing for workers to cast out their illusions, it can only be done by helping to raise the confidence of the working class through their own experience of struggle.”
On the other hand, struggle by itself can lead to a massive growth in reformist consciousness as millions of workers begin the journey from right to left. What is needed is the combination of effective revolutionary intervention and mass struggle. The job of revolutionaries is to simultaneously work with reformists and against them, to apply the tactic of a united front.
The authors analyse the development of this tactic by the Bolsheviks and the Comintern, its subsequent application and misapplication by the British CP, and its later employment by revolutionaries in the Anti-Nazi League in the late seventies.
The book is a political blockbuster. It is an unsparing indictment of Labour’s record, invaluable for debates, polemics and the education of revolutionaries. It may also convince many a wavering left reformist.
It is a powerful argument, from experience, for the absolute necessity of building an independent revolutionary party. It is a theoretical account of the dynamics and laws governing the behaviour of Labour and reformism, which will safeguard the revolutionary party from false expectations, opportunist decisions and sectarian blunders in the future.
It is a detailed guide to action for revolutionaries trying to win the working class away from reformism.
 






Review of: David Caute, Sixty-Eight: The Year of the
Barricades (Hamish Hamilton £14.95); Ronald Fraser, 1968:
A Student Generation in Revolt (Chatto & Windus £14.95);
Tariq Ali, Street Fighting Years: An Autobiography of the Sixties
(Collins £12.95); Chris Harman, The Fire Last Time:
1968 and After (Bookmarks £6.95)






‘Bliss was it in that dawn to be alive
And to be young was very heaven.’



Wordsworth was writing about the French Revolution but his words
express splendidly how a generation of revolutionaries felt about
1968. So powerful were the emotions engendered by the events of that
year that even when the passage of twenty years has, in all too many
cases, cooled them into mere nostalgia for a past that has long since
been renounced or ‘outgrown’, there is still sufficient
interest for the anniversary to attract quite large-scale media
attention.
As I begin this article in the first week of 1988 the New
Statesman has already produced a special 1968 supplement, World
in Action has done a ‘Where are they now?’
documentary featuring three activists of the period, and I have
before me four substantial books on the subject which it is the task
of this article to review. By the time this review appears it is very
possible that revolutionaries of post-sixty-eight vintage will be
thoroughly fed up with the reminiscences of their elders.
Nevertheless is it important that revolutionaries, young and old
alike, should seriously study the struggles and movements of 1968. To
change the world it is necessary to understand it and the present can
only be understood as a product of the past. Many important features
of today’s world were directly shaped by the events of twenty
years ago, e.g. neither Irangate nor the US intervention in the Gulf
can be understood except in the context of Vietnam, and the war that
grinds remorselessly on in Ireland had its opening skirmish in Derry
on 5 October 1968.
For the revolutionary left 1968 was particularly decisive,
undermining the well-nigh absolute hegemony of the old reformist and
Stalinist organisations and opening a space in which the project of
revolutionary party building became a realistic possibility. Even
more than a decade of downturn has not sufficed to close that space
completely.
Here it is necessary to insist, in spite of and because of
the likely media hype, that 1968 is not a myth or a romantic
fairy-tale conjured up by ageing hippies harking back to the good old
days of their lost youth. On the contrary it was a year of real mass
challenge to the international capitalist order on a scale that had
not been seen since the end of the Second World War and possibly
since the great revolutionary wave of 1917-23. Even the briefest
chronology of the year’s major confrontations makes this clear:



January
The Tet Offensive in Vietnam makes it clear the Americans are
losing the war.
April
Assassination of Martin Luther King followed by black
riots/uprisings in 126 cities.
Attempted assassination of Rudi Dutschke followed by mass
student street fighting in Germany.
May-June
Student revolt in Paris followed by general strike –; the
largest strike in history.
The Prague Spring – Dubcek’s liberalisation in
Czechoslovakia.
August
Russian invasion of Czechoslovakia.
Democratic Convention in Chicago –; mass demonstrations
and police riot.
September
Massacre of student/worker demonstration in Mexico on eve of
Olympics.
October
Beginning of the nationalist uprising in Northern Ireland.



If anything the memoirs of old or ex-student revolutionaries are
likely to underestimate rather than overestimate the significance of
the year for the simple reason that they were almost certainly
marginal to the really big struggles. Unfortunately the media
discussion of 1968 is unlikely to correct such imbalances, still less
form a basis for serious study, and sadly the same applies to two of
our four books.
First there is David Caute’s Sixty-Eight: The Year of the
Barricades. This is both the worst and the most right-wing of the
bunch in that it is the only one not explicitly on the side of the
movements it describes. Caute studiously avoids any clear statement
of his political position, in the name of historical ‘objectivity’
perhaps, and strikes a pose of standing atop the barricades of his
title looking down condescendingly on both sides. I suppose one could
call this ‘liberalism’, but it is a liberalism which, as
so often, lends infinitely more aid and comfort to reaction than it
does to those in revolt. Perhaps the people Caute really identifies
with are
The majority of university teachers [who], while often
initially sympathetic to student demands, finally rejected the whole
movement, equated ‘student power’ with anti-rational
left-fascism –; and welcomed its repression.
Perhaps Caute would dismiss this as a slander, and at a safe
distance of twenty years he has no need to welcome the repression,
but how else to explain his penchant for quoting distressed and
outraged academics such as Diana Trilling and Sir Douglas Logan and
the evident relish with which he combs the movements for every folly,
absurdity and scandal he can lay his hands on.
Anyone who has experienced or even thought seriously about
revolution knows that mass spontaneous struggles of the oppressed
(without which revolution is impossible) inevitably include certain
blunders, excesses and even crimes. However it has always been the
mark of reaction to focus on these scandals as if they represented
the essence of the movement, and of the treacherous liberal
‘sympathiser’ to use them as an excuse for retiring to
the sidelines. This is precisely what Caute does.
His approach is a mixture of the academic and the journalistic,
with a heavy bias towards the latter and the vices of both. The quest
for understanding is continually sacrificed to the quest for good
copy. It is this which determines his heavy over-emphasis on events
in America (seven whole chapters, two on the Chicago Convention
alone), for it is the American student movement with its isolation
from the ranks of the organised working class that supplies the
richest harvest of ‘crazies’. By contrast Ireland, with
not a Yippie in sight, does not rate a mention – not even in
the chronology.
Similar motivations seem to lie behind Caute’s concern with
the sixties counter-culture. Cultural developments inevitably reflect
and respond to what is happening in the wider society but the
relationship is not mechanical. There was indeed a close and
important connection between the left, the student revolt and the
sixties cultural explosion that included everything from the Beat
poets to the Beatles and Jean Luc Godard to Richard Neville, but they
were not the same thing. Rather they were movements whose paths
crossed in a significant conjuncture but whose directions (and
composition) were different. Caute however is interested in amalgams
not distinctions, in sensational montage not analysis. As a
consequence he both falsely conflates the counter-culture and the
left and fails to see the merit that existed in many of the artistic
and intellectual products of the period. It is the persona not the
poetry of Allen Ginsburg that interests him, the image of Timothy
Leary not the ideas of R.D. Laing.
The intellectual poverty of the book is, perhaps, best illustrated
by the questions Caute poses in the introduction.
What were they [the rebelling students]: courageous
visionaries or romantic Utopians? Genuine revolutionaries or
posturing spoilt brats? An authentic resistance movement or a
frivolous carnival by kids who had never known poverty and the fear
of unemployment? An idealist challenge to imperialism or a pantomime
of rhetorical gestures? A rebirth of the critical intelligence or a
long, drugged ‘trip’ into fashionable incoherence? This
book aims to provide a history which will yield tentative answers to
these questions. (Sixty-Eight, p. vii)
With a problematic like that, drawn straight from the world of the
Sunday colour supplements, it is hardly surprising that Caute’s
book is so weak. Its merit is that its four hundred-odd pages
contain, amidst the retrospective smirking and cynicism, a good deal
of factual information. In terms of theory and analysis it is
worthless.
Tariq All’s Street Fighting Years is distinctly
preferable in its politics and tone – Tariq, at least, is clear
which side he is on – but hardly better as a historical account
or as a guide to understanding. Indeed, this is really the most
disappointing of the books because we might have expected something
much better.
Tariq’s approach is autobiographical and this in itself is
the root of some of the problems. I do not mean by this that
socialists should reject autobiography in principle or that works in
this genre can never be major contributions – think of
Trotsky’s My Life or Serge’s Memoirs of a
Revolutionary – but Tariq is not Trotsky or Serge, not by a
long chalk. Quite apart from questions of theoretical acumen and
literary talent, the great strength of My Life, for example,
is that Trotsky was central to the events he describes and those
events were central to the epoch. Tariq, however, was central only to
the Vietnam Solidarity Campaign in Britain which was a very minor
episode among the epic battles of 1968, and as a consequence the
autobiographical form repeatedly distorts any overall picture of the
period.
Moreover, Tariq was not in any sense a typical sixty-eighter.
Nineteen sixty-eight was above all an eruption of new forces from
below whose aspirations were democratic and egalitarian in the
extreme. Naturally these new forces threw up new leaders (though
often the leaders were foisted on the movements by the media) but
usually these leaders at least came from the rank and file, even if
their rise was meteoric. But Tariq never seems to have been part of
the rank and file. His class background, his education and status
(President of the Oxford Union in the early sixties, reviews editor
for Michael Heseltine’s Town magazine) made him always
of the elite, always a star, and for this reason there are crucial
aspects of the sixty-eight experience he is unable to grasp or
communicate.
He doesn’t know or show what it was like to organise at
grass roots level even among students (the working class seems to
cross his path only accidentally) and he has almost no involvement in
direct collective struggle. Leading a solidarity campaign, even when
a couple of its demonstrations end in punch-ups, is not quite the
same as being in a fight, as part of a collective, against an
immediate enemy, whether it is a university authority, a boss, or the
state. Consequently he misses the key ‘feeling’ of the
time, namely the extraordinary elation of hitherto anonymous
powerless individuals discovering their collective power.
Many of the participants in the struggles of sixty-eight became
completely intoxicated by this experience and, lacking any knowledge
of the sober realities of class struggle, failed to see any
limitations to it – a fact which gave rise to much
ultra-leftism and some of the absurdities seized on by Caute.
Nonetheless it was one of the central driving forces of the
international movement. Tariq doesn’t really express it. This
is not because he was a premature hardened Bolshevik, it’s
because he was never anonymous and powerless. For this reason it is
quite false to claim, as the book’s jacket does, that this is
‘an autobiography of an entire generation’, if by that is
meant a generation of revolutionaries.
Tariq’s best quality is that he is always on the right side,
opposing bad things, supporting good things: anti-imperialist,
anti-capitalist, anti-Stalinist, anti-racist, anti-sexist,
anti-sectarian; pro-Vietnam, pro-Che, pro-Malcolm X, pro-student,
pro-socialist, pro-democracy and pro-the revolution. But this good
quality is offset by two bad qualities, both of which are amply
displayed in Street Fighting Years.
The first of these I can only describe as an alarming absence of a
basic sense of revolutionary decency. How else could he write,
without a blush, passages such as the following?
There were two small tables beautifully laid out for
supper and soon other guests arrived, somewhat less punctually than
myself Kenneth and Kathleen Tynan and Eleanor Bron were assigned the
same table as me, while sundry starlets and Ursula Andress, attired
in an amazingly low-cut outfit, were seated on the other table a few
feet away. Brando was the perfect host, dividing his attention
equally between us and his other guests ... Dinner was followed by
dancing and later Brando kindly offered to put me up for the night,
but the Tynans, who had left early, had insisted I spend the rest of
the night at their flat in Mayfair. This seemed a more relaxed
option.
Over brunch the next day ... (Street Fighting Years,
p. 75)
This may have been the spirit of ‘swinging London’ in
the sixties, it was not the spirit of sixty-eight.
Tariq’s other bad quality, less offensive but ultimately
more damaging, is the superficiality of his politics. It’s not
that his political judgement is especially poor, in fact much of the
time it is eminently sensible compared to that of many people around
at the time, but it is always impressionistic, based on surface
appearances, never the product of serious Marxist analysis.
For example he writes quite a lot about the in-fighting on the far
left and the ‘style’ of the respective groups (Militant
were ‘Seventh Day Adventists’, the Socialist Labour
League, forerunner of the WRP, were ‘run like a one-party
statelet’) but the political differences are simply not
discussed seriously. Consider this account of the International
Socialists (IS):
The IS members were entirely different and, on most
questions, were refreshingly undogmatic, but their view of world
politics seemed to be bizarre and far too Eurocentric. When I first
heard them talk among themselves they gave me the impression of being
a weird breed of professional anti-communists. When I discovered that
for them there was no qualitative difference between Chiang Kai-shek
and Batista on the one hand and Mao Zedong and Fidel Castro on the
other, I realised that I would always be a stranger in their house.
(Street Fighting Years, p. 119)
Tariq must know that this is a travesty: that the real issue was
not Eurocentrism but the centrality of the working class and that the
argument was not about whether to support Castro against Batista or
Mao against Chiang but whether the societies over which Mao and
Castro presided were, in the absence of workers’ revolution and
workers’ power, some variety of socialism or workers’
state or whether they were state capitalist. Tariq knows this but
prefers not to get involved in such ‘theoretical’
controversy – much better to skate over the matter with
superior phrases about ‘bizarre’ views and ‘weird
breeds’.
But is the debate about Stalinism and the nature of third world
national liberation movements irrelevant to the subject matter of
Tariq’s book? On the contrary it is of burning relevance. For
the central theme of his account and, in his view, the central theme
of the events of the late sixties, is the struggle against the
Vietnam War and in support of the Vietnamese Revolution. His own
visit to North Vietnam in early 1967, when he saw at first hand the
hideous atrocities perpetrated by the American bombing, is described
as
a formative experience; something I can never forget ...
What I had seen was the most epic resistance ever witnessed in the
sordid annals of imperialism. (Street Fighting Years, p. 113)
Yet now, twenty years later, thirteen years after the fall of
Saigon, we are offered no critical reflections on this experience.
Despite the fact that the outcome of events in Indo-China (above all
the monstrous Pol Pot regime in Kampuchea, but also the Chinese
invasion of Vietnam, the Vietnamese invasion of Kampuchea and the sad
spectacle of the boat people) posed questions about the underlying
nature of these revolutions in the sharpest possible form; despite
the fact that his own organisation, the Fourth International, debated
the matter furiously, with Ernest Mandel (to whom Street Fighting
Years is dedicated) insisting that the Pol Pot regime must be
designated a workers’ state in order not to open the door to
the theory of state capitalism; despite the fact that disillusionment
with Vietnam and China wrought havoc on the left internationally;
despite all this, Tariq maintains a discreet silence on the question.
Instead all we get is silly comments like the following:
Many years later I was talking to a veteran communist
leader in India. He was describing a meeting with Ho Chi Minh in
1964, two years before my visit. The Indian asked Ho Chi Minh to
explain how the Indochinese Communist Party, which had been formed at
roughly the same time as the Communist Party in India, had succeeded
whilst they in India had failed. The Vietnamese had laughed and
replied: ‘In India you had Gandhi. Here I am Gandhi!’ The
remark was more serious than one might imagine. (Street Fighting
Years, p. 113)
The irony is that in so far as the remark is at all serious (in
suggesting that both Gandhi and Ho represented varieties of bourgeois
nationalism) it is in a way that quite escapes our author.
In one respect, however, Street Fighting Years does give an
insight into the theoretical basis of Tariq’s views. It reveals
the decisive influence on his thinking, not of Marx or Trotsky, but
of Isaac Deutscher. Deutscher, exponent of a literary Trotskyism
shorn of its revolutionary cutting edge, propounded the view that the
Soviet bureaucracy would reform itself from above, and it is
Deutscherism that informs Tariq’s latest enthusiasm, Mikhail
Gorbachev. A ‘powerful spectre ... beginning to haunt the
European powers’ according to Tariq,
Gorbachev was foreseen by Deutscher. One hopes that the
Soviet leader will soon repay the compliment by publishing
Deutscher’s monumental histories of the USSR. (Street
Fighting Years, p. 269)
What a pathetic re-enactment of the illusion, so characteristic of
Tariq and many of his comrades in the late sixties and early
seventies, that if the Trotskyists loved-up to Castro, Ho Chi Minh
and others with sufficient fervour they would ‘repay the
compliment’ by recognising Trotsky. The only difference is that
no one is going to storm the US embassy chanting ‘Gorby! Gorby!
Gorby!’
In the end, however, it is the omissions as much as the howlers
that make this book such a let-down. It doesn’t capture the
spirit of the period, it doesn’t offer a Marxist analysis, and
it doesn’t even tell you much about street fighting, of which
Tariq, as far as I know, did little.
Ronald Fraser’s 1968: A Student Generation in Revolt,
provides a very refreshing contrast. Fraser is a talented and
conscientious oral historian who will be known to many readers of
International Socialism for his outstanding Blood of Spain.
Here, with a team of assistants, he has attempted the ambitious
project of recreating the struggles of sixty-eight through the
memories of 230 student activists of the time drawn from six
different countries. Moreover the attempt succeeds, at times
brilliantly. Fraser really has captured the ‘feeling’ of
the student revolt in those heady days.
This is important for two reasons. First because, while it is
pretty generally acknowledged that there was a special sixty-eight
atmosphere, there are (as Caute’s and Ali’s books
testify) rival interpretations as to what exactly that atmosphere
was. The revolutionary liberatory experience born of collective
defiance and initiative needs defending against those who depict the
whole thing as some frenzied psychedelic trip, or the epitome of
radical chic, or merely the exaggerated folly of naive youth.
Secondly because as much as possible of this experience needs to be
communicated to the current generation of socialists and
revolutionaries – the children of the downturn – who,
through objective circumstances, have never known the exhilaration of
such a movement but who, if they are to remain revolutionaries, have
to believe, emotionally as well as intellectually, that such things
can happen.
Fraser and his collaborators achieve this by allowing the
participants to speak for themselves, often without interpretation or
commentary (though not, of course, without the interpretation of
selection – a significant point as we shall see). The best way
of illustrating this is simply to quote from the book.
It’s a moment I shall never forget. Suddenly,
spontaneously, barricades were being thrown up in the streets. People
were building up the cobble stones because they wanted – many
of them for the first time – to throw themselves into a
collective spontaneous activity. People were releasing all their
repressed feelings, expressing them in a festive spirit. Thousands
felt the need to communicate with each other, to love one another.
That night has forever made me optimistic about history. Having lived
through it, I can’t ever say ‘It will never happen’
...
Danny Cohn-Bendit, student leader at Nanterre, on the night of
the Paris barricades, 10/11 May 1968. (1968, p. 7)
The more straitlaced among us may cavil at this talk of ‘love’
and ‘communication’, but in an uprising people do have
such feelings just as much as rage or bitterness or hope. I visited
Paris shortly after the Night of the Barricades and there were no
street battles during my brief visit but I saw how people had been
changed – transformed is a better word – by their
experiences. I too will never forget it and can’t ever say ‘It
will never happen’.
My most vivid memory of May ’68? The newfound
ability for everyone to speak – to speak of anything
with anyone. In that month of talking during May you learnt more than
in the whole of your five years of studying. It was really another
world – a dream world perhaps – but that’s what
I’ll always remember: the need and the right for everyone to
speak.
René Bourrigaud, student at the Ecole Superieure
d’Agriculture, Angers, France. (1968, p. 7)
Bourrigaud is describing what happened in a small conservative
town in western France when the municipal theatre was occupied!
It became a permanent forum of debate. Workers came and
took part–;it was the first time they had ever set foot in this
temple of bourgeois culture. Some of them spoke about their
experiences during the Popular Front occupations of 1936. (1968,
p. 194)
But it is a representative experience – in Paris it was the
Odeon, the national theatre, that became the forum, non-stop,
twenty-four hours a day. Indeed something like it happens in every
revolution – witness John Reed:
What a marvellous sight to see Putilovsky Zavod pour out
its four thousand to listen to Social Democrats, Socialist
Revolutionaries, Anarchists, anybody, whatever they had to say, as
long as they would talk! For months in Petrograd, and all over
Russia, every street-corner was a public tribune. In railway trains,
street-cars, always the spurting up of impromptu debate everywhere
... At every meeting, attempts to limit the time of speakers voted
down, and every man free to express the thought that was in him. (Ten
Days that Shook the World, p. 40)
But for us in Thatcher’s Britain May ’68 is the
closest to home, the proof of what is possible in advanced
‘democratic’ western Europe, and what is possible in
revolution is what seems impossible the rest of the time:
The savage night of battle that followed was heard all
over France. Radio reporters covered it live ... A well-known former
soccer commentator (!) was reporting the events for one station:
‘Now the CRS are charging, they’re storming
the barricade – oh, my God! There’s a battle raging. The
students are counter-attacking, you can hear the noise – the
CRS are retreating ... Now they’re regrouping, getting ready to
charge again. The inhabitants are throwing things at the CRS –
oh! The police are retaliating, shooting grenades into the windows of
apartments ...’At this point the radio station, which had been
telling the commentator over the air not to dramatise events,
interrupted him. ‘This can’t be true, the CRS don’t
do things like that!’ ‘I’m telling you what I’m
seeing ...’ His voice went dead – they’d cut him
off. (1968, pp. 187–88)
One of the ways in which Fraser’s book excels is in
depicting the process of political awakening and commitment as it
occurred in numerous individuals as part of the overall movement.
Each story is different, unique, but from Berkeley to Belfast there
is a common theme – the individual changing in the midst of
collective action:
My world had been very staid, very traditional, very
frightened, very middle class, and respectable. And here I was doing
these things that six months before I would have thought were just
horrible. But I was in the midst of an enormous tide of people ... It
was phenomenally liberating ... At the same time it was political
struggle. It wasn’t just Columbia. There was a fucking
war on in Vietnam, and the civil rights movement ... 1968 just
cracked the universe open for me. And the fact of getting involved
meant that never again was I going to look at something outside with
the kind of reflex condemnation or fear. Yes it was the making of me
– or the unmaking.
Mike Wallace, occupation of Columbia
University, New York, April 1968 (1968, p. 8)
And when we decided to occupy it was like the revolution
had started! I was just a typical student, like most of those sitting
in. But we discovered what is meant by collective strength, we felt
our power. I can remember one of the IS student leaders saying: ‘We
are sitting in because we have to protest against starvation in the
Third World. ’ Clearly it had nothing to do with that –
and yet somehow clearly it did. We were taking on the world, the
political power structure and we sensed that rebellion from below
could change it.
John Rose, LSE, 1967 (1968, p. 112)
‘Immediately, another march to City Hall [Belfast]
was proposed. The law required that the police be given notice of all
marches and an individual’s name be given as the responsible
organiser. No one stood up to accept the latter role.
‘And then, all of a sudden, I remember this
extraordinary voice with its amazing rhetorical ability come from one
of the rows ...’ recalled Anne Devlin, sixteen-year-old high
school student and daughter of a Catholic labour politician. ‘The
voice went out to the roof and came back again: “Mr Chairman, I
am an orphan, I have nothing to lose, I will give my name ...”
It was Bernadette [Devlin]. Where she got the voice and the
confidence to do it, I don’t know, but she grabbed her moment
in history and set herself on a course for ever after.’ (1968,
pp. 207–8)
Well, one morning my young brother comes running home,
out of breath, with his little satchel, saying: ‘Come quick,
there’s a demonstration!’ So instead of going to school I
followed him and we found ourselves on the Boulevard Saint-Michel in
the middle of this huge demo. How can I describe it? A fabulous
happiness, a tremendous joy! I recognised a lot of friends from the
Vietnam committee, we kissed. And then I see myself, holding hands
with my brother, shouting, laughing, going through the streets with
the demo. It was May ’68!
Lily Metreux (1968, p. 179)
In revolutions people express outrage and anger at the brutality
of the system but outrage and anger are not the mainspring of
revolution; revolutions are egalitarian but revolution is not made
for equality; revolutions demand justice but, at bottom, revolution
is not about justice; revolution is about freedom – yes,
freedom of the individual – and individual freedom is
inseparable from collective power. This is not the conscious message
of Fraser’s 1968, but it is a message that vibrates from
a multitude of its pages and for that reason, in itself, it deserves
to be widely read.
Unfortunately it also has serious political weaknesses. Fraser,
like Caute and even, to some extent, Tariq, does not really lay his
political cards on the table, but it would appear that, like a number
of his interviewees, he has retreated from the explicit commitment to
revolution typical of sixty-eight to a vague radical reformism. He
would probably endorse the comment of Robert Linhart, former leader
of the Union des Jeunesses Communistes Marxistes-Leninistes, that
‘the illusion in our ranks, Trotskyists and Maoists alike, was
the seizure of power. Noone believes in that anymore’ (1968,
p. 325). He also seems to agree with Frank Bardacke that the
American SDS’s turn to revolution in 1968 was a mistake, and
with David Gilbert that it led people to look for ‘almost
magical solutions’ including a ‘regurgitation of the
Marxist formulation of the working class’ (1968,
p. 261).
The result of this retreat is that the book ends very much with a
whimper – the familiar invocation of the movementist alliance:
more democracy, greater civil rights, more freedoms ... the demands
of women, ecologists, ethnic and cultural minorities and others.
(1968, p. 332) It is to Fraser’s credit as a
historian that this feeble concluding perspective has not greatly
obscured the incendiary material that precedes it, nonetheless it
does limit it and distort it in various ways. Symptomatic of this is
that Fraser restricts his account to students. This is a major fault.
Of course no one would deny that students were immensely important in
1968, but it is quite false to present the struggles of that year as
purely or even predominantly student.
The Vietnamese Tet Offensive was not launched by students; it was
not students who burned the ghettos across America when Martin Luther
King was assassinated; it was not the street fighting on the Left
Bank but the general strike of ten million workers that made the May
Events the high point of the whole movement; Czechoslovakia’s
Prague Spring and the resistance to the Soviet invasion involved
students but was also far wider, and the same applied to the struggle
in Northern Ireland; in Italy there was a direct connection between
the student unrest and the revolt of the workers in the hot summer of
1969.
Failing to recognise this and focussing exclusively on students
means, for example, that Fraser devotes only part of one paragraph to
a description of only one of the ghetto uprisings, and that by a
black student at Columbia who was not directly involved. However more
is at stake here than just balance and comprehensiveness of coverage.
Fraser’s student exclusivity is a concession to the view
(epitomised by Caute who produces the blatant fabrication that ‘only
black America provided a revolt by those who were exploited as well
as alienated’ [Sixty-Eight, p. vii]) that
sixty-eight was primarily a revolt of the privileged. If sixty-eight
was a purely student affair then its significance as a challenge to
capitalist power is enormously diminished. The whole demon of
revolution is neatly exorcised for it is self- evident that students
by themselves cannot make the revolution.
Taking students as the starting point also makes it impossible to
produce a coherent explanation as to why this international
revolt took place. In so far as Fraser attempts to tackle this
question, it is via the biographical experiences of his informants,
but here the oral history method lets him down. Accounts of
individual experience, skilfully selected and juxtaposed as they are
here, can be very effective at describing what happened, but
cannot themselves explain why it happened. This is a task
which requires Marxist analysis but Fraser does not provide it.
A book which does is Chris Harman’s The Fire Last Time:
1968 and After. The enormous superiority of this work over the
others reviewed here – and really it is in a different class –
derives first and foremost from the fact that Harman is alone in
approaching the subject armed with the Marxist method, i.e. a method
which makes its point of departure the development of the forces of
production and the effect of this development on the relations of
production and the class struggle and then goes on to consider the
impact of and response to these changes at the level of the
superstructure (politics, ideology, etc.).
Harman has produced a tour de force: much more than just an
account of 1968, it is an overall guide to the class struggle in
Europe and America from the late sixties through to the mid-seventies
set firmly against the background of the development of world
capitalism since the Second World War.
In seeking to convey the quality of The Fire Last Time, I
find myself searching rather desperately for relevant comparisons.
It cannot be compared with even the best works of Marxist academic
history (Hill, Thompson, de Ste Croix, etc.) which take a period in
the distant past and study it in enormous detail, for, while it is
not scholarly in that sense, it operates on a far wider scale and, in
dealing with virtually contemporary history, it tackles problems that
are both more difficult and more pressing. What do spring to mind are
some of the classics of the Marxist tradition: Luxemburg’s The
Mass Strike, Trotsky’s 1905, even Marx’s
Eighteenth Brumaire. I have no wish either to flatter Chris or
to embarrass him, so I should say promptly that he does not have
Marx’s genius for expressing the profoundest theoretical
insight in a brilliant epigram, or Luxemburg’s magnificent
revolutionary élan or Trotsky’s extraordinary confidence
and dialectical sharpness so the comparison doesn’t really
stand. That it should even arise is praise enough. Certainly it is a
model of Marxist historical writing and particularly striking is the
sure-footed way it moves from country to country, struggle to
struggle, constantly relating the details of a specific episode to
the total picture.
Perhaps the best way of bringing out the politics of Harman’s
book is to show how its treatment of a number of key issues differs
from that of the other three authors. This has the added bonus of
focussing on some of the arguments about the legacy of 1968 that are
likely to arise on the left in this anniversary year.
First the question of what caused the upheaval. As we have seen,
neither Caute nor Ali, nor even Fraser seriously addresses this
question. In so far as they offer an answer it is, essentially, the
Vietnam War. The importance of Vietnam is obvious, especially in
America, and there is no doubt that internationally it was the most
frequently recurring issue, the common thread linking protest
demonstrations in ‘London, Paris, Rome, Berlin’ etc. In
itself, however, the war will not suffice as an explanation, for even
the most vicious and disastrous colonial war (Algeria is another
example) would not have had the effect it did if it had not
intersected with ripening contradictions inside the capitalist
heartlands.
Harman approaches this problem systematically. He begins by
describing the state of the world pre-1968, ‘the long calm’
that accompanied the post-war boom and its ideological reflection in
the theories of such diverse intellectuals as Crosland, Strachey,
Parsons, Bell, Marcuse, Barran and Sweezy. All of these,
notwithstanding their radically different viewpoints, assumed that
western capitalism had solved its basic economic problems and
permanently incorporated the working class. Harman demonstrates that,
while the facts underlying this view were real enough, it was a
profoundly false and one-sided generalisation. On the one hand it was
based solely on the situation of north-west Europe, the American deep
south and Northern Ireland where quite different economic, social and
political conditions prevailed. On the other hand it ignored the way
economic expansion itself bred cumulative changes in the
structure of the world system which were bound, eventually, to call
into question the foundations of political stability. (The Fire
Next Time, p. 5)
Here Harman points first to the contradictions inherent in the
permanent arms economy which permitted the lesser powers (Germany,
Japan, etc.) to take advantage of the boom conditions sustained by
America’s unparalleled arms spending without themselves having
to pay for them and thus enabled them to enjoy rates of growth which
eventually undermined US hegemony. This in turn led the US to attempt
to reassert its dominance in Vietnam.
Secondly Harman notes how the boom produced a massive process of
urbanisation and proletarianisation which gradually reshaped the
whole social structure. This had a particularly dramatic effect in
the more backward sectors of advanced capitalism (southern Europe,
southern USA, Ireland, etc.) where the old attitudes of rural
deference and small farmer conservatism on which the authoritarian
regimes in those sectors had rested were steadily uprooted. In this
way the social foundation was laid for the later rise of
working-class militancy and revolts against Jim Crow racism,
Gaullism, Orangeism and the Mediterranean dictatorships.
Thirdly Harman shows how, as part of the same process, the boom
transformed the position of students, enlarging their numbers and
lowering their status and conditions, with the result that by the
sixties, ‘neither in class origin nor class destination were
students “the children of the bourgeoisie”.’ (The
Fire Last Time, p. 41). Moreover he explains how
The transitional relationship between students and the
different classes of society and their allotted role as transmitters
of the ruling ideology make students especially sensitive to
ideological crisis in the wider society. If that ideology is in
palpable contradiction with reality as they experience it, they are
themselves thrown into intellectual turmoil and can react with moral
indignation. (The Fire Last Time, p. 42)
Thus whereas in Caute, Ali and Fraser sixty-eight appears as an
almost miraculous eruption, a sudden moral revolt against the horror
of Vietnam and the values of ‘consumer society’, Harman
uncovers its material roots, including the material roots of the
moral revolt. Whereas in Caute, Ali and Fraser the student rebellion
is seen as essentially separate in origin and course from the
struggles of the working class, Harman is able to treat both student
and worker militancy as responses to the changes undergone by
international capitalism and thus trace the underlying connections
between the movements of sixty-eight and the great period of
working-class struggle that followed in Britain, Italy, Spain, Greece
and Portugal.
The question of causation leads on directly to a second key issue
– that of revolutionary continuity. A widespread view, echoed
more or less in the three other books, is of a sixties ‘mood’
unconnected with revolutionary movements in the past and now
definitely over, never to return. This, indeed, was how it seemed
(and seems) to the majority of activists – the proportion of
militants with a political memory or political consciousness
stretching back to earlier revolutionary periods was infinitesimally
small. For Harman, however (and here again we see the superiority of
Marxism over subjective impressionism), ‘1968 is a year of
international revolution no less than 1793, 1830, 1848, 1917 and
1936’ (The Fire Last Time, p. 152). In other words
it is one episode, one high point in an ongoing class struggle that
is inherent in the existence of a class-divided society and that
continues today.
Harman is not, of course, suggesting that nothing has changed. He
traces meticulously how all the movements born in the late sixties
eventually ran into the sand and how in 1974–76 there came ‘a
second turning point’ in which
the structures by which ruling classes maintained their
own internal coherence and ruled the rest of society were repaired –
in the most extreme cases virtually rebuilt. (The Fire Last Time,
p. 339)
He shows how the characteristic form taken by the restabilisation
was a pact between government, big business and the reformist labour
leaderships (the Social Contract, the Pact of Moncloa, the Historic
Compromise) which induced the working class to acquiesce in attacks
on its living standards that would have been fiercely resisted in
earlier years, which in turn paved the way for a new period of calm
and a general swing to the right. But, Harman insists, this new
stabilisation is no more permanent than its predecessor in the
fifties. Indeed it is a lot less firmly based because of the overall
economic crisis of the world system. For this reason the ruling
classes have every reason to fear, and we have every reason to hope
for, ‘another sixty-eight’.
This revolutionary perspective gives Harman’s book a purpose
and coherence completely lacking in the other accounts. It also leads
him to devote considerable attention to an aspect of the struggle
which they treat only in passing and with a certain disdain –
the question of revolutionary organisation. For Caute, Fraser and
even Ali, the various revolutionary groups, organisations and
embryonic parties which arose or played a role in 1968 are just part
of the general kaleidoscope of events. For Harman they represent
various attempts to solve a fundamental problem – the creation
of a revolutionary party of the working class, i.e. the instrument
indispensable to any ultimate victory, whose absence made a crucial
difference on a number of occasions in these years (May ’68 in
France, Portugal 1975 for example). He therefore takes the groups’
ideas and activity seriously and the result is a fascinating account
of the development and trials of the revolutionary left.
What particularly distinguishes this account is that it avoids
getting bogged down in sectarian minutiae. Harman’s focus is
always on the relationship between theory and practice, on how the
ideas of the revolutionaries assist or hinder them giving a lead to
the various spontaneous movements when they arise, and on their
capacity to keep revolutionary activity on course in periods when it
is necessary to swim against the tide. In this way the story of the
revolutionary left is integrated into the analysis of the class
struggle as a whole.
The revolutionary groups of 1968 and after suffered from many
defects, most obviously smallness, inexperience and isolation from
the working class. This, however, was more or less unavoidable given
the nature of the immediately preceding period. More serious in the
long run, Harman shows, was their confused politics. Arising in a
period when the classical Marxist tradition had been all but
obliterated, they by and large turned for their ideas to a mixture of
theories adopted and adapted from third world nationalism –
Fanon, Guevarism and Maoism. Even some of the Trotskyist groups were
similarly infected (as Tariq’s book reveals).
When the struggle was advancing, these ideas tended to fill the
revolutionaries’ heads with dreams of instant revolution (‘The
duty of a revolutionary is to make the revolution’ said
Guevara) which diverted them from the crucial task of gaining a base
in the working class. When these expectations were shattered on the
rocks of reality and it became necessary to retreat, such ideas
offered no basis for coming to terms with the new situation and led
in the main to collapse and disillusionment.
This, of course, is a generalisation. Italy is the extreme case
where the largest revolutionary left in Europe destroyed itself in
the space of a couple of years; Britain, where the influence of
Maoism was minimal and where the SWP was able to maintain itself
during the downturn, is something of an exception. Nevertheless it
has not been a question of returning to square one. Just as
capitalism has not been able to restore the secure economic and
political conditions of the fifties, so revolutionary socialist ideas
are nothing like as marginalised as they were in the fifty years that
preceded 1968.
Which brings me to a final crucial difference between The Fire
Last Time and the other books: the audience they are written for.
Caute’s book, as far as one can judge, is aimed at ‘the
general public’ with only a passing interest in 1968; Tariq’s
and Fraser’s (despite its great merits) cater primarily for the
left nostalgia market referred to at the beginning of the article;
only Harman has written a book for the revolutionaries of today, that
is a book which reviews the past in order to look to the future and
which will serve as a real guide to action.
In so doing he has provided a unique analysis of a period of
international history rich in lessons for present and forthcoming
battles. It also contains many specific analyses – of the
British upturn, of the Portuguese revolution, of the end of the
Franco regime and so on – which could not be properly discussed
in this review but which are of great value and interest in
themselves. It should be bought and read by every reader of this
journal.
 



This year marks the centenary of the painting of Les
Demoiselles d’Avignon by Pablo Picasso. There cannot be many
paintings whose anniversary would occasion an analysis in a journal
of socialist theory – an honour usually reserved for revolutions
and other great events in the history of the class struggle –
nevertheless Les Demoiselles certainly repays serious
consideration. Aside from its individual stature as one of the
outstanding paintings of the 20th century, there is its enormous
importance as a turning point in the history of art and, indeed,
wider cultural history, and also its powerful resonance today.








Click here for larger version



Les Demoiselles d’avignon is an oil painting on canvas
begun by Picasso in late 1906 and completed in the summer of 1907. It
is eight feet tall, seven feet eight inches wide, and has hung since
1937 in the Museum of Modern Art in New York. The painting depicts
five nude women, clearly prostitutes in a brothel. Of the three women
on the left, the leftmost is shown side on, apparently drawing back a
curtain to reveal the others, and the second and third are shown
frontally, staring straight out of the canvass. The depiction of all
three women, especially the head of the furthest left, is influenced
by Ancient Iberian (pre-historic “Spanish”) sculpture that
Picasso had seen the previous year in the Louvre. The two women on
the right, one standing slightly in the background between curtains,
the other squatting in the foreground, have been given heads that
resemble the African sculptures or masks that the artist is known to
have seen in the Musée d’Ethnographie du Trocadéro. The bodies of
all the women are rendered by means of flat, angular planes of colour
with little shading or modelling. Jutting out at the centre of the
bottom of the painting is a bowl of fruit – a melon, grapes, pear
and apple. The painting received its title not from Picasso but from
his friend André Salmon in 1916, and it is either, depending on
interpretation, euphemistic or ironic for it refers to a brothel or
brothels on the Carrer d’Avinyo in Barcelona, of which Picasso
evidently had personal experience.
So much for the basic facts. By far the most frequent comment on
Les Demoiselles, in both journalism and art history, is that
it marks “the birth of modern art”. [1]
Let us first consider the justification for, and truth of, this bold claim.
 
Les Demoiselles and modern art
The simplest, most widespread, distinction between “traditional
art” (by which is meant European art from about 1300 onwards) and
“modern art” is that the former was engaged, at a minimum (it did
other, more important, things as well) in the attempt to imitate the
appearance of people, objects and scenes in the real world, whereas
the latter is not. Traditional art is commonly portrayed as
representational, naturalistic or “realistic” [2],
whereas modern art either wilfully distorts physical appearances or,
in abstract art, abandons them altogether. There are numerous
problems with this crude distinction, not least the difficulty
involved in regarding paintings of Madonnas, angels and Venuses as
“realistic”, but there is also clearly some truth in it. At least
the faces of the Madonnas, the tunics of the angels and the breasts
of the Venuses looked like observable faces, tunics and breasts. And
while some “traditional” artists (Hans Holbein, John Constable,
Gustave Courbet) are more mimetic (imitative) than others (Sandro
Botticelli, Hieronymus Bosch, El Greco) and some “moderns” (Paul
Klee, Wassily Kandinsky) more expressionist or abstract than others
(Amedeo Modigliani, Pierre Bonnard), one has only to compare a
representative list of traditionals with a similar list of moderns to
get the point – on the one hand Van Eyck, Piero della Francesca,
Titian, Rembrandt, Diego Velázquez, Thomas Gainsborough, Francisco
Goya, Edouard Manet and Vincent van Gogh who, despite the immense
differences between them, were all engaged in producing recognisable
images of persons and things; on the other hand Georges Braque,
Kandinsky, Kazimir Malevich, Piet Mondrian, Max Ernst, Joan Miró,
Jackson Pollock, and Mark Rothko who, despite their differences, were not.
The tipping point between the two – the clearest, most decisive
assault on the past, the key breakthrough to the new – is indeed
Les Demoiselles d’Avignon. Before Les Demoiselles
even Picasso’s own work, his blue and rose periods, was clearly a
continuation of the mimetic tradition, closer in many ways to
Rembrandt, Goya, Manet and Van Gogh than to his work of one, two or
three years later. Les Demoiselles opens the floodgates,
first to cubism and then in rapid succession to futurism, synthetic
cubism, expressionism, vorticism, abstraction, suprematism, dadaism
and more besides. Within just ten years artists were producing works,
such as Malevich’s Black Square on White and Duchamp’s
ready-mades, which would not previously have been regarded as art at
all (and were not so regarded by the majority at the time), but which
have subsequently achieved, at least within the art world, classic
and iconic status. Les Demoiselles is a veritable revolution
in paint – the art equivalent of the French Revolution, indeed of
the Storming of the Bastille.
Another characteristic of traditional art, very closely bound up
with its naturalism, was the high level of craft skills it involved
and demanded. These skills, developed particularly in the 16th and
17th century, lay especially in the precise rendering of surfaces:
lace, satin, velvet, sable, glass, silver, feathers, flesh tones, the
folds in drapery or robes and so on. [3]
This is reflected in the way people commonly talk about art – ”Look
at the detail!” or, “It makes you feel as if you can touch it”
– and for many it was these skills that served as the surest
guarantee of artistic quality, of the status of traditional paintings
as “real” or “great” art. In retrospect it can be seen that
the premium on these skills was waning from Claude Monet and
impressionism onwards, but it was Les Demoiselles that was
the decisive break. In 1907 it would have looked like not just a move
away from the traditional skills, but a full-scale assault on them.
This was the beginning of art which would provoke the outraged cry,
“My four year old can do better than that!”
For centuries, roughly from the Renaissance to the 19th century,
“beauty” was a, perhaps the, dominant concept in aesthetic
theory, the value, together with the closely related “harmonious
form”, to which it was held that art should aspire. Of course there
was always art which could not reasonably be described as beautiful,
for example the dark fantasies of Bosch or William Hogarth’s
satirical series (Marriage á la Mode, The Rake’s
Progress, etc), but such work was generally deemed of a lower
order than that of artists such as Sandro Botticelli, Leonardo da
Vinci and, especially, Raphael, where beauty and harmonious form were
more clearly in evidence. The philosophers Edmund Burke and Immanuel
Kant supplemented “beauty” with the concept of “the sublime”
to accommodate works, such as Michelangelo’s Last Judgment,
which, if not beautiful, were manifestly awe inspiring. Above all,
the concept of beauty ruled the genre of the female nude, where it
had the added advantage of masking or providing an alibi for the
issue of sexual desirability and lust. In the tradition of nude
painting that stretches through Botticelli, Giorgione, Titian,
Rubens, Velázquez, Goya, Ingres and Renoir the aim of the artists
was always to present their female subjects as beautiful. (Rembrandt
is, I think, the only significant exception prior to the 19th
century.) Clear inroads into this tradition were made by Manet’s
Olympia, Paul Cézanne’s Bathers series, and
Toulouse Lautrec’s brothel scenes, but again it is with Les
Demoiselles that the sharpest confrontation takes place. Picasso
not only does not attempt to make the women “beautiful” but, by
the use of the African masks, positively insists on their ugliness
(by the conventional standards of the day).
The enormously disturbing newness of Les Demoiselles is
confirmed by the reaction, not of the public or the critics, but of
Picasso’s – avant_garde artist friends when they first saw it in
his studio. Both Henri Matisse and Georges Braque were at first
repelled by it. Braque suggested that Picasso had been “drinking
turpentine and spitting fire” [4],
while André Derain is alleged to have claimed that “some day
Picasso would hang himself behind his canvas”. [5]
 
Les Demoiselles and theories of modernism
There have been, of course, a number of more rounded and
theoretically sophisticated accounts of the emergence of modern art
than the simple distinctions discussed so far. Probably the most
influential, at least within the art world, is that of the American
art critic Clement Greenberg. Greenberg established himself by being
the principal champion of abstract expressionism, and for 20 years or
so (roughly the mid-1940s to the mid-1960s) was the leading art
critic in America and, therefore, the world. His status in art
criticism approximated to that of John Maynard Keynes in economics or
F.R. Leavis in literature. Greenberg began in the late 1930s as at
least a semi-Marxist in the Trotskyist influenced milieu around
Partisan Review, but during and after the Second World War
moved, like so many, towards a mainstream or right wing liberalism
and in the process became a rigorous formalist in matters of art
criticism and history, rejecting, more or less absolutely, any
discussion of the content or social context of artworks.
For Greenberg, modernism was more than art and literature: it
included “almost the whole of what is truly alive in our culture”
[6], and its essence lay “in the use of
the characteristic methods of a discipline to criticise the
discipline itself – not in order to subvert it, but to entrench it
more firmly in its area of competence”. [7]
Each art form had to demonstrate in practice that the kind of
experience it provided was not to be obtained from any other
activity. This meant each art form systematically shedding all
conventions not essential to its survival as art, and focusing with
increasing intensity on its unique and defining characteristics. In
the case of painting this was the making of marks on a
two-dimensional surface:
The limitations that constitute the medium of painting –
the flat surface, the shape of the support, the properties of pigment
– were treated by the Old Masters as negative factors that could be
acknowledged only implicitly or indirectly. Modernist painting has
come to regard these same limitations as positive factors that are to
be acknowledged openly. Manet’s paintings became the first
modernist ones by virtue of the frankness with which they declared
the surfaces on which they were painted ... It was the stressing,
however, of the ineluctable flatness of the support that remained
most fundamental in the processes by which pictorial art criticised
and defined itself under modernism. Flatness alone was unique and
exclusive to that art ... and so modernist painting oriented itself
to flatness as it did to nothing else. [8]
Greenberg’s account cannot be accepted as adequate or
satisfactory. First, it treats the development of art as almost
completely (and quite implausibly) autonomous from society, history
and politics (except in the very last analysis of the existence of
“modern” society). Second, it operates by the sleight of hand of
simply excluding from the canon of modernism all painting not
participating in the project of flatness (for example surrealism,
Diego Rivera and the Mexican muralists or Francis Bacon).
Nevertheless, the history of European art from about 1850 to 1950
shows that Greenberg has identified a real and important tendency.
From Manet, through impressionism, Gauguin, Cézanne, cubism,
Kandinsky and Mondrian, to Pollock and abstract expressionism, one
can clearly see the compression of the three-dimensional picture
space, which had been opened up in the 14th and 15th centuries. [9]
It is like watching a stage in which the backdrop moves ever closer
to the apron until it has squeezed out, in Greenberg’s words, “the
kind of space that recognisable three-dimensional objects can
inhabit”. [10]
There is no single painting that so clearly illustrates and
exemplifies Greenberg’s argument as Les Demoiselles: the
stripping away of inessential conventions, the replacement of
sculptural modelling by flat planes, the extreme compression of space
between background and foreground – all these undergo a qualitative
intensification in this work.
If, however, we turn to more Marxist theorisations of modern art
Les Demoiselles retains its pivotal role. John Berger does
not fully discuss modernism as such, but he clearly regards cubism as
the crucial modern movement and the revolutionary art of the 20th
century. [11] For Berger, cubism
synthesises the materialism of Gustave Courbet and the dialectics of
Cézanne, and is a response to the scientific and technical
breakthroughs of the period (Max Planck, Albert Einstein,
electricity, the Eiffel Tower, the aeroplane, etc) and the positive
economic promise of monopoly capitalism (the possibility of a world
of material plenty and equality) before it was dashed by war and
fascism. But for Berger it was by painting Les Demoiselles
that “Picasso provoked cubism. It was the spontaneous and ...
primitive insurrection out of which, for good historical reasons, the
revolution of cubism developed.” [12]
Perry Anderson’s account of modernism in his article Modernity
and Revolution has a similar point of departure to Berger, but is
more systematic and is applied to the culture as a whole, not just
painting:
In my view, “modernism” can best be understood as a
cultural field triangulated by three decisive coordinates. The first
... was the codification of a highly formalised academicism in the
visual and other arts, which itself was institutionalised within
official regimes of states and society still massively pervaded,
often dominated, by aristocratic or landowning classes ... The second
coordinate is ... the still incipient, hence essentially novel,
emergence within these societies of the key technologies or
inventions of the second industrial revolution: telephone, radio,
automobile, aircraft and so on ... The third coordinate ... was the
imaginative proximity of social revolution. [13]
Les Demoiselles fits neatly into this schema. French art
remained dominated by the aristocratic Academy with its annual salons
more or less until the end of the 19th century, and Manet, the
impressionists, and the post-impressionists (Seurat, Cézanne,
Gauguin, Van Gogh) were all met with derision. The automobile is
developed, essentially, in the 1890s in Germany and France, and the
first mass production is undertaken in the US in 1902. The Wright
Brothers made the first powered flights in December 1903 and in
September 1906 Santos Dumont made a public flight in Paris. Guglielmo
Marconi established the world’s first radio station in 1897 on the
Isle of Wight, and opened the first wireless factory in Chelmsford in
1898. Above all the attention of Europe was captured by the 1905
Revolution in Russia. Moreover, if we examine the chronology of the
landmarks of the modernist revolution in the other art forms we find
that Les Demoiselles, almost invariably, precedes them: in
music, Igor Stravinsky’s Firebird was composed in 1910,
and The Rite of Spring between 1912 and 1913, while the
Ballets Russes was formed 1909 and first performed L’Après-midi
d’un Faune in 1912; in literature Marcel Proust’s A la
Recherche du Temps Perdu was begun in 1909, James Joyce’s
Dubliners appeared in 1914, Franz Kafka’s In the Penal
Colony in 1914 and his Metamorphosis in 1915.
Even from the standpoint of Georg Lukács, the principal Marxist
opponent of modernism, I think it would be fair to say that Les
Demoiselles exemplifies many of the tendencies –
fragmentation, absence of perspective, abandonment of totality –
which he held against modernism.
Of course one can push this too far. From a wider perspective,
such as that of Marshall Berman in his powerful work, All That is
Solid Melts into Air, “modernism” is a cultural response to
the whole experience of “modernity”, ie modern capitalism, not
the product of any individual work or artist – and this is surely
right. Modern art and modernism would have happened in some form
regardless of whether Les Demoiselles had been painted.
Indeed in this wider view modernism long pre-dates Picasso,
stretching back, perhaps, to Kant and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe or
in painting to David and Goya, or Théodore Géricault and Courbet.
Perhaps what we really need is the idea of two modernisms: one
encompassing the progressive culture of the whole epoch inaugurated
by the French and industrial revolutions and still continuing today;
the other deriving from the specific conjuncture analysed by Anderson
and Berger and lasting until the Second World War, which perhaps
could be called High Modernism (on the model of the High Renaissance
or High Stalinism). This would have the advantage of combining
Berger’s broad dynamic vision with Anderson’s rigour, without the
latter’s numbing pessimism and the door it opens to postmodernism. [14]
Nevertheless this broad view does not negate the role played by
Les Demoiselles at a crucial historical moment, or its
exceptional influence on the tempo and form of modernism’s
development. Just as the knowledge that Lenin did not cause or create
the Russian Revolution does not exclude the fact that his part in it
was greater that of any other single individual, so understanding the
wider historical determination of modernism is perfectly compatible
with recognising the exceptional role of this particular work.
 
The Power of Les Demoiselles
I have so far discussed the impact of Les Demoiselles on
the development of modern art in purely formal terms, and that was
indeed the nature of its influence – it produced a flood of cubist
paintings of men with guitars and cafe tables, not a flood of
paintings of prostitutes. Nevertheless it would not and could not
have had this massive formal influence if it had not been such an
exceptionally powerful painting in its own right, that is if its
formal innovations had not been seen by other artists (especially
Braque) to work in practice. And the moment we consider or analyse
the power of Les Demoiselles as an individual painting we
have to deal with its subject matter, and see its formal qualities as
a way of treating that subject matter. In other words we must view
the painting as a totality, a particular fusion or unity of form and content.
This brings us to the simple and inescapable fact that Les
Demoiselles is a picture of five prostitutes and is about
prostitution. However, it is striking how many art historical and
journalistic accounts do try to escape this fact or, at least, to
avoid any serious discussion of it. Guardian art critic
Jonathan Jones argues, “Most of all, this is a painting about
looking ... it’s misguided to see [it] as a painting ‘about’
brothels, prostitutes or colonialism.” [15]
This is evasion. Yes, it is about looking, but precisely about
looking at, and being looked at by, prostitutes. Everything in the
picture’s composition reinforces this. Many paintings position us
when we look at them – Titian’s Venus d’Urbino makes
us the courtesan/Venus’s lover or patron, Manet’s A Bar at
the Folies Bergères makes us a customer ordering a drink –
but Les Demoiselles fixes us more definitively than any work
I can think of: as the client of the brothel for whom the women are
displaying themselves. The phallic bowl of fruit jutting upwards in
the centre foreground becomes our phallus leading us into the brothel
and towards the women. Thus the painting stages an “in our face”
confrontation with the institution of prostitution.
But if Les Demoiselles is “about” prostitution, what
exactly is it saying about prostitution?
There is, in the literature, a biographical story which purports
to answer this question and thus to “explain” the meaning of the
painting. Picasso had a friend who died of syphilis, having been
infected by a prostitute, and, according to these accounts, Les
Demoiselles is an expression of the fear and anger felt by
Picasso as a result. But, regardless of the truth or otherwise of
this story, it does not account, or accounts only very partially, for
the nature and power of the finished work, which is making a more
general statement. [16]
According to John Berger that general statement is “a raging,
frontal attack, not against sexual ‘immorality’, but against life
as Picasso found it – the waste, the disease, the ugliness, and the
ruthlessness of it ... instead of criticising modern life by
comparing it, as much in sorrow as in anger, with a more primitive
way of life, he now uses his sense of the primitive to violate and
shock the civilised ... He is not in the least concerned with formal
problems. He is concerned with challenging civilisation. The
dislocations in this picture are the result of aggression, not
aesthetics.” [17]
But, if the syphilis story is too narrow, Berger’s “rage
against civilisation” is too broad. He is right about the element
of rage in the painting, but insufficiently precise in identifying
its target, again evading the issue of prostitution. Partly, I think,
Berger is led astray by following the conventional view of the
African heads on the women on the right as aggressive. My own view is
that they are not intrinsically either frightening or savage and that
they are present in the painting for two reasons: first because in
African art, art from a pre-capitalist society, Picasso had found an
important source for a new, non-naturalistic way of representing the
world; second, in terms of the content of the painting, they occur
precisely as masks, as blocking mechanisms behind which the real
features of the women are concealed. [18]
A number of feminist art historians have seen the rage as directed
primarily against women as such, and have viewed Les Demoiselles
as a highly misogynistic painting. One of the most forceful of these,
Carol Duncan, argues that the emergence of modern art coincided with
women starting to claim equality (she cites the suffragist movement)
and that a great deal of modern art expressed a defensive male sexist
reaction to this:
Indeed, as women’s claims to full humanity grew, the
more relentlessly would art rationalise their inferior status ... In
fact, the defence of male supremacy must be recognised as a central
theme in modern art. Gauguin, Munch, Rodin, Matisse, Picasso and
scores of other artists, consciously or unconsciously, identified
some aspect of the sexist cause with all or part of their own
artistic missions. Art celebrating sexist experience was accorded the
greatest prestige, given the most pretentious aesthetic rationales,
and identified with the highest and deepest of human aspirations.
Nudes and whores – women with no identity beyond their existence as
sex objects – were made to embody transcendent, “universally”
significant statements ... the image of the whore even came to stand
for woman in her purest, most concentrated form. [19]
For Duncan Les Demoiselles is the epitome of this sexist trend:
What is so remarkable about this work is the way it
manifests the structural foundation underlying both the femme fatale
and the new primitive woman. Picasso ... dredged up from his psyche
the terrifying and fascinating beast that gave birth to both of them.
The Desmoiselles prismatically mirrors her many opposing
faces: whore and deity, decadent and savage, tempting and repelling,
awesome and obscene, looming and crouching, masked and naked,
threatening and powerless. In that jungle-brothel is womankind in all
her present and past metamorphoses, concealing and revealing herself
before the male ... Picasso presents her in the form of a desecrated
icon already slashed and torn to bits ... no other work reveals more
of the rock foundation of sexist anti_humanism or goes further and
deeper to justify and celebrate the domination of woman by man. [20]
Duncan’s comments on modern art in general have some truth in
them, certainly more than is usually recognised in conventional art
history. It is also true that Picasso’s life, and some of his art,
provides evidence of sexist attitudes. It is even the case that there
is anger, misogynistic anger, in Picasso’s depiction of the Avignon
prostitutes. Nevertheless, I believe Duncan’s judgment of Les
Demoiselles is fundamentally mistaken and this brings us to
heart of what the painting is about and the nature and cause of its power.
The central feature of Les Demoiselles is the
confrontation between the artist/brothel client/viewer – at this
moment they are one and the same – and the gaze of the central
women (second and third from the left). Yes, he and we enter the
brothel and look at the prostitutes with anger, but this look, and
this anger, is returned in spades (if I may use the card playing
metaphor) in the implacable gaze of the prostitutes, which functions
as both an expression of their situation and feelings, and as a
mirror reflecting back his/ours. Thus Les Demoiselles, far
from being crudely sexist or simply misogynistic, is a uniquely
intense and dramatic depiction of the mutual antagonism, estrangement
and alienation involved in the institution of prostitution.
Bourgeois society oscillates between two attitudes to
prostitution: on the one hand moral condemnation and legal
persecution of the prostitute (largely the department of the church,
the police and the courts); on the other hand, sometimes sentimental,
sometimes risqué, glamorisation, largely the province of the
arts. In the latter, Hollywood has played its part but so has “high
art” (Titian’s Venus d’Urbino, Boucher’s and
Ingres’s Odalisques). In both cases what is evaded is the
economic deprivation and emotional trauma which lead women into
prostitution, and the sexual deprivation and emotional alienation
which lead men to prostitutes.
Once this is grasped it also becomes evident that the formal
innovations, which had such an impact on the course of art, all
contribute to the intensity of the dramatic confrontation that is Les
Demoiselles. Picasso needed the radical break with traditional
forms of naturalistic representation, needed the assault on
conventional standards of beauty, needed the African masks, to smash
and eliminate any traces of sentimentality and glamorisation. Above
all Picasso needed the flattening, the extreme foreshortening of
space in the painting, to thrust the women into our faces, to stage
this eyeball to eyeball confrontation between us and them, client and
prostitute, and to cut through the ingrained habit of evasion of the
reality of prostitution. And it is precisely the success of Les
Demoiselles in achieving this that makes it so genuinely
shocking, not just to Braque and Matisse a hundred years ago, but to
us today, when its formal qualities have long become familiar. To
look at Les Demoiselles is still to receive the visual
equivalent of a sharp slap across the face.
The issue of prostitution is still very much with us, and in all
its forms from the concentrated hatred of the Ipswich murders, and
the extreme exploitation and alienation of the virtual slave trade in
women from Eastern Europe and elsewhere, to the milder, but
insidious, relegitimisation of sexism through lap dancing, lads’
mags and raunch culture.
Moreover, there is more involved and more at stake here than just
the critique of one particular social institution. Bourgeois
society’s mystification of prostitution and evasion of its
realities (replicated in the art critics’ evasion of the real
content of Les Demoiselles) is habitual not just because of
the hypocrisy of so many bourgeois politicians, priests and
moralists, preaching “family values” in public while privately
behaving quite otherwise, but because what the commodification of sex
does to the human relations between the people involved is
symptomatic of what alienation and commodification (i.e. capitalism)
do to human relations as a whole. Marx explained this with great clarity:
Prostitution is only a specific expression of
the general prostitution of the labourer, and since
it is a relationship in which not the prostitute alone, but also the
one who prostitutes, fall – and the latter’s abomination is still
greater – the capitalist, etc., also comes under this head. [21]
Of course, it is not my argument that Picasso was intellectually
conscious of all of this. We do not, and cannot, know exactly what
passed through his mind as he worked on Les Demoiselles, and
paintings are rarely visual illustrations of intellectual theses. My
guess would be that Picasso worked part consciously, part
intuitively, and was concerned more with the representation of
feelings than of thought out ideas. But this is not really the point.
What we have to work with and respond to is the painting itself, and
this confronts us with the fact – surely a significant one – that
the picture which revolutionised art was a hugely powerful statement
of rage at the commodification of sex and life.

Notes
1. See for example, Wullschlager,
2007, or Jones, 2007.
2. I am using “realistic” here in
the way it is used in everyday language, the media and mainstream art
history, which basically accepts the method of representing the world
-developed in the Renaissance as true realism, and not in the
specific Marxist sense developed by Frederick Engels, Georg Lukács
and others. Lukács distinguished between “naturalism”, the more
or less accurate depiction of surface appearances, and “realism”,
which penetrated surface appearances to reveal the real driving
forces in society. Lukács developed this distinction in relation to
literature, so that for him Honoré de Balzac was a great realist,
whereas émile Zola was merely a naturalist, and “the central
aesthetic problem of realism is the adequate presentation of the
complete human personality” (Lukács, 1948). It can perhaps be
applied to some “traditional” (i.e. European 1300–1900) visual
art, so that Rembrandt’s “realism” could be contrasted to the
“naturalism” of Van Dyke or numerous hack portraitists. But it is
very difficult to see how it can cope with post-1900 art, with its
divergent phenomena such as geometric and expressionist abstraction,
dadaism, Marcel Duchamp and the “ready-made” tradition, pop art,
conceptual art, installation art, performance art, etc. And it cannot
be used to understand the difference between “traditional” art
and “modern” art which is what I am concerned with here.
3. John Berger supplied the historical
materialist explanation for this, linking it to the rise of
capitalism and its fixation on property and commodities. See Berger, 1972a.
4. Hughes, 1991, p. 24.
5. Warncke, 1997, p165. There is a
significant difference between this and the outrage that greeted
Manet and the impressionists in that the latter came from the public
and the press, whereas this came from the artists in Picasso’s
immediate circle and resulted in the public not seeing the painting
for nearly ten years.
6. Greenberg, 1993, p. 754.
7. Greenberg, 1993, p. 755.
8. Greenberg, 1993, pp. 755-756.
Neil Davidson has suggested that the position of the younger
Greenberg in his essay Avant-Garde and Kitsch is in some ways
superior to the position cited here. I think that this is true, but
space does not permit an account of the development of his views.
Justice for Greenberg will have to wait.
9. What John Berger called “not so
much a window on the world as a safe in the wall”.
10. Greenberg, 1993, p. 756.
11. See Berger, 1972b, and Berger, 1965.
12. Berger, 1965, p. 75.
13. Anderson, 1984.
14. Obviously such a periodisation
requires a sustained argument of a depth and length that cannot be
presented here.
15. Jones, 2007.
16. The story relates better to some
of the numerous preliminary studies for Les Demoiselles, which
feature two male figures – a sailor, and a student carrying a
skull, a possible “wages of sin” memento mori.
17. Berger, 1965, p72.
18. On the first point, see
Molyneux, 2006.
19. Duncan, 1993, pp. 112–113.
20. Duncan, 1993, pp. 96–97.
21. Marx, 1967, p. 93, Marx’s emphasis.


References
Anderson, Perry, 1984, Modernity and Revolution, in New
Left Review 144 (March–April 1984).
Berger, John, 1965, The Success and Failure of Picasso (Harmondsworth).
Berger, John, 1972a, Ways of Seeing (Penguin).
Berger, John, 1972b, The Moment of Cubism, in Selected
Essays and Articles: the Look of Things (Harmondsworth).
Duncan, Carol, 1993, The Aesthetics of Power (Cambridge University).
Greenberg, Clement, 1993, Modernist Painting, in Charles Harrison and Paul Wood (eds.), Art in Theory 1900–1990 (Blackwell).
Jones, Jonathan, 2007, Pablo’s Punks, The Guardian, 9 January 2007.
Lukács, Georg, 1948, Preface to Studies in European Realism.
Marx, Karl, 1967, Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 (Progress).
Hughes, Robert, 1991, The Shock of the New (Thames and Hudson).
Molyneux, John, 2006, Picasso, Modernism and the Non-European,
Socialist Worker, 22 April 2006.
Warncke, Carsten-Peter, 1997, Picasso (Taschen).
Wullschlager, Jackie, 2007, The Day Modern Art Was Invented:
Picasso’s Demoiselles, The Financial Times, 4 January 2007.
 

o Picasso: Les Demoiselles d'Avignon (1907)




John Molyneux Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Pablo Picasso
Les Demoiselles d’Avignon
(1907)







 



Art reflects society. This statement, which is based on a core proposition of historical materialism, is fundamentally true – all art has its roots in developing human social relations – but it is also a condensation of a very complex interaction. This is because the social relations that art reflects are antagonistic relations of exploitation, oppression and resistance. So we should also remember Brecht’s words that ‘Art is not a mirror to reflect reality, but a hammer with which to shape it’. In Europe in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance art ‘reflected’ society in that a huge amount of it was commissioned by the church and religious subject matter was predominant. But this didn’t stop Michelangelo, for example, using an ostensibly religious subject, such as David, to express both revolt of the people of Florence against rule by the Medici bankers and homoeroticism. Rembrandt ‘reflected’ the early bourgeois society of the 17th century Dutch Republic by painting numerous portraits of Dutch burghers but also drew attention to, and showed his sympathy with, the outcasts of that society in his etchings of beggars. Constable ‘reflected’ the industrial revolution sweeping Britain at the time not by painting factories but by painting the English landscape as a rural idyll, much as Wordsworth and Coleridge took off to the Lake District. William Morris expressed his hatred for late Victorian capitalism by celebrating the visual culture medieval Europe.
A very large amount of art, in many different countries, reflected the cataclysm of the First World War but it did so in a wide variety of ways.
But first we should see this in historical perspective. War has been an important theme in art since war became a central feature of human society – with the division of society into classes and the development of the state. Thus in the art of Pharaonic Egypt, we find depictions of Ramses II in his war chariot; in Ancient Greece, numerous representations of the Trojan wars in sculptures and on vases; in medieval Florence, Paulo Ucello gives us The Battle of San Romano, which also pioneers the development of single point perspective. 17th century Dutch art features a whole school of maritime paintings which specializes in naval battles (reflecting the major role played by sea power in the Dutch Revolt and in the establishment of the Dutch Republic with its empire stretching from New Amsterdam to Batavia).
The overwhelming majority of all these art works, whether they are masterpieces or mediocre, do not just depict war, they celebrate it. ‘The ruling ideas in society are the ideas of the ruling class’, says Marx, ‘The class which has the means of material production at its disposal, has control at the same time over the means of mental production’, and this applies even more strongly to painting and sculpture than to poetry and literature, because of its dependence on commissions, on wall space in palaces, churches and public buildings and its embodiment in very expensive physical materials (e.g. marble and bronze). Consequently, from the Parthenon marbles depiction of the Battle of the Centaurs and the Chinese Terracotta Army, through Leonardo’s lost Battle of Anghiari, Titian’s portrait of Charles V at the Battle of Marburg, to David’s Oath of the Horatii and Napoleon Crossing the Alps, and Lady Elizabeth Butler’s Scotland Forever!, we find literally innumerable works glorifying war and military leaders. 18th and 19th century British art, in particular, is filled with (generally second rate) paintings recording the progress of Britain’s military exploits and colonial conquests – Woolf at Quebec, Clive of India, Nelson, Wellington, Gordon at Khartoum, the Battle of Omdurman and so on. The only important exception to this pattern is provided by Goya’s extraordinary series of etchings The Disasters of War born out of his direct experience of the Spanish peasants’ resistance to Napoleon’s occupying army. To this day, these brutal works remain the most searing sustained indictment of the inhumanity and horror of war in the history of art. But as I said they were absolutely an exception – until the First World War.
Before we come to how that change occurred we need briefly to review the development of art leading up to the War.
 
Modernism, Futurism and Vorticism
The emergence of modern art dates roughly from the mid-19th century with Courbet and Manet, followed by the Impressionists (Monet, Pissarro, Sisley, etc.), Symbolists (Redon, Moreau, Klimt) and post-impressionists (Seurat, Cezanne, Gauguin, Van Gogh). In the early 20th century this development accelerated and, in artistic terms, radicalized with the swift and overlapping succession of avant-garde movements such as the Viennese Secession, Fauvism, Analytic and Synthetic Cubism, Die Brücke and Der Blaue Reiter (Expressionism), Orphism, Futurism, Rayonism, Vorticism and the beginnings of abstract art with Kandinsky. [1] Artistically it was cubism that was to prove the most profound and most important of these movements [2] but in the years just leading up to the War it was Futurism that held centre stage and made the biggest impact in avant-garde artistic circles across Europe.
Futurism was a poetic and artistic movement founded in Milan in 1909 by the Italian poet, Filippo Marinetti who authored its grandiloquent manifesto. Futurism was a response to the dramatic eruption of modernity – modern industrial capitalism concentrated in Italy’s northern cities – within traditional Italian society. It denounced the past and all its works in favour of the new and the modern, enthusiastically and uncritically celebrating the machine, speed, the automobile and the aeroplane. With great fanfare, Marinetti’s manifesto declares:

We intend to sing the love of danger, the habit of energy and fearlessness.
 
Courage, audacity, and revolt will be essential elements of our poetry.
 
Up to now literature has exalted a pensive immobility, ecstasy, and sleep. We intend to exalt aggressive action, a feverish insomnia, the racer’s stride, the mortal leap, the punch and the slap.
 
We affirm that the world’s magnificence has been enriched by a new beauty: the beauty of speed. A racing car whose hood is adorned with great pipes, like serpents of explosive breath-roaring car that seems to ride on grapeshot is more beautiful than the Victory of Samothrace.
 
We want to hymn the man at the wheel, who hurls the lance of his spirit across the Earth, along the circle of its orbit.
 
The poet must spend himself with ardour, splendour, and generosity, to swell the enthusiastic fervour of the primordial elements.
 
Except in struggle, there is no more beauty. No work without an aggressive character can be a masterpiece. Poetry must be conceived as a violent attack on unknown forces, to reduce and prostrate them before man.
 
We stand on the last promontory of the centuries! Why should we look back, when what we want is to break down the mysterious doors of the Impossible? Time and Space died yesterday. We already live in the absolute, because we have created eternal, omnipresent speed.

Given the historic moment, the extraordinary burst of urbanization combined with electrification and numerous other startling technical innovations and scientific breakthroughs, the appeal of this one-sided intoxication with the machine and speed is not hard to understand. And it managed to inspire some powerful works of art such as Boccioni’s sculpture, Unique Forms of Continuity in Space and Balla’s Abstract Sound + Speed. However, the Manifesto went on to say:

We will glorify war – the world’s only hygiene – militarism, patriotism, the destructive gesture of freedom-bringers, beautiful ideas worth dying for, and scorn for woman.

Here we see revealed the reactionary arrogance, brutality and incipient fascism that lay at the heart of Italian Futurism. [3] In the event, the eagerly anticipated War was to claim the lives of a number of Futurist artists, most notably Umberto Boccioni and the architect Antonio Sant’Elia, and destroy Futurism as an art movement. Marinetti’s militarist bravado could not survive the brutal reality of the war experience, at least not as an inspiration for avant-garde art.
Much the same happened with the British incarnation of Futurism, namely Vorticism. The Vorticist art movement was formed in 1914 by the artist and writer, Wyndham Lewis, in loose association with a number of other artists including David Bomberg, William Roberts, Christopher Nevinson, Henri Gaudier-Bresca, Jacob Epstein and Edward Wadsworth. The aesthetic of Vorticism , as displayed in its magazine BLAST [4] was a combination of cubism and futurism but Lewis’s general world view and attitude to war was similar to that of Marinetti. Nevinson was also strongly influenced by Marinetti and another influence on Vorticism was the poet, Ezra Pound, who gave it its name. Like Marinetti, Pound went on to become a fascist and Mussolini supporter. Vorticism did not survive the war. A number of the artists went to war and some became official war artists but the war changed their attitudes and their art practice. [5]
 
Nevinson, Nash and others
The two most important British war artists were Christopher Nevinson and Paul Nash. Between them they produced some of the most powerful depictions and expressions of the horrific reality of the war.
Nevinson was the son of a war correspondent and a suffragette. He trained as an artist the Slade School of Art. At the start of the war Nevinson joined an ambulance unit where he tended wounded French soldiers and for a while served as a volunteer ambulance driver. In January 1915 ill health forced his return to Britain but he was later made an official war artist and returned for a while to the Western Front.
At first he used a Futurist and Vorticist approach to produce extremely effective representations of soldiering which did not romanticize or glorify war but also stopped short of actually showing the slaughter. Probably the best example of his work at this period was La Mitrailleuse, which his fellow artist, Walter Sickert, called ‘probably the most authoritative and concentrated utterance on the war in the history of painting’. [6]




C.W.R. Nevinson, French Soldiers Resting








C.W.R. Nevinson, La Mitrailleuse



But Nevinson was deeply affected by his work with the wounded, especially a group he found more or less dumped and left to die in a shed outside Dunkirk. The memory of this haunted him and it was some time before he found the strength to depict it. The result when he did was a dark brooding and compassionate painting ironically entitled La Patrie in which no trace of Futurist enthusiasm remains.




C.W.R. Nevinson, La Patrie (1916)



At first when he became an official war artist Nevinson seemed to lose his critical edge, and focused on relatively sanitized images of aerial combat, but when, after a while, he produced tougher images he immediately fell foul of army censorship. In particular they refused to permit him to exhibit his 1917 work Paths of Glory on the grounds that it showed British dead.




C.W.R. Nevinson, Paths of Glory (1917)



Significantly this work was straightforwardly naturalist and showed no trace of Futurist/Vorticist influence.
Paul Nash, whose work is described by Richard Cork as ‘the most impressive made by any British artist during the conflict’ [7] was a very different case from Nevinson. Before the war Nash was a rather anaemic water colourist and landscape painter with no radical or avant-garde tendencies. The experience of the war transformed him and by November 1917 he was writing to his wife:
I am no longer an artist interested and curious, I am a messenger who will bring back word from the men who are fighting to those who want the war to go on for ever. Feeble, inarticulate, will be my message, but it will have a bitter truth, and may it burn their lousy souls. [8]
What Nash did to convey his message, and get round the problem of the censor at the same time, was use landscape in such a way show the full horror of the war without depicting dead soldiers.




Paul Nash, The Wire (1917)








Paul Nash, We Are Making a New World (1918)








Paul Nash, The Menin Road (1919)



No one looking at these pictures of land that has been tormented and tortured can fail to grasp that they are gazing on killing fields of appalling dimensions.
Some of the most haunting images of the war – they are close to unbearable to look at – come from a very unlikely source. Henry Tonks was a surgeon who became Professor of Fine Art at the Slade School of Art where he taught amongst others Augustus John, Gwen John, Wyndham Lewis, Stanley Spencer, David Bomberg, John Nash and William Orpen. When war broke out he resumed his medical career and in 1916 became a lieutenant in the Royal Army Medical Corps. This led him to produce pastel drawings recording facial injury cases.



















Henry Tonks, Faces of Battle (1916)



Here the most straightforward artistic naturalism turns, simply by virtue of the reality it depicts, into a devastating indictment of the war.
Many British artists – William Orpen, John Nash, Stanley Spencer, William Roberts, David Bomberg and others produced war related work – but the dramatic effect of the First World War on British art is, perhaps best summed up by the example John Singer Sargent. Before the war Sargent was one of London’s most successful society portraitists painting pictures like this:











John Singer Sargent (Pre-WW1 Portraits)



Serving as a war artist turned him into the painter of this:




John Singer Sargent, Gassed (1919)




From Franz Marc to George Grosz
The story of art on the other side of no-man’s land is not, of course, the same but it is remarkable similar. In pre-war Germany it was Expressionism rather than Futurism that was artistically dominant but there were a number of links between the two tendencies (particularly via the influence of Kandinsky and Robert Delauney). In addition the powerful influence of the philosophy of Nietzsche ensured that there was no shortage of artists willing to greet the outbreak of war as a great ‘cleansing’ and ‘purification’. [9]
Two examples are August Macke and Franz Marc, founding members in 1911 (along with Kandinsky) of the Expression avant-garde group, Der Blaue Reiter (The Blue Rider). Prior to the war both produced work that was brightly coloured, optimistic even ‘exalted’.




August Macke, Girl with Blue Birds (1914)








Franz Marc, Little Yellow Horses (1912)



In his major study of the period Richard Cork writes of Macke:
Like so many of his contemporaries, he greeted the declaration of war with an initial enthusiasm that led him to anticipate ‘walloping’ the French in August ... (Max) Ernst recalled, ‘Influenced by Futurism, he accepted war not only as the most grandiose manifestation of the modern age but also as a philosophical necessity’. [10]
His close friend, Franz Marc, took a similar view and both signed up to fight. But both were rapidly disillusioned by the reality. Cork continues:
Macke was sent with his Rhineland Regiment to France on 8 August. Whatever Nietzschean illusions he may have harboured about the purgative value of war were quickly destroyed. ‘It is all so ghastly that I don’t want to tell you about it’, he wrote to his wife. [11]
Within two months Macke, after fighting in seven battles, was dead – to the dismay of Marc. Eighteen months later Marc was also killed, at Verdun, but not before he produced a bleak Sketchbook from the Battlefield including The Greedy Mouth which shows the war as a strange devouring monster.




Franz Marc, The Greedy Mouth (1915)



Another example is the expressionist sculptor, Ernst Barlach, for whom it was a ‘holy war’ which he depicted as a charging swordsman of ferocious power.




Ernst Barlach, The Avenger (1914)



Three months participation as an infantry soldier in 1915 (after which he was invalided out) was enough to turn Barlach into a convinced opponent of the War and this so influenced all his subsequent work that he was later denounced by the Nazis as a ‘degenerate’ artist.
Many other German artists went through this transformation. Max Slevogt is a case that parallels John Singer Sargent. Before the war he was a painter of pleasant impressionist landscapes. He became an official war artist and what he saw turned him into an artist who produced searing indictments of the slaughter.




Max Slevogt, The Country House in Godramstein (1912)








Max Slevogt, Paroxysm of Destruction (Spectres fight with Their Own Severed Limbs) (1916)



Otto Dix was an enthusiastic volunteer in 1914 and fought on the Western and Eastern Fronts, including at the Somme, until his discharge in December 1918. But after the war produced nightmarish prints that are reminiscent of Goya in their unflinching depiction of the brutality of war.




Otto Dix, Wounded Man (1916)








Otto Dix, Storm Troopers Advancing Under a Gas Attack (1924)



Käthe Kollwitz is in some ways a special case because of her politics, artistic style, gender and different, gender-related, experience. As a committed socialist (and member of the SPD) she was producing naturalistic, or one could say social realist, depictions of working people, the poor and their sufferings long before the war. She was not really part of the expressionist, cubist or futurist avant-garde and, perhaps for personal biographical reasons (the death of her siblings. including her younger brother Benjamin) death, grief and mourning were always central themes in her work. One of her most powerful pieces, Woman with Dead Child, dates from 1903. Despite this, she initially supported the war, doubtless influenced by the SPD, but then in October 1914 her son, Peter, was killed on the battlefield and this sent her into prolonged depression. However, she turned profoundly against the war and eventually came to the conclusion ‘that Karl Liebknecht was proved right’. [12] Her artistic response to the war focused not on the horror of battle but on the grief of widows and mothers.




Käthe Kollwitz, The Survivors (1919)








Käthe Kollwitz, Widows and Orphans (1919)



Perhaps the most radical of all the war artists was George Grosz who viewed the war with hostility from the start and already in 1914 produced an ink drawing, Pandemonium, which depicted crowds in the grip of ‘patriotic’ frenzy and war fever. In 1915 he made a series of drawings and lithographs which, in the words of Richard Cork, were ‘obsessed with corpses’ such as Battlefield with Dead Soldiers and The Shell. But what also distinguished Grosz was the satirical savagery with which he depicted the profiteers and bourgeois whom he held responsible for the war.




George Grosz, Pandemonium (1914)








George Grosz, The Explosion (1916)








George Grosz, For the Rich the Booty, For the Poor the Curse of War (1919)








George Grosz, These War Invalids Are Becoming a Positive Pest! (1920)



Grosz was an active revolutionary as well as an artist. He took part in the Spartacist Rising of January 1919 and went on to be a founder member of the German Communist Party.
 
The Dadaist Response
What has been presented here is, necessarily, a highly selective sample of the vast amount of art generated by the First World War in all the belligerent countries. A huge number of artists produced war related work – John Nash, Stanley Spencer, William Roberts, William Orpen, Albin Egger-Lienz, Oscar Kokoshka, Natalia Goncharova, Max Beckmann, George Leroux, Fernand Leger, Pierre Bonnard and Felix Vallotton are just a few of those not specifically discussed here. Consequently a comprehensive survey is completely beyond the range of this article. What I have tried to show is the general trajectory of war art at the time, which was overwhelmingly in the direction of opposition to the war, and some of what I consider to be the most powerful images.
However, there is one further and very different artistic reaction to the war which needs to be highlighted – that of the Dadaist movement. At the start of this article I noted that Constable ‘reflected’ the industrial revolution by painting its opposite, the English countryside, my point being that the fact that the relationship between art and its social context is often complex and dialectical does not make that relationship any the less real. Dadaism responded to the war not by depicting its battles or its horrors but with its own iconoclastic revolt against all past and existing culture.
Dada was founded in early 1916 at the Cabaret Voltaire in Zurich by a group of artists and poets who included Hugo Ball, Tristan Tzara, Richard Huelsenbeck, Hans Arp, Marcel Janco and Hans Richter. As Dawn Ades notes, ‘It was essentially an international movement: of the Zurich Dadaists, Tzara and Janco were Rumanian, Arp Alsatian, Ball, Richter and Huelsenbeck were German.’ [13] What brought them to Zurich was the same thing that brought Lenin there – its location in neutral Switzerland. The participant, Hans Richter, observes:
To understand the climate in which Dada began, it is necessary to recall how much freedom there was in Zurich, even during a world war. The Cabaret Voltaire played and raised hell at No. 1 Spiegelgasse. Diagonally opposite, at No. 12 Spiegelgasse, the same narrow thoroughfare in which the Cabaret Voltaire mounted its nightly orgies of singing, poetry and dancing, lived Lenin. Radek, Lenin and Zinoviev were allowed complete liberty the Swiss authorities were much more suspicious of the Dadaists, who after all were capable of perpetrating some new enormity at any moment, than of those quiet studious Russians even though the latter were planning a world revolution. [14]
Dada was born out of disgust at the war. Richard Huelsenberg wrote in 1920, ‘we were agreed that the war had been contrived by the various governments for the most autocratic, sordid and materialist reasons’. [15] Whereas Lenin and his comrades aimed to turn the imperialist war into a civil war and thus overthrow capitalism, the Dadaists declared war on the art and culture of a rotten society believing that it was irredeemably corrupted and complicit. To all official and established art they counterposed the defiant and nihilistic gesture, art that claimed to be anti-art.
The idea of destroying bourgeois art with art or with gestures was always an illusion – capitalist society and the capitalist art world has demonstrated again and again its ability to incorporate this kind of artistic rebellion. And viewed in retrospect the actual art works produced by the Zurich Dadaists do not stand out as exceptionally radical, outlandish or extreme within the story of modern art. Nor do they appear as in any way protests against the war.




Hans Richter, Autumn (1917)








Marcel Janco, Dance (1916)



Nevertheless the Dada concept and the Dada attitude proved highly fertile in terms of the development of modern art in the 20th century. Within a few years there were Dadaist groups in Berlin, New York, Paris, Cologne and other cities involving artists as diverse as Max Ernst, Francis Picabia, George Grosz and John Heartfield (the great photomontage artist). Dada typography was taken up by Russian constructivism. Dada also led directly to Surrealism, perhaps the most important and influential avant garde art movement after World War I. And in New York Dadaism produced the genuinely iconoclastic work of Marcel Duchamp, which really did change the course of modern art and our whole understanding of what constitutes art.




Marcel Duchamp, Fountain (1917)








Marcel Duchamp, L.H.O.O.Q (1919)




Causes and Consequences
Having thus shown the profound effect of the First World War on European art at the time, it remains to try to say why this happened, why the artistic response to the war was so qualitatively different to any previous war (war, after all, has always involved immense brutality) and then to reflect on longer term consequences of this.
When it is matter of understanding why art developed as it did Marxism, with its historical materialist method, comes into its own. As Trotsky wrote:
It is very true that one cannot always go by the principles of Marxism in deciding whether to reject or to accept a work of art. A work of art should in the first place be judged by its own law, that is, by the law of art. But Marxism alone can explain why and how a given tendency in art has originated in a given period of history. [16]
Nevertheless, even with the aid of historical materialism, such explanation, seeking to show the relationship between general social historical development and specific developments within in the history of art, must involve a certain element of speculation. As Marx noted:
It is always necessary to distinguish between the material transformation of the economic conditions of production, which can be determined with the precision of natural science, and the legal, political, religious, artistic or philosophic – in short, ideological forms in which men become conscious of this conflict and fight it out. [17]
In this case I think we can identify the convergence of two main historical phenomena: the changed social position of artists and the specific nature of the war.
From about 1848, when the bourgeoisie lost its role as a revolutionary class and moved firmly into the camp of reaction, a split opened up between the more advanced artists and the aristocratic/bourgeois ruling classes. Beginning with Courbet and progressing through the Impressionists to the likes of Seurat, Van Gogh, and Toulouse Lautrec the artists, in Clement Greenberg’s phrase ‘migrated to Bohemia’. We are not talking about proletarian art here – the artists remain predominantly of middle class origin and petty bourgeois in their objective class position [18] – but in many cases they live and work along side the working class and the poor and this is reflected in the art – its subjects and their treatment. Courbet paints stone breakers and supports the Paris Commune, Seurat depicts workers on the banks of the Seine, Van Gogh paints peasants and postmen not kings and emperors, and Picasso’s blue period gives us the Parisian poor. The development of capitalist society with its growing educated middle class also made it more possible for artists to survive, albeit with difficulty, by selling their work, independently of state, church or ruling class patronage. [19] In art, as in life, there were right wing as well as left wing tendencies but both right and left were in some sense in revolt against the old order. Thus, the late 19th and early 20th century prepared the ground for artistic revolt against the war.
However, the main factor was undoubtedly the character of the war itself. The imperialist nature of the war and the absence of a significant element of national liberation was important in that, once the early illusions disappeared, there was widespread perception that it ‘wasn’t worth it’ and that lives were being sacrificed ‘for nothing’ i.e. for no legitimate political or moral purpose. But history had long been replete with brutal dynastic and imperialist wars, without producing anti-war art. Here the sheer scale and duration of the war, and of the slaughter, was hugely important. Previous wars had fought largely either by mercenaries or relatively small professional armies and even if they lasted a long time consisted of a series of battle of shortish duration. There was no precedent for the mass conscription and prolonged war of position in trenches that dominated the First World War.
This meant, as we have seen in our brief survey, that significant numbers of artists were drawn into the war as participants, and became casualties, in a way that had not happened before. The enormous casualty rate also ensured that the war reached back into and affected the whole of society. When in his Anthem for Doomed Youth, the poet Wilfred Owen evokes the image of young men drawn from ‘sad shires’ and ‘the drawing down of blinds’ we see this happening all across England. No town or village, scarcely a family, remained untouched by the catastrophe.
Thus history created both a supply of potentially anti-war artists and a social demand for anti-war art. Moreover the shift from initial, naive, enthusiasm to bitter disillusionment and opposition which we have seen among artists was a reflection a much wider societal reaction.
When it comes to consequences we can note three main things. First, the profusion of anti-war art became part (a small part, of course, compared to the revolt of the masses) of the struggle against the war, not just ‘a mirror to reflect reality but a hammer to shape it’. Second, the art, like the poetry and novels, helped to fix the image of the war as a disaster in the popular consciousness and social memory, thus making it much more difficult to rehabilitate it or retrospectively ‘celebrate’ it. Third, it put an end – one cannot say ‘forever’ but up to the present and for the foreseeable future – to art that seeks to romanticise or glorify war and that is a small but permanent step forward.
* * *
Footnotes
1. The pivotal role of Picasso’s Les Demoisel les D’Avignon in this process is discussed in John Molyneux, A revolution in paint: 100 years of Picasso’s Demoiselles, International Socialism 115, July 2007. http://www.isj.org.uk/?id=341.
2. See John Berger, The moment of cubism, in The Moment of Cubism: And Other Essays, London 1969.
3. In 1919 Marinetti was to co-write another famous manifesto – the Fascist Manifesto of Benito Mussolini.
4. BLAST was edited by Lewis. Only two issues appeared, one in Summer 1914 and one in 1915, but they had a lasting impact on British art.
5. With the partial exception of Wyndham Lewis.
6. Walter Sickert, The Burlington Magazine, September/October 1916.
7. Richard Cork, A Bitter Truth: Avant-Garde Art and the Great War, Yale University Press, 1994, p. 196.
8. Paul Nash (1949), Outline: an autobiography and other writings, Faber and Faber, London.
9. The backing of the war by German Social Democracy was also a significant factor in securing the initial support of many artists including Käthe Kollwitz who will be discussed later.
10. Richard Cork, as above, p. 42.
11. As above, p. 43.
12. Karl Liebknecht, close comrade of Rosa Luxemburg, voted 1 out of 111 SPD Reichstag deputies against War Credits. He went on to form the Spartakus League (forerunner of the German Communist Party, and participate in the Spartakus Rising in the German Revolution. As a result he, along with Rosa Luxemburg, were murdered by counter-revolutionary Freikorps in January 1919. Kollwitz marked his death with a powerful woodcut, Memorial Sheet for Karl Liebknecht.
13. Dawn Ades, Dada and Surrealism, in Nikos Stangos (ed.), Concepts of Modern Art, London 1981, p. 111.
14. Hans Richter, Dada: Art and Anti-Art, London 1966, p. 16.
15. Cited in Dawn Ades, as above, p. 111.
16. L. Trotsky, Literature and Revolution, London 1991, p. 207.
17. K. Marx, 1859 Preface.
18. In their large majority, artists remain owners of their own means of production, and sellers of the products of their labour, not of their labour power.
19. In a way that was not possible for Goya or Velasquez or Michelangelo.
 



Sabby Sagall
Final Solutions: Human Nature, Capitalism and Genocide
Pluto Press, 2013, £20.50
Sabby Sagall has written a hugely ambitious book which covers immense historical ground and attempts to answer one of the most challenging historical and theoretical questions of our time. The historical events it deals with are four genocides: that of Native Americans at the hands of European settlers; the Armenian genocide perpetrated by Turkey; the Nazi Holocaust and the Rwanda genocide of 1994. The question it tries to answer is how to provide a convincing overall explanation of these dreadful events.
The essence of his argument – and this is what makes this book so distinctive and original – is that such an explanation requires a combination of socio-economic historical analysis with psychoanalysis. The historical analysis is based on classical Marxism, or what might be called orthodox historical materialism i.e. it takes as its point of departure the development of the forces and relations of production and the consequent class struggle. The psychoanalysis is drawn mainly from Freud as mediated by the Freudo-Marxism of the Frankfurt School, in particular the work of Erich Fromm.
As might, perhaps, be expected given the author – Sagall is a very long-standing member of the British SWP – he tends to take the relevance of Marxist historical materialism to the problem more or less for granted – there is no sustained comparison of Marxist historical explanations of these events with non-Marxist explanations of them. He does, however, feel the need to justify in some detail the psychoanalytic concepts which he believes are necessary to supplement or complete more conventional Marxist analysis in this field and this takes up the first half of the book. In the second half, he attempts to demonstrate the applicability of this Marxist/psychoanalytic methodology to each of the aforementioned genocides in turn.
The most important concept deployed by Sagall is that of ‘social character’ developed by Fromm. For Freud, human behaviour and character is heavily influenced by the unconscious and each individual’s unconscious, and therefore their character, is shaped primarily by their experiences in early childhood and how these interact with their basic sexual drives and development.
Freud’s analysis of this process, with its concepts of oral, anal and genital stages, the Oedipus Complex and sublimation, though enormously influential and genuinely insightful, is open to the criticism of being asocial in that on the one hand it focuses on separate individuals (and their parents) and, on the other, claims to be universal across all societies and time periods.
Fromm’s concept of social character gives the Freudian account a Marxist twist by being applied not to isolated individuals but to social classes or communities and by being shaped by that class/community’s role in the process of production (as productive or unproductive, exploiter or exploited, reactionary or progressive). To this Sagall makes the important addition of the idea of social character also being formed by the experience of the given class/community in the class struggle, especially its experience of victory or defeat. In Sagall’s hands, therefore ‘social character’ is a class and historically specific concept.
His argument as a whole is as follows: first, that genocide is ‘a modern phenomenon rooted in the social, economic and psychological nature of capitalism [a] society based on individual greed and competitiveness, political domination, the alienation of human labour and the commodification of human beings and their relationships.’ (p. 248) But because capitalism is only episodically, not permanently, genocidal, this background analysis must be supplemented by analysis of the specific circumstances and conflict precipitating the genocide and the social character motivating the perpetrators to carry it out.
In particular, Sagall identifies the capitalist ‘middle class’ (or petty bourgeoisie) with their ‘anal destructive’ and ‘authoritarian’ social character as the prime agents of genocide, especially when they ‘have suffered major historical defeats or other forms of extreme stress’. (p. 248) In the genocide of Native Americans he focuses on the middle-class English Puritan and later the Scots-Irish as main villains of the piece. In relation to the Armenians, it is the middle-class would-be modernisers of the Young Turk movement in the Ottoman Empire. In the Holocaust it is the petty bourgeois based Nazis and in Rwanda it is the middle class Hutu Power leaders and their peasant followers.
In the case of the Anglo-settlers in North America, there is a clear conflict with the Native Americans over land occupancy, usage and ownership but this is augmented and driven to genocide by the social character of the settlers with its puritanical sexual repression, its anxieties about salvation and its suppressed rage at religious persecution and other violent conflict in Britain.
The Young Turks were a middle-class movement that wanted to modernise the Ottoman Empire in order to save it. They were frustrated in their attempts, disorientated and driven to narcissistic rage by the progressive disintegration of the Empire in the 19th and early 20th century. This rage was tipped over into genocidal aggression by catastrophic defeats in the 1st World War and projected on to the Armenians ‘the enemy within’.
In Germany the already authoritarian social character of the middle class, as it developed in the 19th century, was intensified by the experience of defeat in the 1st World War and the trauma of the Great Depression and given expression by Hitler and the Nazis. The decision to launch the Final Solution itself in 1941/42 was precipitated by defeat on the Russian front which signalled the collapse of the Nazi dreams of conquest.
In Rwanda the background to genocide lay in a long period of domination by Tutsi minority which was intensified and racialised by German and Belgian colonial rule. With independence a Hutu-based government was established and many Tutsis went into exile. For a while the economy grew but then in the early nineties it crashed and the exiled Tutsis launched a civil war to regain power. Rwanda was traditionally a very authoritarian society and the economic collapse, combined with panic that the invading Tutsi forces were on the verge of victory, precipitated the mass slaughter of Tutsis.
The question that immediately confronts a reviewer is does Sagall’s argument stand up? Answering it is no easy task. I note that in his review of the book in Socialist Review Donny Gluckstein, who has written books on the Nazis and on the Second World War and so is no ignoramus on these matters, concludes with the rather evasive remark ‘Whether he [Sagall] has succeeded is something that the reader will have to decide.’ I am not surprised. A proper scholarly assessment of Sagall’s thesis demands expert knowledge of each of the four genocides he investigates, plus a serious grounding in psychoanalytic theory in its totality, plus a good grasp of historical materialism and issues of historical method. In all likelihood this will be the work of many specialist hands rather than one individual.
Here I will confine myself to some overall, rather impressionistic comments and a discussion of some issues that it throws up.
First, the book is well written and clearly explained; the first part on psychoanalytic concepts is more difficult than the second on the actual genocides but in general it is accessible to the lay reader and is certainly full of very interesting material. Second, it combines a large amount of theory with a great deal of wide ranging empirical evidence and this is a very impressive achievement. It is clearly the product of a deep and sustained engagement with the material and the issues it raises.
The tone of the book is also impressive. Sagall’s commitment to social justice and human liberation and, of course, to ensuring that the horrors he describes are not repeated, is evident throughout but there no descent into rhetoric or superfluous moralizing. It is a scrupulous, social scientific investigation.
This said, the first problem that strikes me is a very basic one: is psychological analysis really required here? Clearly all human action from the most everyday to the most historically significant has a psychological aspect or component to it, just as it has a biological or physiological component. Neither walking down the road nor storming the Bastille is possible independent of the law of gravity but that doesn’t mean we expect historical analysis of the French Revolution to include an exposition of the theory of gravity. Sagall acknowledges this problem when he writes, ‘if we wish to analyse the causes of the First World War, Lenin is more useful than Freud’. (p. 55) In other words, although a psychological dimension is involved it can be ‘assumed’ or taken for granted because it is a relatively minor element whereas it is economic, class and political factors that are causally decisive.
One answer to this objection is that the best Marxist history does incorporate the psychological element as a link in the chain of analysis that begins with the development of the forces of production. The outstanding example of this is Trotsky’s History of the Russian Revolution and it is notable that in the Preface to that mighty work he writes, ‘The dynamic of revolutionary events is directly determined by swift, intense and passionate changes in the psychology of classes’. But the psychology involved here is an understanding of changes in consciousness, mass or individual, rather than invoking the role of the unconscious, and hence does not make use of Freudian or psychoanalytic concepts such as id, ego and super ego or projective identification which Sagall wants to employ.
But Sagall advances a different argument. He maintains that there is a fundamental difference between the genocides that he is trying to explain and other bloody historical events such as the First World War (or, for example, the suppression of the Paris Commune or Franco’s terror during and after the Spanish Civil War, or Pinochet’s repression in Chile) in that the latter were ‘rational’ but the former were ‘irrational’. What he means by this is that in the First World War or in crushing the Commune the ruling classes were acting on the basis of, and in rough conformity to, their economic and class interests. His four chosen genocides, however, were ‘irrational’ in they did not correspond to the objective class interests of their perpetrators. This is why psychoanalytic concepts are needed.
This seems to me a difficult argument in that distinguishing or separating out the rational and the irrational in human behaviour and human history as clearly separated out as Sagall tries to do is not easy. I suspect that unconscious drives would be very much at work in the slaughter of the Communards, and in all sorts of repression and individual and systematic torture etc. And it seems to be an unfortunate fact of history that no brutal regime has ever fallen through a shortage of torturers or thugs to enforce its will. (The famous Milgram Experiment of 1961, which showed the readiness of ‘normal’ citizens to torture when ordered to do so by an authority figure, is relevant here). Genocide, the attempt to exterminate a whole people, is clearly at the extreme end of the spectrum of human cruelty but is it qualitatively different in this respect from other forms of brutality that have gone on throughout the history of class society?
Sagall defends his insistence on the need to deploy psychoanalysis not just on the grounds that unconscious factors were at work in the genocides he considers but that these genocides were so contrary to the class interests of the perpetrators that these unconscious factors have to be considered a major part of the explanation and that without them the genocides would not have taken place.
In itself, this is a strong argument but whether or not Sagall has shown that this was so in relation to each of his chosen episodes is a question to which I will return shortly, but first want to raise another issue: the concept of ‘social character’. It is reasonable to argue that social classes develop certain distinctive ‘character structures’ on the basis of their roles in production and history but this does not tell us how much weight should be attributed to this factor in the analysis of history. It is also reasonable to argue that there exists such a thing as ‘national character’, formed by history, but we know how such a notion is often abused in journalism and poor history writing. Clearly Sagall’s social character concept is much superior to and more Marxist than, that of national character, but some of the same dangers may arise. In the case of ‘social character’ these danger is compounded by the difficulty of providing empirical confirmation of claims about the nature of particular social characters (e.g. that the German middle class were ‘authoritarian’).
Sagall addresses this problem with the claim that there are four kinds of evidence for social character: social or social psychoanalytical surveys; psychoanalytical case studies; historical studies; realist creative literature. But much of this may be of doubtful reliability and sometimes in this book I think Sagall makes assertions about groups’ social character (e.g. the Scots-Irish) on the basis of secondary sources that would be very open to challenge.
When it comes to the application of his theories and hypotheses to the four genocides I think Sagall’s accounts are not equally convincing. Most convincing to my mind is his treatment of the Nazi Holocaust. This may be because here he is able to build on the masterly work already done by Trotsky, as well as many other Marxist hands ranging from the Frankfurt School to Mandel and Callinicos. It may also be because it is with the question of the Holocaust that Sagall has been most engaged and which may have driven the whole enterprise. Also the massive diversion of resources involved in the Holocaust does seem to run clearly counter to the Nazi regime’s overwhelming interest in winning the war.
I also found the section on the Armenian genocide pretty persuasive but certainly lack sufficient knowledge of this episode to pass any confident judgment. In the case of Rwanda I was more doubtful but felt even less qualified to offer an assessment,
It was the account of the Native American genocide that I found least satisfactory. This is because I was not persuaded of the argument that was predominantly ‘irrational’ in the sense defined by Sagall. This is partly because the process was gradual and protracted, over centuries, rather than a sudden outburst of ferocious destructiveness, as was the case with the other three. It is also because the settlers had such a clear self-interest in terms of driving the Native Americans off the land and crushing their resistance. Doubtless this process involved innumerable excesses (in which social and individual character may have played a part) but I don’t think the genocide as a whole was driven by these unconscious psychological forces rather than the irreconcilable clash of opposed modes of production and conflicting economic interests.
Sagall supports his argument by an extended comparison between the extermination in Anglo-America and the conquest of Latin America which though brutal in the extreme stopped short of actual genocide, attributing the difference to the different social character of the Spanish and Portuguese conquistadors and settlers. I thought this gave the latter too much credit and the more likely explanation was the fact, also mentioned by Sagall, that in the North the conflict was over land, whereas in the South it was over control of labour. In other words, the Spanish and Portuguese refrained from full genocide because they needed the indigenous population to work for them, as was the case with African slaves in the US. But Sagall can counter this objection by saying that what made this genocide irrational was precisely that it deprived the white settlers of a potential labour force. Perhaps in the end it comes down to a question of degree.
These doubts and problems are intended to stimulate discussion, however, and not at all to negate the interest and value of the book. I don’t think it would be possible for anyone to cover this ground and attempt to answer the questions Sagall does here without raising a multitude of issues requiring further debate and discussion. That this book will, hopefully, be a provoker of such debate, and a significant reference point within it, is itself a major achievement on which the author should be congratulated.
 



For without exception the cultural treasures he surveys have an origin which he cannot contemplate without horror. They owe their existence not only to the efforts of the great minds and talents who have created them, but also to the anonymous toil of their contemporaries. There is no document of civilization which is not at the same time a document of barbarism.
– Walter Benjamin, Theses on the Philosophy of History
Clearly Walter Benjamin’s statement about mankind’s so-called cultural treasures corresponds to certain basic propositions of historical materialism. The whole emergence of ‘civilization’ was predicated on and associated with the division of society into classes i.e. on exploitation and oppression. In particular the development of ‘culture’ and ‘the arts’, whether we are speaking of philosophy, poetry, drama, architecture, sculpture or whatever required the existence of a social class freed from the drudgery of producing its own food and other basic material needs and thus able to devote large amounts of its time to learned pursuits and this in turn required that these basic activities be performed for them by others – slaves, servants and peasants.
Moreover, the maintenance of such a state of affairs was possible only with the development of a strong central authority standing above society and exercising a virtual monopoly of decisive physical force, i.e. a state, willing and able to act, when required by the interests of the dominant class, with extreme barbarity.
However, speaking personally for a moment, it was the actual experience of visiting various museums and galleries that brought home to me just how direct and intimate has been the relationship between many of the highest achievements of human culture and the extremes of human barbarism.




Rembrandt’s The Return of the Prodigal Son



In the Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg, part of the Winter Palace of the Tsars, there hangs Rembrandt’s The Return of the Prodigal Son. The central feature of this wonderful painting is the father placing his hands on the back of his kneeling son in a gesture of exceptional tenderness, love and acceptance. The picture was bought for the Hermitage in 1766 by the Empress Catherine the Great who came to the throne by means of a coup against her husband Paul III in 1762 in which she had him murdered.
Remove your gaze from the painting and turn to the nearby gallery window. It looks out on the infamous Peter and Paul Fortress which stands directly on the other side of the Neva River. The Fortress was, of course, the legendary place of incarceration of political prisoners under Tsarism. In 1718 Peter the Great had his own son, Alexei, tortured to death there because of his involvement in a conspiracy.
In Venice there is the famous Bridge of Sighs which runs from the Doge’s Palace to an adjacent building. The Doge’s Palace is one of the main landmarks in Venice visited by millions annually. It contains work by Titian, Palladio, Tintoretto, Veronese, Tiepolo and many other masters. The Bridge of Sighs is also a famous sight beneath which pass gondolas.
But it was not from the romantic sighs of lovers that the Bridge got its name: rather it derives from the fact that the Bridge led directly from the court room in the Palace to the dungeons and torture chambers next door.




The Bridge of Sighs, Venice



Florence is the leading city of the early Renaissance and one of the most important centres of art in the world – the city of Giotto, Massaccio, Piero della Francesca, Botticelli, Leonardo and Michelangelo. It has two focal points: the extraordinarily beautiful Duomo (Cathedral), with its magnificent dome designed by Brunelleschi and its Campanile (bell tower) built by Giotto, and the Piazza della Signoria containing a replica of Michelangelo’s David, Cellini’s great Perseus and the magnificent Palazzo Vecchio.




Palazzo Vecchio in the Piazza della Signoria, Florence



In 1478 a long standing conflict between the Medici Family who ruled Florence at the time and their banker rivals, the Pazzi Family came to head. The Pazzis, in alliance with the Silviatis (papal bankers in Florence) and with the tacit support of Pope Sixtus IV, launched a coup. On Sunday 26 April during High Mass at the Duomo before a crowd of 10,000 they attacked Lorenzo and Giuliano de Medici. Giuliano was stabbed nineteen times and bled to death on the cathedral floor but Lorenzo, though wounded, escaped and rallied his supporters who counterattacked, capturing and killing the conspirators. One, Jacopo de Pazzi, was thrown from a window of the Palazzo, then dragged naked through the streets and thrown into the River Arno. Others were hung publicly from the walls of the Palace.
Twenty years later in 1498, the radical preacher, Girolamo Savanarola, who denounced the corruption of the church and was much admired by Botticelli and Michelangelo, was hung and burned at the stake in the Piazza della Signoria after being subject to torture by the strappado. [1]
This unity of opposites between culture and barbarism is nowhere as clear as in Rome. Rome of the High Renaissance and Michelangelo’s Sistine Chapel was also, of course, Rome of the Papacy (held at various times by the Borgias, the Medicis, the Della Roveres and the Farneses) which was legendary for its corruption, decadence and murderous intrigues and which together with the Jesuits and the Inquisition launched the Counter-Reformation at the Council of Trent in 1545. So the Rome of St. Peter’s and the Vatican museums is also and simultaneously the Rome of brutal repression such as the public roasting in the Campo de’ Fiori of Giordano Bruno, for the ‘crime’ of heresy.
But it is the ruins and art of Ancient Rome – the Colosseum, the Forum, the Capitoline Museums, the thermal baths of Caracalla – that most starkly embody the culture/barbarity relation. This is because they were and are so bound up with institution of slavery. The Colosseum, even its ruined state, is a building of awe-inspiring splendour but the purpose it served was unspeakable: the systematic slaughter of human beings and animals for ‘sport’.
Unfortunately the dependency of art on barbarism has not ended to this day although the links are more indirect and less overt. The New York Museum of Modern Art, generally regarded as the most influential museum in the history of modern art, was the creation of and run by the Rockefeller Family who amassed their vast fortunes through Standard Oil (forerunner of ExxonMobile); no reader of this Review should need reminding of the link between blood and oil. Another of America’s leading art museums, The Getty in Los Angeles, is also based on oil money – in this case the fortune amassed by Jean Paul Getty via the Getty Oil Company. New York’s second most important modern art museum is the Guggenheim, housed in a famous building designed by Frank Lloyd Wright. The Guggenheim differs from MOMA and the Getty in that it arose not from oil money but from gold mining in the Yukon.
In the UK the Tate Britain was built on the sight of the old Millbank Prison with money made by Henry Tate whose fortune derived from the sugar trade which had its roots in slavery in the Caribbean. By coincidence, if you look across the River Thames from the steps of the Tate what you see is Vauxhall Cross, the Ziggurat like headquarters of MI6.




Vauxhall Cross, London



And for most of the last 30 years the contemporary art scene in Britain has been dominated by Charles Saatchi who made his wealth through the Saatchi & Saatchi advertising agency which established itself by running Margaret Thatcher’s election campaign in 1979. People who have worked for Saatchi testify not only to his ruthless capital accumulation but to his personal brutishness – a fact confirmed by his public assault on his wife, Nigella Lawson.
One of the largest collections of African art in the world is housed in the Royal Museum of Central Africa in Tervuren in Belgium. How did that art get there? It is only necessary to pose the question to grasp the answer. It was hardly donated by the Congolese in gratitude for the kindness bestowed on them by King Leopold and his associates. [2]
These examples can be multiplied almost indefinitely because Marx’s statement that ‘the ruling ideas of any age are the ideas of the ruling class’ applies with as much force to the area of the arts as it does to philosophy, law, religion or education; indeed even more so where painting, sculpture and architecture are concerned because the physical and monetary resources for the making, storage, display etc. of such work are more than are needed to write a book or a poem. And because, to quote Marx again, ‘If money comes into the world with a congenital bloodstain on one cheek, capital comes dripping from head to foot, from every pore, with blood and dirt.’ [3]
Therefore the question is what are the implications of this intimate association between culture and barbarous oppression? One view, much favoured by tyrants, rulers and their agents and apologists is that the cultural achievements justify or redeem the barbarism. This was concisely expressed by the deeply cynical Harry Lime in The Third Man.
Like the fella says, in Italy for 30 years under the Borgias they had warfare, terror, murder, and bloodshed, but they produced Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, and the Renaissance. In Switzerland they had brotherly love – they had 500 years of democracy and peace, and what did that produce? The cuckoo clock.
An opposite, and in my view preferable, position is that no art, no matter how wonderful is worth a single human life. Then there is also the attitude, common in left wing and radical circles, that all art and culture of the past and all ‘established’ art of the present is so contaminated by and implicated in the barbarity and brutality of the ruling classes that it should be totally rejected in favour of a new ‘people’s’ or working class art. This was the view taken, for example, by the Dadaists in Zurich in World War I. It was the culture and art of the past, they argued, that had culminated in the mass slaughter in the trenches, which claimed 10 million lives or more, and therefore it deserved only to dispensed with and destroyed. A similar position was taken by the Proletarian Culture movement (known as Proletcult) in Russia immediately after the 1917 Revolution; they rejected all ‘bourgeois’ art in the name of a new working class art that they believed they were in the process of creating.
Walter Benjamin himself, with whose observation this article began, stopped short of outright rejection but concluded that because the cultural treasures of the past ‘have an origin which he cannot contemplate without horror’ the historical materialist ‘views them with cautious detachment’.
However, the classical Marxists such as Marx and Engels, Lenin, Trotsky and Rosa Luxemburg took a rather less detached and rather more positive view of the great art of the past. They argued that this cultural heritage – despite its roots in slave, feudal and capitalist society – was something which the modern working class should not reject or destroy but should aim to take over from the bourgeoisie and make widely available to the masses. Marx, for example, is known to have been a great enthusiast for the literature of Ancient Greece, especially Aeschylus, and for Shakespeare. Engels particularly admired Balzac (despite his reactionary views) for his realistic depiction of French society. Lenin regarded the plans of the Proletkult as rather juvenile ultra-leftism and Trotsky variously defended Dante, Shakespeare and Pushkin on the grounds that reading their work, regardless of its overt political stance, would enrich the human personality and our understanding of life.
In support of this latter position, I would add that although humanity’s ‘cultural heritage’ was, and remains, dominated and largely owned by the ruling classes and thus unavoidably associated with and tainted by their barbarism, the relationship between the art (and the artists) and the rulers is also marked by many contradictions.
For example, the Medici family, overall, dominated Florence during the Renaissance and after [4], and also were patrons of the young Michelangelo. Nevertheless there was also resistance to Medici rule and Michelangelo’s David was commissioned by the City Council to celebrate the success of the city in deposing them and it is clear that Michelangelo himself was hostile to the Medicis, just as he also had conflicts with Pope Julius II who commissioned the Ceiling of the Sistine Chapel. Similarly, the Tsars may have bought up paintings by Rembrandt but Rembrandt himself, and his art, was a product of the Dutch Revolution which was broadly anti-imperial and progressive in character. [5] And the Rockfeller family’s MOMA in New York may have promoted Picasso but Picasso was a leftist and, for a time, a Communist. Even when the artists are not in anyway radical their work often embodies values that are far more humane than those of the ruthless tyrants and billionaire exploiters for whom they end up working.
It is class society, not the art itself, which makes artistic achievement rest on barbaric and exploitative foundations and while artists can and do struggle in various ways to free themselves from this dependence it is ultimately a contradiction that can be resolved only by ending class society.
After the Revolution I am sure we can find many positive uses for the awesome Colosseum including housing an exhibition devoted to Spartacus and the great slave revolts.
* * *
Footnotes
1. A gruesome mechanism that broke the shoulders.
2. Belgian colonial rule in the Congo, especially under King Leopold, is legendary for its extreme brutality.
3. Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, London 1974, pp. 711–12.
4. For a period the Medicis were driven out of Florence but in the period of reaction after 1527 they returned as hereditary rulers – a position they retained for 200 years.
5. See John Molyneux, Rembrandt and Revolution, Redwords, London 2001.
 



Marxist Theory
Ed. Alex Callinicos
OUP £6.95
THE FIRST thing to be said about this collection of articles is that its title is misleading. Marxist Theory might suggest this will be an exposition of the main outlines of Marx’s thought or some kind of representative selection of classical Marxist writing.
In fact it is neither. It is a selection of essays from one small tendency within current academic Marxism – the school of “analytical Marxism”.
Analytical Marxism is a trend which has developed since the late 1970s predominantly within the universities of the English speaking world and is concerned with what it is pleased to call “high theory”, i.e. “the basic explanatory principles of historical materialism and their relationship to philosophical doctrines and debates”.
Its main aim is to effect a marriage between Marxism and the tradition of Anglo Saxon analytical philosophy. In its own words it “is distinguished by the use of ‘state of the art methods of analytical philosophy and positivist social science’” (J. Romer cited by Callinicos). Its main work to date is Gerry Cohen’s Karl Marx’s Theory of History – a Defence.
Marxist Theory comprises primarily four articles relating to issues arising from Cohen’s book. They include arguments for and against the primacy of the forces of production over the relations of production in historical materialism, for and against the legitimacy of functionalist-type explanations in Marxism and the applicability of “game theory” to the analysis of the class struggle.
This debate climaxes in a rather pathetic article by Cohen virtually renaming Marxism. There is also a useful but over-reverential critique of the Weberian sociologist Anthony Giddens by Callinicos and two rather turgid articles on ethics by Richard Miller and Norman Geras.
I am not over enamoured with this work. There are four main reasons for this.
First, I disagree completely with the whole approach to Marxism exhibited here. I take it as fundamental that Marxism is the theory of proletarian revolution. Its purpose is to serve as a guide to action in the class struggle. For this reason all the real advances and breakthroughs in Marxism have come from revolutionaries actively involved in trying to change the world.
It is practice which poses the problems which generate theory. It is in practice that theory is tested. Academic Marxism, for all its self-proclaimed erudition, rigour and precision, has contributed little of lasting value to the real Marxist tradition.
Analytical Marxism strikes me as a version of Marxism at its furthest remove from practice and from the working class. It is a Marxism of the senior common room and the ivory tower – scholastic and pedantic in the extreme.
By comparison the likes of Marcuse and Sartre, Althusser and Poulantzas appear as engaged militants. The corruption of such an isolated and detached school, its infection by bourgeois academic ideology is surely as inevitable as the corruption of Labour MPs and trade union bureaucrats cut off from rank and file control.
Cohen’s lamentable reconsideration of historical materialism is a case in point. He says he does not exactly believe that historical materialism is false but is “not sure how to tell whether or not it is true” and besides it doesn’t matter very much because: “The political significance of retreat from historical materialism should not be exaggerated”. It is impossible to imagine someone who felt a responsibility to the working class writing in this kind of petty bourgeois sceptical manner.
Secondly, I disagree altogether with the philosophical foundations of this enterprise. Analytical Marxism, we are told, is “post-Hegelian Marxism” and also “post-Althusserian Marxism” in that its precondition was “the expulsion of Hegelian modes of thinking from Marxist theory” and in so far as Althusser’s main achievement was to break out of the Hegelian straightjacket!
But the Hegelian dialectic is one of the key building blocks, or component parts, as Lenin puts it, of the Marxist synthesis. In its materialist form it is Marxism’s philosophical foundation and cannot simply be discarded without a major break with the Marxist tradition.
Moreover, the materialist dialectic has proved itself, in the works of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Trotsky etc., to be a most powerful tool for the analysis of the development of capitalism and the class struggle.
What does post-Hegelian Marxism offer in its place?
In the case of Althusser we are offered a mixture of alienated structuralism and idealism which served as a bridge to outright anti-Marxism and revisionism.
In the case of analytical Marxism we get abstract metaphysics and a choice between mechanical technological determinism and individualist game theory. The fruits of technological determinism have already been seen in the Marxism of the Second International. And is it really suggested that game theory will yield analysis of the class struggle superior to The Eighteenth Brumaire, Results and Prospects or other books contaminated by the Hegelian dialectic? If so, one can only say that this book provides no evidence for it.
My third reason for disliking this book is that I find most of the specific arguments advanced false. For reasons of space two examples must suffice.
On the question of the forces and relations of production, it is essential for the coherence of historical materialism to defend the orthodox position on the primacy of the productive forces – but not in the deterministic way Cohen defends it.
The forces of production are primary in that they are the point of departure for the Marxist theory of history. But they are not the whole story. The development of the forces of production to the point where they come into conflict with the relations of production both throws the old order of society into crisis and creates the materialist basis for the new higher order. But this does not in itself ensure the transition. This depends on the outcome of the class struggle, which is not technologically or economically predetermined.
On Jon Elster’s methodological individualism it is of course true (indeed it is a truism) that societies are composed of individuals, but it does not follow from this that the individual can be regarded (whether historically or methodologically) as prior to society. The individual is always a social individual – the product of society.
Elster’s notion of social structures as the unintended consequences of individual actions neglects the fact that the fundamental human activities are production and reproduction and both are and always have been social activities.
Even that favourite exception Robinson Crusoe proves the rule, for Crusoe produces on his island with the aid of tools and knowledge that are social acquisitions. Elster concedes that “many properties of individuals such as ‘powerful’, are irreducibly relational, so that accurate description of one individual may require reference to other individuals”, but this is a massive understatement.
The first property of individuals that is irreducibly relational and requires reference to other individuals is that of being human. Human beings are irreducibly social.
My fourth reason for disliking this book is that I feel Alex Callinicos has been trapped by his role as editor into being far too uncritical of this specious Marxism. And when he is critical he is far too diplomatic.
The problem is that his name on the jacket unavoidably associates him with the contents of the book. The danger is that the subtle caveats and carefully qualified objections that litter his introduction will be insufficient to counter the impression that he is somehow recommending this feeble fare as “the latest thing” in Marxism when in reality it is merely “the latest thing” in the repetitive story of revisionism.
 



This article is a discussion of the politics of George Orwell’s Animal Farm. I would not normally recommend this as the Marxist way to approach a literary work. As Trotsky reminds us, a work of art must be judged first according to the laws of art and a novel cannot be treated as if it were merely the dramatisation of a political treatise.
However, Animal Farm is something of an exception to this general rule. Not a novel in the usual sense, it is an explicit political fable-an unmistakable allegory of the Russian Revolution and the rise of Stalinism-in which the characters are transparent symbols of either historical individuals (Old Major/Karl Marx, Snowball/Leon Trotsky) or particular social types (Moses/the priest, Squealer/the party propagandist, the dogs/the GPU), not ‘real’ or ‘rounded’ characters. The plot, at least in its main outlines, is not the product of creative imagination, but of the actual course of Russian history.
Orwell himself wrote of Animal Farm that it was the first work in which ‘I tried with full consciousness of what I was doing to fuse political purpose and artistic purpose into one whole’ [1], but it would probably be more accurate to say that the artistic serves the political.
This is not to suggest that Animal Farm lacks artistic merit. On the contrary, it is in many ways a minor masterpiece. Orwell’s deceptively simple but finely honed prose style works to near perfection and is superbly adapted to dealing with the central artistic difficulty involved in the Animal Farm project, that of making his characters believable as both animals and humans, or rather as animals with human characteristics. This was an enterprise which could all too easily have failed either by falling into the crude sentimentality of a Disney cartoon or by producing an effect verging on the ridiculous. In fact it does neither. In Animal Farm we laugh only when Orwell wants us to and when Napoleon sets the dogs on the dissident pigs and other animals we do not scoff, we feel the full horror of the Moscow trials. Orwell s solution to the problem is to tell us enough about his characters and their physical attributes to ensure that we never forget they are animals, but not so much that we visualise them with such clarity as to make their talking or working the farm seem absurd. It is a kind of descriptive tightrope walking and Orwell never falls off the wire.
Also, just as in Nineteen Eighty Four Orwell found a series of images which gave expression to the experience of totalitarianism (Big Brother, Room 101, thoughtcrime, etc) and so passed into the culture, so in Animal Farm there are moments of great power such as the final amendment to the Seven Commandments to read: ‘All animals are equal but some animals are more equal than others’, and the closing scene when: ‘The creatures outside looked from pig to man, and from man to pig and from pig to man again, but already it was impossible to say which was which.’ [2] These imprint themselves indelibly on the memory as encapsulating with superb irony the betrayal of revolutionary hopes and the cynical duplicity not just of Stalinism, but of rulers and exploiters of all types. [3]
Nevertheless the fact remains that the political significance of Animal Farm far outweighs and in a sense is out of all proportion to its artistic significance. In terms of the history of the novel Orwell stands as a rather parochial figure of the second rank: a good prose stylist but decidedly limited in emotional range and in his ability to create living, three dimensional characters. It is one of the reasons for the artistic success of Animal Farm that it does not require these qualities. In political terms, however, Animal Farm is probably the most popular and influential piece of literary propaganda produced in English, perhaps in any language, this century. The sheer scale of the book’s success is astonishing. According to my 1987 edition, it has been reprinted a staggering 57 times including three times in a single year and, as everyone knows, it is a favourite of teachers and examiners, appearing on virtually every O level, CSE and GCSE syllabus. Animal Farm’s only rival in this respect is Nineteen Eighty Four and it seems overwhelmingly likely that far more people have learned what they know of the fate of the Russian Revolution from here than from any other source. Certainly the ratio of people who have read Animal Farm to those who have read Trotsky, Deutscher, Carr, Cliff or any other serious account must be astronomical.
However, if the scale of the book’s success is surprising the reason for it is not mysterious. It is, of course, that Animal Farm is generally thought to be a simple, dramatic and extremely effective statement of the key arguments against socialism and revolution, namely that socialism can’t work and that all revolutions end in tyranny. This then is the justification for discussing Animal Farm and for that discussion being primarily concerned with politics. The political ideas of Animal Farm are part of our culture and of our consciousness. They play a role, a considerable role, in the ongoing argument that all socialists are engaged in. This is why these ideas need to be analysed and confronted.
The analysis must begin with a problem. The problem is that Animal Farm is a ‘right wing’ book by a ‘left wing’ writer. Orwell’s left credentials (left, not Marxist) are substantial: he is the author of a powerful attack on imperialism (Burmese Days), a sympathetic investigation into the lives of the poor and the poorest (Down and Out in Paris and London), an indictment of the condition of the unemployed and the working class in the Depression (The Road to Wigan Pier) and, above all, of Homage to Catalonia, the superb anti-Stalinist celebration of the Spanish Revolution. He is also the person who actually went to Spain and fought with the POUM militia. How then did this ‘man of the left’ with his evidently sincere hatred of exploitation and oppression come to write a book which has been of such use to the right?
There are three possible solutions to this problem: first, that by the time Orwell wrote Animal Farm in 1943-4 he was no longer a leftist; that between 1937 and 1943 Orwell’s views had shifted markedly to the right – in short, that he had sold out and become a conscious and premature cold warrior.
Secondly, it is argued that Animal Farm is not a right wing book; really it is a left critique of Stalinism which has been used and distorted by the ruling class and the education system.
Thirdly, Animal Farm is said to be a right wing book despite Orwell’s intentions and that this disjuncture between intention and text is explained by contradictions in the author’s politics which are also present and observable in the text.
Solution one is a biographical argument which can be rejected on biographical grounds. It is true that between Homage to Catalonia and Animal Farm there was a significant rightward shift. Orwell returned from Spain an inspired and committed socialist – a revolutionary even – who, as late as January 1939, was intending to oppose the coming war on internationalist grounds. He even contemplated forming an underground organisation to undertake ‘illegal anti-war activities’. [4] But the combination of the Hitler-Stalin pact and the outbreak of war turned him into a patriot or, more accurately, revealed his underlying patriotism [5], and this inevitably meant a move from revolution to reform. Nevertheless the move to the right did not go so far as to carry Orwell into the camp of reaction. Subjectively he remained a socialist, a Labour Party supporter and a left winger. In 1943, the year he began Animal Farm, he started a weekly column for Tribune which continued for four years.
It must also be remembered that the political circumstances of 1943–4 rule out the possibility that Animal Farm was written for opportunistic reasons. Britain and Russia were allies and Russia was at the height of its popularity. A book so obviously critical of the Soviet regime was therefore very much going against the stream – a fact which is confirmed by the difficulty Orwell experienced in obtaining a publisher. What seems clear therefore is that Animal Farm was intended as an attack on Stalinism from a position within the left (which is not the same as an attack on Stalinism from the left). [6]
Orwell himself claimed in 1946 that:
Every line of serious work I have written since 1936 has been written, directly or indirectly, against totalitarianism and for democratic socialism as I understand it. [7]
Provided we are aware of the political nuances of ‘democratic socialism’ (the title would be claimed by Roy Hattersley) there seems to be no reason to dispute this as an honest statement on intent. In all probability Orwell would have been outraged at the way Animal Farm has been used, just as in 1949 he felt obliged to issue a statement in America denying that Nineteen Eighty Four was an attack on socialism or the British Labour Party. [8]
However, neither in politics nor in literature does intention necessarily coincide with result or achievement. Consequently rejection of solution one, that Orwell was a conscious reactionary, does not imply acceptance of solution two, that Animal Farm is a left wing book misrepresented by the system. The idea that Animal Farm and Orwell’s work as a whole can be rescued from the right wing and in some sense claimed for the socialist tradition is quite a popular one on me left. It has a particular appeal, I think, to those socialists for whom Homage to Catalonia has been formative reading and who are therefore inclined to read me rest of Orwell’s work in its light, seeing Animal Farm as broadly a Trotskyist account of the rise of Stalinism.
Unfortunately this interpretation must also be rejected. First, it is not, from my experience as a teacher, the ‘natural’ reading of the book, i.e. it is not the interpretation made by the average reader on first reading. On the contrary, the large majority of student readers of Animal Farm I have encountered take it to be a critique of socialism and revolution. Second, as I shall try to show in the course of arguing for solution three, it is not an interpretation which can be sustained on me basis of detailed analysis of the text.
Solution three posits a contradiction between intention and text and within the text, arising from a contradiction in Orwell’s politics. The root of this contradiction is that Orwell combines an ethical condemnation of capitalism with a rejection of Marxism and a deep pessimism about the working class as the agent of socialism. Where it is a matter of Orwell’s personal political stance the ethical element in the combination is sufficient to keep him subjectively on the left, but when me combination is presented as a historical analysis (albeit in allegorical form) die objective effect is predominantly right wing – ultimately it reinforces the view that socialism is impossible.
I say predominantly and ultimately because there certainly are left wing elements in Animal Farm. It is important to recognise and specify these partly because the right wing appropriation of the book has resulted in these often being overlooked and partly to understand how and why they are effaced in the overall effect.
The most important left element is Old Major’s passionate denunciation in the opening chapter of the brutal exploitation and oppression of animals under the rule of Man. This is intended to parallel Marx’s critique of capitalism and of the exploitation of the working class by the bourgeoisie. The key point is that Orwell clearly endorses this critique and invites the reader to identify with it. [9]
’The life of an animal is misery and slavery: that is the plain truth ... Why then do we continue in this miserable condition? Because nearly the whole produce of our labour is stolen from us by human beings,’ says Old Major, and Orwell obviously agrees. The animals’ rebellion, i.e. the workers’ revolution, and the defence of their revolution in the Battle of the Cowshed are depicted as entirely justifiable and their aspirations for prosperity, peace, comradeship and equality as noble and desirable. Orwell’s indictment of the regime established by Napoleon and the pigs is that it is indistinguishable in its tyranny and oppressiveness from the rule of Man in general and Mr Jones in particular. Throughout the book no human (i.e. bourgeois) appears as anything other than an exploiter.
Animal Farm also contains a neat little satire on the role of religion in the character of Moses, the tame raven, who is ‘a spy and a tale bearer’ but also a clever talker who tells the animals about ‘Sugarcandy Mountain’ to which all animals are supposed to go when they die. Moses is driven out in the Rebellion but is later allowed to return by me pigs who use him for the same purposes he was used for by Mr Jones, and many of the animals revert to their belief in his stories of Sugarcandy Mountain. ‘Their lives now, they reasoned, were hungry and laborious; was it not right and just that a better world should exist somewhere else?’ [10] Here Orwell is clearly making use of a simplified version of the Marxist analysis of religion.
A further critical and subversive feature of Animal Farm is the way it deals with the pigs’ justification for their privileges. The first breach in the principle of animal equality comes when, immediately after me Rebellion, the pigs lay claim to the milk and apples:
Squealer was sent to make the necessary explanation to the others.
’Comrades,’ he cried, ‘You do not imagine, I hope, that we pigs are doing this in a spirit of selfishness and privilege? Many of us actually dislike milk and apples, I dislike them myself. Our sole object in taking these things is to preserve our health. Milk and apples (this has been proved by Science, comrades) contains substances absolutely necessary to the well being of a pig. We pigs are brain workers. The whole management and organisation of this farm depend on us. Day and night we are watching over your welfare. It is for your sake that we drink that milk and eat those apples. [11]
Here Orwell presents Squealer’s argument as merely a clever piece of self serving hypocrisy, but in so doing he exposes not only the Stalinist justification for special shops for party members and so on, but also one of the central arguments used by our own bourgeoisie to justify its privileges. If it is false that ‘brain workers’ are morally entitled to more than manual workers then how is it to be justified that lawyers earn more than dustmen or managers more than miners?
It is therefore reasonable to point out to bourgeois admirers of Animal Farm that it depicts their system as ruthless exploitation, their class as cruel and incompetent tyrants, their religion as a fraud and their ideology as a swindle. Nevertheless we would deceive ourselves if we did not also recognise that the effects of this quite sharp social criticism are outweighed and negated by the fact that the book discredits socialism and indeed any attempt at radical transformation of this unhappy state of affairs. It is the analysis of precisely how it does this which reveals the deeply reactionary content of Animal Farm.
In the first place there is the fact that the allegory works on two levels. On the one hand a number of the characters and events in die story represent actual figures and episodes from Russian history, eg Snowball represents Trotsky, the Windmill debate represents the industrialisation debate of the 1920s, Napoleon’s deal with Frederick is the Hitler-Stalin pact and so on. On the other hand some characters and events are symbolic in a wider sense. Thus Mr Jones represents the bourgeoisie, or perhaps the ruling class in general, rather than the Tsar as such; Boxer represents ‘the ordinary decent worker’ in general rather than specifically the Russian working class; Clover, Mollie and the Sheep represent definite social types (or what Orwell imagines to be definite social types) and are not in the least specifically Russian. In this way Animal Farm is simultaneously an allegory of the Russian Revolution and of revolution in general. It therefore suggests, and the suggestion is built into the very structure of the book, that the fate of the Russian Revolution is the inevitable fate of all revolutions past and future. This idea is further reinforced by the setting of the story very definitely in England, which immediately carries the message that any revolution in England is destined to end the same way.
Also very significant in conveying the same idea are the points at which the story of Animal Farm diverges markedly from actual history. This may seem an unreasonable line of argument in that a beast fable of 120 pages obviously cannot reproduce with any great exactitude all the complexity of the Russian Revolution and its degeneration. But in fact one of the most notable features of Animal Farm and one of its undeniable achievements is just how closely it manages to follow the real events and how much it packs in: not just the revolution, the exile and slander of Trotsky and the purges, but also the debate on socialism in one country [12], the peasant resistance to collectivisation (the rebellion of the hens), the strategy of the popular front (the pigeons’ change of slogan from ‘Death to humanity’ to ‘Death to Frederick’) and many other relatively minor details. Of course there is much simplification but that is what it mostly is – simplification not distortion. It is in this context that two substantial alterations, one might say falsifications, of the record are important.
The most blatant of these concerns the character of Napoleon. It is clear that Napoleon represents Stalin, just as Old Major is Marx and Snowball is Trotsky. Who then represents Lenin? Since Orwell depicts the Rebellion as led by two pigs, Napoleon and Snowball, one is forced to the conclusion that Napoleon also represents Lenin. Thus in Animal Farm the figures of Lenin and Stalin are merged into one character. This is of enormous ideological significance. The dominant orthodoxies both West and East have always insisted, each for their own reasons, on the continuity of Leninism and Stalinism: the former to discredit Marxism and the revolution itself as the inevitable prelude to tyranny, the latter to claim for themselves the heritage of the great revolutionary. Whether it was intentional or not, Orwell, by conflating Lenin and Stalin, unavoidably endorses the standard Western view.
There are a number of versions of the Leninism leads to Stalinism thesis. In one Lenin was from the outset a totalitarian personality bent on absolute personal power; in another it is the Leninist concept of the party that is the prime source of the totalitarian evil; in a third it is the very project of revolution that is the original sin and Lenin and Stalin are merely different stages in the predestined logic of revolution. But in all cases the implications and conclusions are profoundly reactionary.
If Animal Farm had contained a separate Lenin figure this would not in itself have resolved the matter (any more than it does in real life) but it would at least have permitted the continuity to be questioned within the terms of the text. As it is, the merger of Lenin and Stalin in Napoleon forecloses on this possibility and greatly strengthens the impression of a smooth and inevitable degeneration into dictatorship.
The second serious historical misrepresentation concerns the years immediately following the revolution and in particular the civil war of 1918 to 1921. In reality this was a period of immense and terrible suffering for the Russian people. The economy experienced near total breakdown, industrial production fell to a tiny fraction of its pre-revolutionary level, the transport system disintegrated, starvation and disease swept through the cities and the populations of Petrograd and Moscow, the heart of the revolution, fell drastically. The Whites came within a hairbreadth of crushing the young workers’ state and to defeat them the regime had to subordinate virtually everything to the needs of the army, including sacrificing a substantial part of the most politically conscious section of the working class. Relations between town and countryside were stretched to breaking point and beyond by the need to requisition grain. The Bolshevik regime was forced, repeat forced, as a matter of life and death of the revolution, to resort to harsh and authoritarian measures. [13]
It was in this period therefore that the material foundations of the Stalinist bureaucracy were laid. Not only were the authoritarian precedents established (the Bolshevik political monopoly, the banning of factions, and so on), which would later be employed by Stalin for his own purposes, but also the active subject and driving force of the revolution – the industrial proletariat – disintegrated. ‘Dislodged from its class groove’, as Lenin put it at the time, by the war and the economic collapse, the working class ceased to exist as a collective which could rule or control those who ruled in its name. It was this that initiated the transformation of the state and party officials into a privileged self serving bureaucracy.
It was against this background and in response to this situation that the struggle between Stalin and Trotsky developed in the 1920s, with each leader and each faction reflecting and representing divergent social forces. Stalin spearheaded me drive of the bureaucracy to free itself from any dependency on the working class and establish itself as a ruling class in its own right. Trotsky led the desperate resistance of that section of the working class and the Bolshevik Party which remained loyal to the original goals of the revolution. Victory went to Stalin not because of his personal superiority but because the social force for which he stood was, at that point in time, stronger and more cohesive man me working class.
In Animal Farm, however, this crucial period is depicted in a completely different light. The catastrophic difficulties and hardships of the early years disappear without trace.
How they toiled and sweated to get the hay in! But their efforts were rewarded, for the harvest was an even bigger success that they had hoped … Moreover, it was the biggest harvest the farm had ever seen … All through that summer the work of the farm went like clockwork. The animals were happy as they had never conceived it possible to be …With the worthless parasitical human beings gone, there was more for everyone to eat. There was more leisure too. [14]
The devastation of the civil war also vanishes. The Battle of the Cowshed, which corresponds to the civil war, is a very easy victory for the animals and lasts all of five minutes. The only casualties suffered by either side are one concussed stable lad and one dead sheep. The work of the farm is not disrupted one iota.
The effect of this misrepresentation is to deprive the rise of pig rule/Stalinism of any material root or causation. It reduces the struggle between Napoleon/Stalin and Snowball/Trotsky to a purely personal rivalry between individuals of conflicting temperaments. Even the central question of socialism in one country, which is given less prominence than the Windmill/industrialisation debate, is treated merely as logic chopping, a six-of-one half-a-dozen of the other argument with no significant influence on the fate of the farm/revolution.
As usual, Snowball and Napoleon were in disagreement. According to Napoleon, what the animals must do was to procure fire-arms and train themselves in the use of them. According to Snowball, they must send out more and more pigeons and stir up rebellion among the animals on the other farms. The one argued that if they could not defend themselves they were bound to be conquered, the other argued that if rebellions happened everywhere they would have no need to defend themselves. [15]
The omission of the material conditions of the revolution’s degeneration leads to what is the most reactionary feature of Animal Farm, namely the positive explanation it offers of the failure of the Rebellion to achieve its aims. This explanation is couched entirely in terms of the conflict between the ‘Utopian’ revolutionary goals of equality, freedom and democracy, and the innate fixed characteristics of the different animals.
Thus the pigs’ greed and lust for power commence from the very moment that Jones is overthrown and apply to all me pigs without exception. Orwell makes a special point of noting that on the appropriation of the milk and apples, ‘All the pigs were in full agreement … even Snowball’ [16] and such resistance as is offered to the rise of Napoleon, first by Snowball and then by the four young porkers, who protest at the abolition of me Sunday meetings, is never directed at pig rule or pig privilege as such. No reasons are given for this unanimous corruption of the pigs. It is simply presented as automatic – the inevitable expression of pig nature.
The basis of the pigs’ dominance is, of course, their superior intelligence. [17] This, like their greed, is presented as given and inborn, ‘the work of teaching and organising the others fell naturally upon the pigs who were generally recognised as being the cleverest of the animals.’ [18] The leadership role of Napoleon and Snowball is also ‘natural’ in origin. ‘Pre-eminent among the pigs were two young boars named Snowball and Napoleon ... All the other male pigs on the farm were porkers.’ [19] And what of the sows? Well, ‘naturally’ they are not worth mentioning!
Orwell misses no opportunity to reinforce the same message. In the first vote on whether rats are comrades ‘there were only four dissentients, the three dogs and the cat’. [20] The sheep behave from first to last exclusively as ‘sheep’ and Mollie, ‘the foolish, pretty white mare’ who asks ‘the stupidest questions’ [21], is only being true to her ‘nature’ when she defects to Man for the sake of sugar and ribbons. [22] In fact no animal in Animal Farm undergoes any development or is able to escape from the prison and destiny of inherited character.
This is a deeply conservative viewpoint and its right wing implications come most to the fore when we ask the question, what enables Napoleon to usurp power, how does he get away with it? The answer of Animal Farm, Orwell’s answer, is essentially that it is the stupidity of the other animals. This stupidity is emphasised throughout. In the first ‘heroic’ days of the Rebellion all decisions are taken by the general assembly or ‘Meeting’ (corresponding roughly to the Soviets) but the democracy is fatally flawed because of the animals’ lack of intelligence. ‘It was always the pigs who put forward the resolutions. The other animals understood how to vote, but could never think of any resolutions of their own.’ [23] It is for the same reason that Snowball’s attempt to involve and educate the lower creatures in Animal Committees proves a failure, as do their reading and writing classes [24], a fact which is crucial for the repeated manipulation and deception of the animals with regard to the Seven Commandments.
But if virtually all the animals (bar the pigs) are stupid it is the stupidity of Boxer the cart-horse, who symbolises the ordinary, decent, average working man, that is most stressed and most important. Boxer is key because Boxer, like the working class, has the power to deal with Napoleon and his dogs. Orwell certainly seems to have grasped the power of the working class, for he presents this very dramatically. In the scene which parallels the Moscow Trials Napoleon has set the dogs on the four previously dissident pigs. The dogs have tasted blood and three of them fling themselves at Boxer:
Boxer saw them coming and put out his great hoof, caught a dog in mid-air and pinned him to the ground. The dog shrieked for mercy and the other two fled with the tails between their legs. Boxer looked at Napoleon to know whether he should crush the dog or let it go. [25]
Boxer has the power but he never uses it. At every stage he is duped by Napoleon and Squealer. And he is duped because he is stupid. His response to every new piece of corruption, every new oppression, every new lie is the pathetic and submissive repetition of his mottos, ‘Napoleon is always right’ and ‘I will work harder.’ Boxer is not just stupid through circumstance, he is congenitally and irrevocably stupid. When Boxer makes his first appearance it is his strength and stupidity that are immediately mentioned:
Boxer was an enormous beast … as strong as any two ordinary horses put together … a somewhat stupid appearance, and in fact he was not of first-rate intelligence. [26]
And his stupidity resists all attempts at education. Despite great efforts he is unable to learn the alphabet beyond the letter ‘D’.
What a horrible and slanderous picture of the working class this is. Of course the intellectual development of workers is damaged by social conditions, by poverty, abysmal education and alienated labour. Of course in normal times most workers are to a greater or lesser extent dominated by the ideas of the ruling class. But these characteristics are neither innate nor unchangeable. At peaks in the class struggle ‘ordinary’ workers display extraordinary initiative and creativity and even in the depths of reaction, when the confidence to resist openly has been smashed, they are never as stupid, brainwashed and supine as Orwell suggests here.
We are now in a position to summarise succinctly the political message which emerges from Orwell’s allegorical account of the degeneration of the revolution.
It is that, while the old order is undoubtedly exploitative and cruel, the attempt to create a new order of equality and freedom is doomed to fail because it is contrary to certain unchangeable features of human nature. The division of society into rulers and ruled, exploiters and exploited is inevitable because it rests on ‘natural’ inequalities, above all inequalities of intelligence. Egalitarian revolutions founder and will continue to founder because (a) there will always be some (the elite, the intellectuals, me leaders, the superior) who will seek to exploit the revolution for their own ends; and (b) they will succeed in this because the mass of ordinary people, specifically me industrial working class, are intellectually incapable of organising production and running society democratically – the working class cannot emancipate itself.
No wonder therefore that Animal Farm is so vigorously promoted by the right, for it endorses two of the most fundamental themes in its ideology: that the privileged classes owe their position to their personal superiority and that no better system is possible because the masses are inferior. The bourgeoisie is quite willing to concede that life under its rule is hard, cruel and unfair – in some ways it is to its advantage that this should be recognised and accepted – provided only that it is also accepted that mere is no alternative.
That Orwell himself does not relish this conclusion, that he finds it morally repugnant, that he sincerely cares for the lower orders and that it is not explicitly formulated but arises ‘spontaneously’ and inescapably from the story only serves to make it the more weighty.
What then accounts for this deep contradiction in Orwell’s world view? In my opinion it is the product of two factors which interact with each other.
The first is his class background. Orwell, or Eric Blair, was born into the administrative middle class of imperial Britain and educated at prep-school, Wellington and Eton. ‘To me in my early boyhood,’ he recalls, ‘to nearly all children of families like mine “common people” seemed almost sub-human.’ [27] Of course Orwell broke with this background, abandoned his career with the Indian police, rejected many of the values of his class and became a champion of the ‘common man’. But it was not a complete break. Orwell did not become a militant in and of the working class movement, nor did he adopt the world outlook of the workers’ movement, i.e. Marxism. [28] Rather he adopted the role of the self conscious outsider who, while investigating the conditions of the workers and the poor (and sympathising with them), would retain his individual independence and detachment. In the process he never lost his scepticism about the political capacities of the working class. This, like many of his psychological attitudes to the working class, is most clearly expressed in The Road to Wigan Pier:
The first thing that must strike any outside observer is that Socialism in its developed form is a theory confined entirely to the middle classes … a working man, so long as he remains a genuine working man, is seldom or never a Socialist in the complete, logically consistent sense … so far as my experience goes, no genuine working man grasps the larger implications of Socialism … As for the philosophic side of Marxism … I have never met a working man who had the faintest interest in it … I have yet to meet a working miner, steel-worker, cotton weaver, docker, navvy or what not who was ideologically sound. [29]
This diatribe presents itself as an attack on middle class intellectual socialists, but its underlying implication is clear. Socialism in its developed form is a middle class phenomenon because workers are not capable of grasping generalised political ideas. The denial is all the more striking in that Orwell was only able to write The Road to Wigan Pier thanks to the assistance of organised political workers.
The same theme pervades the depiction of the ‘proles’ in Nineteen Eighty Four as ‘like the ant which can see small objects but not large ones’ and ‘people who had never learned to think’. Even in the great exception, Homage to Catalonia, much of the force of Orwell’s celebrated description of ‘a town where the working class was in the saddle’ comes from his amazement that working class people could achieve such a thing. [30]
The second factor and obviously objectively the most important is the bleak times through which Orwell lived: Victor Serge’s ‘midnight in the century’ – the rise of Hitler and Stalin, the Moscow Trials, the betrayal of the Spanish Revolution and the triumph of Franco, the Second World War. That Orwell should sink, under the weight of these terrible defeats and horrors, into pessimism, despair and peculiar cynicism is understandable. That such events should revive and confirm many of his deep fears and prejudices about the working class is not surprising. Conversely it is self evident that if Stalinism and Fascism had been defeated and international socialism had triumphed neither Animal Farm nor Nineteen Eighty Four would have been written. But to understand the social conditioning of a message is not to endorse it or even make it more palatable and certainly does not change the fact that it is a message which socialists have to combat.
This predominantly negative assessment of the politics of Animal Farm will, I expect, meet with the objection from some quarters that it underestimates the courage of Orwell’s anti-Stalinism. I have no wish to deny that courage but my concern is to evaluate a book, not a person, and we must remember that courage can serve all manner of causes, some downright reactionary. Nor can we forget that from the standpoint of revolutionary socialism anti-Stalinism is essential but by no means sufficient.
Anti-Stalinism that is based not on a materialist analysis of the degeneration of the Russian Revolution and a commitment to working class self-emancipation, but simply on moral rejection of totalitarian methods and practices can lead to liberalism, Stalinophobia and right wing anti-Communism. An examination of Orwell’s trajectory post-Animal Farm reveals elements of these traits including a tendency to see Communism, even here in the West, as the main enemy. This is a drift which culminates in Nineteen Eighty Four, but its roots are already clearly discernible in Animal Farm.

Notes
1. G. Orwell, Collected Essays, Journalism and Letters (CEJL) (London 1968), Vol. 1, p. 7.
2. G. Orwell, Animal Farm (London 1987), p. 120.
3. Raymond Williams is, I think, right to suggest of the first of these moments that ‘It is one of those permanent statements about the gap between pretence and actuality, profession and practice, over a very wide range’, and of the second that ‘Seeing that they are the same because they act the same, never mind the labels and the formalities: that is a moment of gained consciousness, a potentially liberating discovery’. (R. Williams, Orwell (Glasgow 1971), p. 74).
4. CEJL, Vol. 1, pp. 377–8.
5. See CEJL, Vol. 1, p. 539, and R. Williams, op. cit., pp. 63–64.
6. In the preface to the Ukrainian edition he wrote: ‘… For the past ten years I have been convinced that the destruction of the Soviet myth was essential if we wanted a revival of the Socialist movement.’ CEJL, Vol. 3, p. 405.
7. CEJL, Vol. 1, p. 5.
8. See CEJL, Vol. 4, p. 502.
9. It should be noted that what Orwell endorses is Marx’s (moral) condemnation of capitalism and not Marx’s theory of history. Orwell was never at any point a Marxist theoretically and had only a very rudimentary knowledge of Marxism.
10. Animal Farm, p. 100.
11. Animal Farm, p. 32.
12. See Animal Farm, p. 46.
13. The basic facts concerning this terrible period should be known to most International Socialism readers. However, the best of many accounts is T. Cliff, Lenin, Vol. 3, The Revolution Besieged (London 1978).
14. Animal Farm, pp. 25–26.
15. Ibid., p. 46,
16. Ibid., p. 32.
17. Note the contradiction between this and the milk and apples episode already highlighted. Ethically Orwell rejects superior intelligence as a justification for privileges, but sociologically he depicts it as the basis of class divisions.
18. Animal Farm, p. 15.
19. Ibid.
20. Ibid., p. 11.
21. Ibid., p. 16.
22. The character of Mollie is a particularly crude sexist stereotype, symptomatic of Orwell’s attitude to women.
23. Animal Farm, p. 28.
24. There is another interesting contradiction here which may again illustrate the conflict between Orwell’s intentions and his execution, between his conscious purposes and his sub or semi-conscious assumptions. On page 29 he tells us, ‘The reading and writing classes however were a great success. By autumn almost every animal was literate to some degree’. But on page 30 he goes into detail and it turns out that, apart from the pigs, only the dogs, Muriel the goat and Benjamin the donkey learn to read. The vast bulk of the animals get no further than the letter ‘A’.
25. Animal Farm, p. 72.
26. Animal Farm, p. 6.
27. G. Orwell, The Road to Wigan Pier (Harmondsworth 1987), p. 10.
28. Orwell’s service with the POUM militia might seem to contradict this, but his original intention in going to Spain was to ‘gather materials for newspaper articles, etc.’ (CEJL, Vol. 1, p. 316) and his membership of the POUM was almost accidental, not based on political commitment. (See R. Williams, op. cit., pp. 54–55.)
29. The Road to Wigan Pier, pp. 152–5.
30. I am indebted to Charlie Hore for this observation.
 



The Pure Revolution: Anti-Bolshevik Communism
Paul Mattick
Merlin Press £3
The revolutionary crisis that gripped European the wake of the Russian revolution and the first world war led to a complete shake-up and realignment of the working class movement. The pre-war division between the social democrats ‘marxists’ and the syndicalists/anarchists was replaced by the division between the now openly reformist social democrats in the Second International and the revolutionary communists in the Third International.
Many syndicalists and semi-anarchists who, as Trotsky put it ‘really wanted to tear the bourgeoisie’s head off, and were attracted by the revolutionary audacity of the Bolsheviks and above all by the soviet system of workers’ councils, sought to join the Third International. One of the products of this period was a movement of extreme leftist, or ‘ultra-left’ communists who attempted a kind of fusion of Marxism and syndicalism which received the name ‘council communism’.
Fired with revolutionary enthusiasm, and disgusted by the chauvinism, opportunism and outright counter-revolution of social democracy, the council communists demanded a direct onslaught by the proletariat on capitalism. No compromises, alliances, temporary retreats or tactical manoeuvres could be tolerated. Parliament was obsolete, so communists should have nothing to do with it, trade unions had become agents of capitalism, so the answer was to break up the unions and build new organisations.
Lenin saw clearly that such tactics would isolate the communists from the mass of workers who retained illusions in Parliament, the unions and social democracy and make it impossible to win over a majority of the working class, and issued a firm but comradely rebuttal in Left-Wing Communism; and Infantile Disorder.
Faced with this criticism and its endorsement of the Comintern, some of the council Communists denounced Bolshevism as a new opportunism and attempted to build new organisations of their own, notably the Communist Workers Party of Germany (KAPD).
Paul Mattick, a revolutionary youth at the time is heir to this tradition. The council communists as a presence in the working-class movement did not survive the early 1920s, but Mattick, with rare consistency, has attempted to cling to and develop their positions ever since. This collection of essays, written over the last forty years, is the record of this project.
In Mattick’s view, social democracy, Bolshevism, Trotskyism, Stalinism, fascism, are all merely aspects of a developing state capitalism. Indeed the whole history of the labour movement and the working class’s struggle up to now is seen as little more than an accessory to the process of capital accumulation and concentration.
Lenin’s theory of the party is equated with Stalinism on the basis of Lenin’s position in 1902, with no regard for the changes in the theory that took place in 1905 and after, and no regard for the seething democratic reality of the Bolshevik party in 1917. The problem of counter-revolution in 1917, because it does not fit Mattick’s scheme, is simply wished away without evidence or argument.
The Communist International was Lenin’s bid for world power. Lenin and Trotsky’s condemnation of German Communist Party’s hopelessly adventurist March Action in 1921 is depicted as opposition to the German revolution as such, when Mattick must know that the March Action was a disaster for the German working class and revolutionary movement, and it was exclusively on this basis that Lenin and Trotsky criticised it.
Socialism in one country was ‘not a perversion of the Leninist standpoint’ but a ‘direct consequence’ of Lenin’s policy. Stalin was ‘the best disciple of Lenin’ in his attitude to German fascism. The controversies between Stalinists and Trotskyists are ‘superficial and often silly’. One could go on almost indefinitely for at times. Mattick descends to the level of polemic we have come to associate with American cold war hacks.
However it is neither ignorance nor malice that motivates Mattick to these absurdities but a fundamentally false theory. Mattick’s marxism is in fact a deep and thoroughgoing economism. One hesitates to make this charge (which has been so abused and misused in recent years) but, in this case, it is justified.
In the first place he regards the workers’ movement and the revolution as overwhelmingly an economic struggle with only the most marginal political element. Secondly he relies exclusively on the catastrophic and total collapse of capitalism not only to provide the context of revolution, but to produce the revolution and determine its course. Thirdly he sees in history only the direct reflection of economic development.
This is why, having grasped the fact of a global tendency towards state capitalism he treats everything, including Bolshevism and workers’ revolution, as a manifestation of this, and is unable to see that the reality of state capitalism in Russia could be established only on the basis of the political defeat of Bolshevism and that revolution.
This is why, generalising from the objective economic unity of interests of the working class, he is unable to see the uneven development of the consciousness of the class which necessitates the creation of the revolutionary party.
This is why Mattick is at his best when dealing with abstract economic theory and at this worst with a concrete historical situation, for concrete reality is never pure economics. This is why he can allow of no political strategy for the working class.
In fact Mattick’s economism dominates his whole conception of the revolutionary process. Proceeding from the contradiction of interest between labour and capital he conceives of the revolution as a pure confrontation of these two forces with all complicating factors such as peasants, national oppression rigidly excluded. But as Lenin said ‘Those who expect a pure revolution will never live to see it’. Nor, we may add, are their ideas likely to be an effective guide to action in preparing the impure, but real, revolution of the future.
 

 Molyneux: Marxism and the Party (6. Gramsci's Modern Prince)




John Molyneux Archive   |   Marxism & the Party   |   ETOL Main Page

John Molyneux
Marxism and the Party

6. Gramsci’s Modern Prince

While a beleaguered Trotsky fought to preserve and apply the Leninist theory of the party, another marxist, Antonio Gramsci, worked for 11 years in a fascist prison to develop new and original ideas on revolutionary strategy. The fruit of this immense labour, and the centrepiece of Gramscian strategy, was a new conception of the role and tasks of the revolutionary party, which constitutes the only fundamental addition to the marxist theory of the party since Lenin. Gramsci was able to achieve this breakthrough above all because of the unique philosophical perspective from which he approached the problem of the party. Consequently any analysis of Gramsci’s theory of the party must begin with a consideration of the philosophical premises on which it was based.
 
1. The philosophy of praxis
Like Georg Lukacs, the other outstanding marxist philosopher of the inter-war period, Gramsci came to marxism through Hegel and so ‘through philosophy’. The key figures in Gramsci’s intellectual formation were Benedetto Croce and Antonio Labriola. Croce was an idealist philosopher for whom the central purpose of philosophy was the understanding of history and who therefore called himself an ‘absolute historicist’. Gramsci regarded him as the highest representative of Italian bourgeois culture and indeed as one of the premier spokesmen of liberalism in the world. Croce was a critic of marxism but for Gramsci his work was on a much more advanced intellectual level than that of the vulgar marxism and positivism prevalent in pre-1914 Italy. Thus Gramsci’s relationship with Croce parallels that between Marx and Hegel – at first under his influence, then more and more seeing him as a major figure who has to be challenged and superceded in a new synthesis. What Gramsci took from Croce and developed was the rejection of economic determinism and positivism and the importance of the ‘ethico-political’ or ‘ideological’ moment in history.
The bridge between marxism and Crocean idealism was provided by Antonio Labriola, the ‘founding father’ of Italian marxism at the end of the nineteenth century. Labriola was a professor of philosophy at the University of Rome who came to marxism late in life having been a leading figure in the Italian Hegelian school. It was Labriola who first introduced the term ‘the philosophy of praxis’, used by Gramsci as a substitute for ‘marxism’ in the Prison Notebooks in order to get past the prison censor. [1] Gramsci had a high regard for Labriola, valuing especially his emphasis on the unity of theory and practice and the independence of marxism from any other philosophical currents. In the Prison Notebooks Gramsci describes him as ‘the only man who has attempted to build up the philosophy of praxis scientifically’. [2]
The direction in which Gramsci’s ideas were moving was clearly shown by the article with which he greeted the Russian Revolution, The Revolution against Das Kapital, in which he praised the Bolsheviks for their refusal to be bound by iron historical laws. And when, after the first world war, Gramsci became a fully-fledged marxist and communist, his version of marxism was completely different from the orthodox ‘scientific’ Amaterialism which characterised the Second International, and which largely dominated the Third Internatioal as well, except for Lenin who had revised his philosophical position in 1914.
For the mature Gramsci of the Prison Notebooks ‘the philosophy of praxis is absolute “historicism”, the absolute secularisation and earthliness of thought, an absolute humanism of history’. [3] It is totally opposed to all forms of transcendentalism, be it the transcendentalism of an abstract ‘human nature’ or ‘man in general’, of religion and derivative idealist philosophies, or the transcendentalism of metaphysical materialism basing itself on ‘objective laws’.
By defining marxism in an historicist/humanist way, Gramsci separates himself not only from Bukharin and Kautsky and from the neo-Kantians but also from Plekhanov, the philosophical teacher of all the Russian marxists, and this leads him to a critique of the standard presentation of issues which are of the greatest importance for the theory of the party: fatalism, prediction and economic determinism.
As we have frequently pointed out, fatalistic interpretations of marxism have repeatedly hindered understanding of the role of the party, and it is one of Lenin’s great achievements that he broke with the Second International’s fatalist conception of organisation. But what distinguishes Gramsci from Lenin, Trotsky and other opponents of fatalism is that the latter never really confronted fatalism as such at a philosophical level. The basic argument was always avoided by introducing the time factor. Of course in the long run, they would say, the unity of the proletariat, the victory of socialism etc. is inevitable, but the question is how to speed up this process, what we should do now and so on. In this way the baleful effects of fatalism were repeatedly warded off, but because of the concession of ultimate inevitability, fatalism itself was never fundamentally refuted. For Gramsci, however, although he recognises the historically ‘useful’ role played by fatalism, there is no such basic equivocation. ‘It should be noted how the deterministic, fatalistic, and mechanistic element has been a direct ideological “aroma” emanating from the philosophy of praxis, rather like religion or drugs (in their stupefying effect).’ [4]
In periods of defeat the fatalist view that ‘history is on our side’ has been a great source of strength and resistance, but when the proletariat takes the stage as the active director of events (i.e. in a revolution) ‘mechanicism at a certain point becomes an imminent danger’. [5]
For the deterministic marxist the great strength of marxism as against bourgeois ideology is its ability to foresee the future because of its insight into the ‘laws of history’. This claim is made by Bukharin, and it is a recurring theme in the writings of Trotsky and many others. Gramsci, however, writes that:
In reality one can ‘scientifically’ foresee only the struggle, but not the concrete moments of the struggle, which cannot but be the results of opposing forces in continuous movement, which are never reducible to fixed quantities since within them quantity is continually becoming quality. In reality one can ‘foresee’ to the extent that one acts, to the extent that one applies a voluntary effort and therefore contributes concretely to creating the result ‘foreseen’. Prediction reveals itself not as a scientific act of knowledge, but as the abstract expression of the effort made, the practical way of creating a collective will. [6]
If, for Gramsci, fatalism was akin to religion, then economic determinism was little better than superstition and a complete vulgarisation of marxism. Against economic determinism as a historical methodology he cites ‘the authentic testimony of Marx, the author of concrete political and historical works’. [7]
Gramsci sees ‘economism’ or syndicalism as a tendency in the working-class movement as derived more from laissez-faire liberalism [8] (the free play of economic forces) than from marxism, which aims through politics at the subordination of economic forces to man’s will. Syndicalism is the theory of an oppressed class ‘which is prevented by this theory from ever becoming dominant’. [9]
Ultra-left electoral abstentionism , absolute rejection of ‘compromises’ and hostility to alliances are all linked by Gramsci with ‘economism’ in that they are all based on the conviction that economic laws (especially as manifested in capitalist crises) will of themselves lead to socialism. To Gramsci this view of the role of economic crises was ‘out and out historical mysticism, the awaiting of a sort of miraculous illumination’. [10] On the contrary:
it may be ruled out that immediate economic crises of themselves produce fundamental historical events: they can simply create a terrain more favourable to the dissemination of certain modes of thought, and certain ways of posing and resolving questions involving the entire subsequent development of national life. [11]
For Gramsci a genuine marxist analysis of a situation must be a concrete study of the relation of forces in the situation with a view to changing it. Such an analysis must incorporate and distinguish at least three ‘moments’ or levels’. [12]


‘The relation of social forces closely linked to the structure, objective, independent of human will and which can be measured with the systems of the exact or physical sciences’. On this basis one can discover ‘whether in a particular society there exist the necessary and sufficient conditions for its transformation’.
 
The relation of political forces: ‘an evaluation of the homogeneity, self awareness and organisation attained by the various social classes’.
 
The relation of military forces. ‘Historical development oscillates continually between the first and the third moment with the mediation of the second’ [13], writes Gramsci, and it is precisely with the second, mediating, moment of politics that he is particularly concerned.


Gramsci, then, assigns to philosophies, conceptions of the world and the ideas men hold an important and active role in the making of history. Naturally this opens him to charges of voluntarism and idealism (and such charges were frequently forthcoming in inner-party struggles). In fact Gramsci is concerned not with philosophy in the abstract, but with the concrete historical development of particular philosophies, and above all with their impact on the everyday thinking and ‘common sense’ of the masses.
For a mass of people to be led to think coherently in the same coherent fashion about the present world is a ‘philosophical’ event far more important and ‘original’ than the discovery by some philosophical ‘genius’ of a truth which remains the property of small groups of intellectuals. [14]
Gramsci insists that ‘everyone is a philosopher, though in his own way and unconsciously’ [15], but what is necessary is to transform that which is implicit, contradictory and fragmented in the masses into a critical and systematic awareness which can result in the formation of a popular collective will to action. But a world outlook does not grow spontaneously in isolated individuals. The formation of a collective will requires a point of origin and a point of dissemination. There must be an active force working to develop it in both theory and practice. [16]
Thus Gramsci’s philosophy of praxis with its emphasis on conscious human agency in history and its rejection of all mechanical or rigid determinism led directly to the question of the revolutionary party and made him superbly equipped to deal with it. But on the basis of philosophical sophistication alone, Gramsci would not have been able to significantly advance the theory of the party. [17] For Gramsci’s theory of the party, there was a second precondition: profound involvement in political practice in the working-class movement and the concrete analysis thereof. It is to this that we now turn.
 
2. The Italian experience – revolution and defeat
The decisive political experience for the shaping of Gramsci’s thought was the rising of the Italian workers, spearheaded by the proletariat of Turin in 1919 and 1920. Gramsci’s intervention in these events, through the weekly journal L’Ordine Nuovo, brought him into the closest contact with the Turin workers. He recalled that
At that time no initiative was taken that was not tested in reality ... if the opinions of the workers were not taken fully into account. For this reason, our initiatives appeared as the interpretation of a felt need, never as the cold application of intellectual schema. [18]
Gramsci’s great achievement in L’Ordine Nuovo was the translation into Italy of the Russian idea of Soviets, through the development of the already existing factory internal commissions into factory councils as the foundation of a new state. In an important passage written in 1920 Gramsci summed up his basic conception of communism.
We have therefore maintained: 1. that the revolution is not necessarily proletarian and communist if it proposes and obtains the overthrow of the bourgeois state; 2. nor is it proletarian and communist if it proposes and obtains the destruction of the representative institutions and administrative machine through which the central government exercises the political power of the bourgeoisie; 3. it is not proletarian and communist even if the wave of popular insurrection places power in the hands of men who call themselves (and sincerely are) communists. The revolution is proletarian and communist only insofar as it liberates proletarian and communist forces of production, forces that have been developing within the society ruled by the capital class. It is proletarian and communist insofar as it advances and promotes the growth and systematisation of proletarian and communist forces that can begin the patient, methodical work necessary for the construction of a new order in the relations of production and distribution. [19]
This emphasis on the creative, constructive aspect of the workers’ revolution as against the destructive aspect of overthrowing capitalism was to remain a constant theme in Gramsci’s thought.
But this experience was also a negative one in that it revealed the decisive weakness of the Italian Socialist Party (PSI) and the whole tradition of Italian maximalist socialism. The mainstream of Italian socialism completely failed to appreciate the significance of the factory councils, regarding them as a threat to the established order of the trade unions, and the Turin proletariat was left to fight alone. At the crucial moment, the PSI remained bureaucratically paralysed and unable or unwilling to give coherent leadership to the rising revolutionary movement; as a result the initiative was lost and the way opened for the vicious counterrevolution which had its climax in Mussolini’s march on Rome. Gramsci’s response to this betrayal was a devastating critique entitled Toward a Renewal of the Socialist Party [20] in which he indicted the party leadership for its failure to create a homogeneous fighting party purged of its reformist and non-communist elements, its failure to involve the party in the life of the Third International, its lack of a revolutionary opposition in the General Confederation of Labour, its attachment to parliamentary democracy and its abstentionist refusal to launch a struggle for power. These theses, which received the endorsement of Lenin, concluded that,
the existence of a cohesive and highly disciplined communist party with factory, trade-union and co-operative cells, that can co-ordinate and centralise in its central executive committee the whole revolutionary action of the proletariat, is the fundamental and indispensable condition for any experiment in Soviets. [21]
Thus not only Gramsci’s philosophical position but also his practical experience led him to the question of the party. At first, however, his originality was masked and he was unable to pursue an independent policy. This was due partly to the pressure of day-to-day events in the period of growing fascist repression, and partly to the position in which he found himself within the newly formed Communist Party of Italy (PCI). The PCI was split between the dominating figure of Amadeo Bordiga, an unbending ultra-leftist, and an opportunist right wing led by Angelo Tasca. Gramsci disagreed profoundly with Bordiga, but valued his presence in the party leadership and was unwilling to challenge him for fear of handing the party over to Tasca. It was not until his incarceration in 1926 that Gramsci had the opportunity to develop and expound his ideas, and by this time events on the world scene also loomed large in his concerns. He wished to learn the lessons of the defeat of the post-war revolutionary wave, not just in Italy, but throughout Europe; and in the growth of the fascist corporate state and the emergence of Fordism in America, Gramsci discerned new developments in capitalism which would pose new strategic problems for the workers’ movement.
This was the background against which Gramsci, in his prison writings, began to elaborate his concept of the revolutionary party.
 
3. The ‘Modern Prince’ and the dual perspective
In the Prison Notebooks Gramsci approaches the question of the party through a study of Machiavelli’s The Prince. The significance of Machiavelli for Gramsci is that he represented a pioneering attempt in Italy to show how to create a national collective will for the foundation of a new state (a unified bourgeois Italy). Machiavelli was a ‘precocious Jacobin’ [22], who through the myth-figure of ‘the Prince’ set out the political leadership, the strategy and the tactics necessary for the achievement of this end. The foundation of a new workers’ state also requires such political leadership – a ‘modern prince’. But Gramsci argues:
The modern prince ... cannot be a real person, a concrete individual. It can only be an organism, a complex element of society in which a collective will which has already been recognised and has to some extent asserted itself in action, begins to take concrete form. History has already provided this organism, and it is the political party – the first cell in which there come together germs of a collective will tending to become universal and total. [23]
Just as Machiavelli shows the necessary characteristics of a successful prince, so Gramsci proceeds, basing himself throughout on the philosophical position we have outlined above, to discuss the necessary characteristics of the revolutionary party. Unfortunately this is not done systematically, but in a series of very rich and complicated observations which are more or less disconnected and in which prescriptions for the marxist party intermingle with analytical points about parties in general. Thus any relatively brief exposition of these ideas, such as this study, must necessarily attempt to pick out the main themes and give them a structure not present (at least explicitly) in the original. This must to some extent be an arbitrary and unsatisfactory process, but it is unavoidable. A useful starting point for understanding the originality of Gramsci’s theory is his notion of the ‘dual perspective’ with which the party must operate. The term itself actually derives from Section XIII of the Theses on Tactics adopted under the inspiration of Zinoviev by the Fifth World Congress of the Comintern [24]; but it is clear that Gramsci invests the concept with much greater universal significance and deeper content than its originator intended. He writes:
The dual perspective can present itself on various levels, from the most elementary to the most complex: but these can all theoretically be reduced to two fundamental levels, corresponding to the dual nature of Machiavelli’s Centaur – half-animal and half-human. They are the levels of force and consent, authority and hegemony, violence and civilisation, of the individual moment and the universal moment (‘church’ and ‘state’) of agitation and propaganda, of tactics and of strategy etc. [25]
Gramsci resists any mechanical separation of the two levels or any attempt to present them as successive stages, separate in time. The element of consent is always present in the application of force, and the element of force is always present in the achievement of consent. The editors of the English edition of Selections from the Prison Notebooks comment:
Perhaps one can see here an attempt to theorise the struggle Gramsci had conducted in the PCI against Bordiga on the one hand and Tasca on the other. Bordiga in this schema would represent an undialectical isolation of the moment of force, domination etc., Tasca a parallel isolation of the moment of consent, hegemony; Gramsci sought to theorise the unity of the two perspectives. [26]
But it is also true that, just as in the revolutionary dialectic of destruction/reconstruction Gramsci emphasises reconstruction, so, while never losing sight of the moment of force, it is the moment of consent which Gramsci emphasises and on which he develops his researches. The reason for this stress is partially polemical (i.e. the struggle against Bordigism) but primarily Gramsci’s profound reappraisal of the tasks facing revolutionary parties as a result of the defeat of the post-war revolutionary wave and the development of modern capitalism.
If the revolutionary party must pursue a ‘dual perspective’, it is because the ruling class maintains itself by the same method – by a combination of dictatorship and hegemony, which are respectively institutionalised in political state power and in civil society. But repressive state power and the institutions of civil society do not develop evenly or stand in the same relationship to each other at all times or in all countries. The revolutionary party must make a concrete analysis of this relationship and shape its strategy accordingly. In particular Gramsci believed that the post-war failure of the revolution in the West was the consequence of a basic difference between Russia and the West in this respect.
In Russia the state was everything, civil society was primordial and gelatinous; in the West, there was a proper relation between state and civil society and when the state trembled a sturdy structure of civil society was at once revealed. [27]
And also
in the case of the most advanced states ... ‘civil society’ has become a very complex structure and one which is resistant to the catastrophic ‘incursions’ of the immediate economic element (crises, depressions, etc.) [28]
In Russia therefore the capitalist state stood isolated in its repressive functions and was susceptible to a speedy frontal attack, but in the West where capitalism was older and had struck much deeper roots in society a different strategy was required. Gramsci, using an analogy from military strategy, terms this ‘the war of position’, as against the previous ‘war of manoeuvre’. [29] At other points in the Notebooks Gramsci poses the question of transition from war of manoeuvre to war of position differently – not in terms of Russia and the West, but in terms of time scale. ‘In the present epoch the war of movement took place politically from March 1917 to March 1921; this was followed by a war of position.’ [30]
There need be no contradiction here, as Gramsci may be suggesting that the war of manoeuvre was always inadequate for advanced capitalism, but that it was only after the defeats of 1921 that this began to be realised (with the turn to the united-front policy by the Comintern).
In contrast to the war of manoeuvre which offers the prospect of quick victory, the war of position implies a long drawn out ‘reciprocal siege’ [31] which demands an ‘unprecedented concentration of hegemony’. [32] The struggle of the revolutionary party to undermine the consent given by the masses to the authority of the ruling class (which is secured through a thousand institutional and associational channels and penetrates deeply into everyday ‘common sense’ thought) and to establish its own hegemony must take place on three related levels. The first is the question of alliances:
The proletariat can become the leading and ruling class to the extent to which it succeeds in creating a system of class alliances which enables it to mobilise the majority of the working population against capitalism and the bourgeois state. [33]
Such alliances, Gramsci points out, must inevitably contain an element of compromise. ‘If the union of two forces is necessary in order to defeat a third ... the only concrete possibility is compromise.’ [34] The aversion on principle of ultra-lefts to compromises and therefore to alliances is, he argues, a product of their fatalistic ‘economism’:
since favourable conditions are inevitably going to appear ... it is evident that any deliberate initiative tending to predispose and plan these conditions is not only useless but even harmful. [35]
Gramsci, on the contrary, placed especial importance on the strategy of alliances, because in Italy the revolution could be made only through an alliance of the northern proletariat and the southern peasantry – a question on which the record of Italian socialism was poor. The overcoming of all sectarian tendencies in the party is a precondition of its achieving hegemony. Thus it is not surprising that Gramsci was completely opposed to the tactics of the Stalinist ‘third period’, although this was concealed at the time. [36]
The second level of the struggle for hegemony is that of the education of one’s own forces. For the war of position it is not possible to rely solely on the mobilisation of the mass of workers behind immediate demands and slogans. Rather they have to be won over at the basic level of their world view and welded into a ‘permanently organised and long prepared force which can be put into the field at the favourable moment’. [37] To do this the party must
never tire of repeating its own arguments (though offering literary variation of form): repetition is the best didactic means for working on the popular mentality (and must) work incessantly to raise the intellectual level of ever-growing strata of the populace. [38]
This requires a correction of the balance between agitation and propaganda (in favour of propaganda) [39], for the party must not only be an expression of the class but must ‘react energetically [upon it] in order to develop, solidify and universalise [it]’. [40] Sectarian dogmatism in theory is fatal for such a work of ‘intellectual and moral reform’, and Gramsci was always opposed to the appearance of, for example, crude anti-clericalism in socialist propaganda. The raising of the intellectual level of the masses cannot be brought about by the imposition of dogma, but must come through separating the element of ‘good sense’ in their ‘common sense’ from the element of confused prejudice and through working to expand and develop it. This requires a sophisticated and non-economistic marxist method.
The third level, which conditions the success of the first two, might be termed the struggle for the intellectuals, and this in turn has two aspects. First, it is necessary to create a stratum of intellectuals ‘organic’ to the working class. Here Gramsci is not using intellectual in the usual way to signify the man of letters, the philosopher, the abstract thinker etc, but to refer to the worker who has a clear conception of the world and of his aims, is an active participant in practical life, a ‘permanent persuader’ and who constitutes the organising directive element in the working class. In other words, the proletarian counterpart to the organic intellectuals of the bourgeoisie – the industrial technicians, the political economists, the judges and lawyers etc. [41]
The formation of ‘elites of intellectuals of a new type which arise directly out of the masses, but remain in contact with them to become, as it were, the whalebone in the corset ... is what really modifies the “ideological panorama” of the age’. [42]
But Gramsci is not utopian about this. He is fully aware from his own experience of the difficulty of intellectual labour and systematic study, especially for the worker, and recognises that the formation of worker-intellectuals is a long slow process that can be completed only after the conquest of state power.
It is also necessary, however, to carry out work in relation to non-proletarian intellectuals, though again Gramsci is clear about the limitations of this.
The intellectuals develop slowly, much more slowly than any other social group, because of their own nature and historical role ... To think it possible that this type can, as a mass, break with the whole of the past in order to place itself wholeheartedly on the side of a new ideology, is absurd. It is absurd for the intellectuals as a mass, and perhaps absurd also for very many intellectuals taken individually, despite all the honest efforts they make and want to make. Now the intellectuals interest us as a mass, and not only as individuals. It is certainly important and useful for the proletariat that one or more intellectuals, individually, adhere to its programme and its doctrine, merge themselves with the proletariat, and become and feel themselves an integral part of it ... But it is also important and useful that a break of an organic kind, characterised historically, is caused inside the mass of intellectuals: that there is formed, as a mass formation, a left-wing tendency, in the modern sense of the word, that is, one which is orientated towards the revolutionary proletariat. [43]
This is necessary not only because it undermines the exercise of bourgeois hegemony in general, but because Gramsci considers that the intellectuals play a key role in maintaining the system of alliances constructed by the ruling class with subordinate strata, and therefore can play a corresponding role in the system of alliances that must be constructed by the party of the proletariat. With regard to Italy, Gramsci analyses the role of intellectuals in the southern agrarian bloc, where they acted as mediators between the peasants and the big landowners; and argues that a left tendency among the intellectuals is one of the prerequisites for breaking this bloc and securing the alliance of the peasantry with the proletariat. In this connection Gramsci notes that the more developed the stratum of organic intellectuals of the proletariat, the greater the pole of attraction the revolutionary party will constitute for the intellectuals in general, and that such intellectuals are likely to be repelled if presented with a vulgar materialist version of marxist theory.
 
4. Spontaneity and leadership
Underlying the whole of Gramsci’s theory of the party is his conception of the relationship of spontaneity and conscious leadership, which can be regarded, at least partially, as equivalent to the relationship between party and class and which is the fundamental question of the marxist theory of the party. His presentation of the problem is a clear advance on that which was achieved by Rosa Luxemburg, the early Lenin or by Lukacs, and corresponds most closely to the position of the mature Lenin. Gramsci begins with a critique of the very concept of pure spontaneity.
It must be stressed that ‘pure’ spontaneity does not exist in history: it would come to the same thing as ‘pure’ mechanicity. In the ‘most spontaneous’ movement it is simply the case that the elements of ‘conscious leadership’ cannot be checked, have left no reliable document. It may be said that spontaneity is therefore characteristic of the ‘history of the subaltern classes’, and indeed of their most marginal and peripheral elements ... Hence in such movements there exist multiple elements of ‘conscious leadership’ but no one of them is predominant or transcends the level of a given social stratum’s ‘popular science’ – its ‘common sense’ or traditional conception of the world. [44]
Gramsci rejects those who counterpose this spontaneity to marxism and who extol it as a political method. This mistake in theory and in practice is based on a ‘vulgar contradiction which betrays its manifest practical origin – i.e. the immediate desire to replace a given leadership by a different one’. [45] But he is equally opposed to a disdainful attitude to mass spontaneity.
Neglecting, or worse still, despising, so-called ‘spontaneous’ movements, i.e. failing to give them a conscious leadership or to raise them to a higher plane by inserting them into politics, may often have extremely serious consequences. It is almost always the case that a ‘spontaneous’ movement of the subaltern classes is accompanied by a reactionary movement of the right-wing of the dominant class, for concomitant reasons. An economic crisis, for instance, engenders on the one hand discontent among the subaltern classes and spontaneous mass movements, and on the other conspiracies among the reactionary groups, who take advantage of the objective weakening of the government in order to attempt coups d’etat. Among the effective causes of the coups must be included the failure of the responsible groups to give any conscious leadership to the spontaneous revolts or to make them into a positive political factor. [46]
Although Gramsci follows this with a reference to the rising of the Sicilian Vespers of 1282 (probably to divert the censor) he clearly has in mind the attitude of the PSI and the Bordigists to the events of 1919–20 as a factor in permitting the triumph of Mussolini.
As an example of the correct relationship between spontaneity and conscious leadership Gramsci cites the work of the Ordine Nuovo group.
The Turin movement was accused simultaneously of being ‘spontaneist’ and ‘voluntarist’ or Bergsonian. This contradictory accusation, if one analyses it, only testifies to the fact that the leadership given to the movement was both creative and correct. This leadership was not ‘abstract’; it neither consisted in mechanically repeating scientific or theoretical formulae, nor did it confuse politics, real action, with theoretical disquisition. It applied itself to real men, formed in specific historical relations, with specific feelings, outlooks, fragmentary conceptions of the world, etc. which were the result of ‘spontaneous’ combinations of a given situation of material production with the ‘fortuitous’ agglomeration within it of disparate social elements. The element of ‘spontaneity’ was not neglected and even less despised. It was educated, directed, purged of extraneous contaminations; the aim was to bring it in line with modern theory [marxism] – but in a living and historically effective manner. The leaders themselves spoke of the ‘spontaneity’ of the movement and rightly so. This assertion was a stimulus, a tonic, an element of unification in depth; above all it denied that the movement was arbitrary, a cooked-up venture, and stressed its historical necessity. It gave the masses a ‘theoretical’ consciousness of being creators of historical and institutional values, of being founders of a State. This unity between ‘spontaneity’ and ‘conscious leadership’ or ‘discipline’ is precisely the real political action of the subaltern classes, insofar as this is mass politics and not merely an adventure by groups claiming to represent the masses. [47]
As a result of this analysis Gramsci then raises what he calls a ‘fundamental theoretical question’ which relates, though from a different angle, to Lenin’s view in What is to be done? that socialism must be introduced into the working class from the outside. Gramsci asks:
Can modern theory [marxism] be in opposition to the ‘spontaneous’ feelings of the masses? (‘Spontaneists’ in the sense that they are not the result of any systematic educational activity on the part of an already conscious leading group, but have been formed through everyday experience illuminated by ‘common sense’ i.e. by the traditional popular conception of the world) [48]
Gramsci’s answer:
It cannot be in opposition to them. Between the two there is a ‘quantitative’ difference of degree not one of quality. A reciprocal ‘reduction’ so to speak, a passage from one to the other and vice versa, must be possible. [49]
The contrast between Gramsci’s view and that of both the early Lenin and Lukacs should be clear. Gramsci establishes the link and reciprocal relationship (which is denied in What is to be done? and History and Class Consciousness) between the actual consciousness, experience and practice of the working class and potential socialist class-consciousness. And he does this without falling into the opposite error of spontaneism.
But Gramsci does not deal only with the strategic tasks of the party and with what its relationship should be to the mass of the class. The Prison Notebooks also contain a number of comments on the organisation and internal life necessary for it to be able to play the role assigned to it. Indeed he goes so far as to say that ‘the way in which the party functions provides discriminating criteria’ [50] for judging the party as a whole. ‘When the party is progressive it functions “democratically” (democratic centralism): when the party is regressive it functions “bureaucratically” (bureaucratic centralism).’ [51]
At the same time there is no trace of utopianism in Gramsci’s picture of the party and its membership. He begins by asserting the ‘primordial and (given certain general conditions) [i.e. the existence of class society – JM] irreducible fact ... that there really do exist rulers and ruled, leaders and led’ [52], and that although this division has its origin in class divisions, it operates also within socially homogeneous groups and therefore within parties. In line with this premise Gramsci analyses the membership of the party as consisting of three elements:

A mass element, composed of ordinary, average men, whose participation takes the form of discipline and loyalty, rather than any creative spirit or organisational ability. Without these the party would not exist it is true, but it is also true that neither could it exist with these alone. They are a force insofar as there is somebody to centralise, organise and discipline them ...
 
The principal cohesive element, which centralises nationally and renders effective and powerful a complex of forces which left to themselves would count for nothing. This element is endowed with great cohesive, centralising and disciplinary powers; also – and indeed this is perhaps the basis for the others – with the power of innovation ...
 
An intermediate element, which articulates the first element with the second and maintains contact between them, not only physically but also morally and intellectually. [53]

Nor does Gramsci make any bones about the fact that of the three elements it is the second, the leadership, to which he attaches most importance.
It is also true that neither could this element form the party alone; however it could do so more than could the first element considered. One speaks of generals without any army but in reality it is easier to form an army than to form generals. [54]
However this ‘realism’ is counter-balanced by another equally fundamental premise.
In the formation of leaders ... is it the intention that there should always be rulers and ruled, or is the objective to create the conditions in which this division is no longer necessary? [55]
Since Gramsci’s aim is certainly the latter, the authority of ‘leadership and discipline must not be based on
a passive and supine acceptance of orders, or the mechanical carrying out of an assignment (which, however, will still be necessary on particular occasions) but [on] the conscious and lucid assimilation of the directive to be accomplished. [56]
What must be achieved within the party, therefore, is ‘centralism in movement’ – i.e. a continual adaptation of the organisation to the real movement, a matching of thrusts from below with orders from above, a continuous insertion of elements thrown up from the depths of the rank-and-file into the solid framework of the leadership apparatus. [57] ‘One of the most important questions concerning the political party’, Gramsci argues, is ‘the party’s capacity to react against force of habit.’ [58] Parties are created in order to prepare for crisis situations, to be able to act at historical turning points, but often they become routinised and incapable of adapting themselves to new tasks. In this respect the main enemy is bureaucracy.
The bureaucracy is the most dangerously hidebound and conservative force; if it ends up by constituting a compact body, which stands on its own and feels itself independent of the mass of members, the party ends up by becoming anachronistic and at moments of acute crisis it is voided of its social content and left as though suspended in mid-air. [59]
But this question also must not be viewed only from one side – for while there is the problem of habit and routine, there is also the need to maintain continuity and establish a tradition.
There is a danger of becoming ‘bureaucratised’ it is true, but every organic continuity presents this danger, which must be watched. The danger of discontinuity, of improvisation, is still greater. [60]
Thus in the case of the internal life of the party, just as with the ‘dual perspective’, and the relationship of the party to the class, Gramsci envisages a dialectical unity between leaders and led, discipline and initiative, continuity and change.
 
5. A provisional assessment
What of the claim that Gramsci is ‘the theoretician of revolution in the west’? Leninism proved itself in Russia and in so doing broke new ground of universal significance. It was Gramsci, through his analysis of the development of civil society and the deep roots of bourgeois hegemony, who saw more clearly than anyone else the basic difference between Russia and advanced cat italism, and therefore the broadening of the framework of Leninisin that would be necessary. Lenin and Trotsky, as Gramsci was aware, had by 1921 begun to sense the problem, but Lenin was preoccupied with Russia and soon to die, and Trotsky, also beset with other difficulties, was unable to develop his insights beyond the level of tactics. [61] Gramsci, however, thought through the implications of his analysis as thoroughly and concretely as the isolation of his prison cell permitted. Moreover, history has proved to be ‘on Gramsci’s side’ in this respect. Western capitalism has shown itself to possess far greater resilience than the theory of the early Comintern marxists allowed for, and Gramsci’s analysis of the expansion of bourgeois social control in his study of Americanism and Fordism reveals him as a profound prophet of new tendencies in capitalism.
Philosophically Gramsci has also been justified: by the publication of Marx’s early writings and the Grundrisse and by the numerous modern researches into marxist philosophy. Can any serious marxist today doubt the baleful influence of fatalism and economic determinism on the revolutionary movement? Other later marxists approached if not equalled Gramsci in their insights into the structure of capitalist society and marxist philosophy, but Gramsci is distinguished from them all in that he, and he alone, was able to forge these insights into a coherent revolutionary strategy based on a development of the theory of the party. Gramsci is thus the only marxist to have added anything fundamentally new to Lenin’s theory of the party.
Nevertheless there remains a question mark over Gramsci’s contribution. His ideas have never been applied in practice. Like Machiavelli he was not himself in a position to change reality – ‘only of showing concretely how the historical forces ought to have acted in order to be effective’. [62]
Nor have Gramsci’s ideas found other hands to take them up and apply them, and what is more they could not have done so. Gramscian strategy requires as its starting point the existence of a Leninist party, but the combined effects of the long postwar boom and the ravages of Stalinism have meant that such parties have not in fact existed. The basic principles of Bolshevism can, within certain limits (and they are quite narrow limits), guide the activity of a small organisation or even a tiny group. This is not the case with the ideas of Gramsci. The war of manoeuvre, like guerrilla war, can be waged with relatively small forces, but the war of position demands a mass army. Without a mass party alliances will not be alliances between classes in a historical bloc but mere temporary co-operation between groups, which may often serve only to blur theoretical and programmatic differences. Without a mass proletarian base the formation of organic intellectuals and the struggle to win over traditional intellectuals will not, as intended, strengthen proletarian hegemony, but will degenerate into scholastic intellectualism and academicism. Gramsci, it must be remembered, wrote against a background in which the basic ideas of socialism were very widely spread in the working class and the PCI had been founded with a membership of about 40,000, of whom 98 per cent were workers and less than 0.5 per cent (245 in all) intellectuals. [63] To imagine that his ideas can be simply transferred to a situation in which the revolutionary movement is overloaded with students and petty bourgeois and has only the slenderest roots in the working class is crassly ahistorical.
We do not really know what the war of position looks like in its practical details. Thus any judgement of Gramsci’s theory of the party must be provisional. If one is impressed and convinced, as it is hard not to be, by the coherence, depth, subtlety and concreteness of Gramsci’s ideas, then one must hold that they will face their decisive test in the future when advanced Western capitalism is once again confronted by mass revolutionary workers’ parties.

Notes
1. To deceive the prison censor Gramsci avoided all use of conventional marxist terminology, and all direct mention of well known revolutionaries. Thus ‘class’ is rendered ‘fundamental social group’; ‘oppressed class’ is ‘subaltern group’; Trotsky is Lev Davidovitch; Lenin is Ilych, or ‘the recent great theoretician’; and marxism is ‘the philosophy of praxis’.
2. Antonio Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks, London 1971, p. 387.
3. ibid., p. 465.
4. ibid., p. 336.
5. ibid., pp. 336–37.
6. ibid., p. 438.
7. ibid., p. 407.
8. ibid., p. 160.
9. ibid.
10. ibid., p. 233.
11. ibid., p. 104.
12. ibid., pp. 180–81.
13. ibid., p. 183.
14. ibid., p. 325.
15. ibid., p. 323.
16. See ibid., p. 192.
17. To illustrate this point we have the example of Lukacs who similarly approached the question of the party on the basis of a critique of mechanical materialism, but who remained entirely within the terrain of philosophy. Lukacs conceived of the party as the bearer and embodiment of proletarian class consciousness, but because he defined class consciousness in an unhistorical and rationalistic way he fell into an idealised and elitist view of the party which failed to add anything useful to, indeed fell short of, Lenin.
18. Cited in John Merrington, Theory and practice in Gramsci’s marxism, Socialist Register, 1968, p. 165.
19. Antonio Gramsci, Soviets in Italy, London 1969, pp. 22–23.
20. Published in Soviets in Italy, op. cit.
21. ibid., p. 35.
22. Antonio Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks, op. cit., p. 123.
23. ibid., p. 129.
24. For the background to this see ibid., p. 169.
25. ibid., pp. 169–70.
26. ibid., p. 124.
27. ibid., p. 238.
28. ibid, p. 235.
29. ibid., pp. 229–39.
30. ibid., p. 120.
31. ibid., p. 239.
32. ibid., p. 238.
33. Antonio Gramsci, The Southern Question, in The Modern Prince and Other Writings, New York 1972, pp. 30–31.
34. Antonio Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks, op. cit., p. 168.
35. ibid.
36. Gramsci’s brother Gennaro visited him in prison to ascertain his attitude to the ‘third period’ but, on finding that he opposed it, kept the information secret in case his brother should be expelled. See Giuseppe Fiori, Antonio Gramsci: Life of Revolutionary, London 1970, pp. 252–53.
37. Antonio Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks, op. cit., p. 185.
38. ibid., p. 340.
39. Gramsci makes this point as part of an analysis of Italian political parties ‘in general’ but, as so often with Gramsci’s ‘abstract’ discussions, there is a clear implication for the practice of the revolutionary party.
40. Antonio Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks, op. cit., p. 227.
41. For Gramsci’s analysis of ‘the intellectuals’ see ibid., pp. 5–23.
42. ibid., p. 340.
43. Antonio Gramsci, The Modern Prince and Other Writings, op. cit., pp. 50–51.
44. Antonio Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks, op. cit., pp. 196–97.
45. ibid., p. 197.
46. ibid., p. 199.
47. ibid., p. 198.
48. ibid., pp. 198–99.
49. ibid., p. 199.
50. ibid., p. 155.
51. ibid.
52. ibid., p. 144.
53. ibid., pp. 152–53.
54. ibid.
55. ibid., p. 144.
56. Cited in A. Pozzolini, Antonio Gramsci: An Introduction to his Thought, London 1970, p. 65.
57. Antonio Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks, op. cit., p. 188.
58. ibid., p. 211.
59. ibid.
60. ibid., p. 195.
61. See Antonio Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks, op. cit., pp. 236–38. Gramsci records that Trotsky began ‘a revision of current tactical methods’, along these lines at the fourth congress of the Comintern. But paradoxically, and for reasons that can only be the subject of speculation, he accuses Trotsky of being: ‘the political theorist of frontal attack in a period which leads only to defeats’. (ibid., p. 238)
62. Antonio Gramsci, Selections from the Prison Notebooks, op. cit., p. 173.
63. ibid., p. liii.
 

 Molyneux: Marxism and the Party (1. Karl Marx: class and party)



John Molyneux Archive   |   Marxism & the Party   |   ETOL Main Page

John Molyneux
Marxism and the Party

1. Karl Marx: class and party

1. The class foundation
The foundation of all marxist approaches to the analysis of political parties is Marx’s theory of class struggle. For marxists the basic explanation for the existence of different and competing political parties is to be found in the economic structure of society. Political parties come into being, attract support and continue to function primarily as the representatives of class interests.
Naturally this idea, as is the case with many marxist principles, becomes a piece of nonsense if it is understood crudely and dogmatically. The thesis that political parties represent class interests does not mean that they necessarily do so in a straightforward one-to-one relationship. It does not mean that at all times one party represents the interests of one class; or that the interests of a class, in the historical sense, can be formulated simply in terms of immediate economic gain; or that the actions of every party can be explained merely by reference to the class on which it is based. In fact history provides numerous examples of every kind of class/party combination: of parties that begin by representing the interests of one class, but end up by serving the interests of another; of parties that attempt to serve the interests of two or even three classes at once; of parties that serve a section of a class against the interests of the class as a whole; of two or three small parties competing to become the undisputed representative of the same class, and so on.
Thus in Britain today we have three major political parties:


the Tory Party, which is primarily the party of the big capitalists but is voted for by many workers and actively supported by large sections of the petty bourgeoisie;
 
the Labour Party, which is based in the organisations of the working class and relies mainly on workers for its votes, but which has a middle-class leadership which accepts the continuance of the capitalist system, and is therefore frequently forced to act against the interests of its working-class base;
 
the Liberal Party, which is basically a petty-bourgeois party, supported by a few larger capitalists and drawing some of its votes from the working class.


None of these examples refute the marxist thesis. Rather they confirm it, for all that is maintained is that the fundamental starting point for the analysis of political parties, as with politics in general, must be the class structure of the society concerned. The numerous complexities we have referred to arise from the fact that classes in society do not simply stand side by side with each other, but one on top of the other in a state of permanent and dynamic conflict, and that political parties play a major role in that conflict. A particular configuration of political parties reflects the relative stages of development reached by the different classes and the degree of hegemony attained by one class over the others, Thus when dealing with marxist theories of the party, and above all where Marx himself was concerned, one is concerned not with a narrow and separate theory of organisation, but always with the relationship between party and class. Parties are moments in the development of classes.
Marx wished to reveal the driving forces of history in order to facilitate the making of history. Thus for Marx classes are not simply static entities, but social groups which come into being through historical processes and pass through various stages of growth and maturity. Above all, classes define themselves through conflict. ‘Individuals form a class only insofar as they are engaged in a common struggle with another class.’ [1] In the course of the struggle classes acquire (or lose) cohesion, organisation, confidence and consciousness. Political parties are weapons in the struggle between classes.
In Marx’s analysis of capitalism ‘society as a whole is more and more splitting up into two great hostile camps, into two great classes directly facing each other: bourgeoisie and proletariat’. [2] It was not that Marx believed that the categories of bourgeois and proletarian covered everyone in capitalist society – to have asserted such as an empirical fact in 1847 would have been absurd. Rather, his contention was that the conflict between bourgeoisie and proletariat is inherent in and fundamental to the capitalist system. Under capitalism production takes place on the basis of the exploitation of wage and labour. Thus lodged in the heart of the capitalist economy is a permanent conflict of interest, and this basic conflict conditions every aspect of social life. As Marx puts it in Capital:
It is always the immediate relation of the owners of the conditions of production to immediate producers ... in which we find the final secret, the hidden basis of the whole construction of society, including the political patterns of sovereignty and dependence, in short, of a given specific form of governments. [3]
In the last analysis the various other classes or social strata can act only within the framework of alternatives provided by the two major classes. In the end they must side with one class or the other. Consequently, from a marxist standpoint, the basic criterion for the assessment of political parties is not simply on which class they are based, but where they stand in the class struggle between bourgeoisie and proletariat.
But when one speaks of Marx’s theory of the party, the subject is not political parties in general, but the revolutionary party which has as its aim the overthrow of capitalism – specifically one is talking about Marx’s concept of a proletarian political party, because, of course, it was his view that ‘the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class ... The other classes decay and finally disappear in the face of modern industry; the proletariat is its special and essential product.’ [4] The tradesman, the artisan, the small farmer, the peasant, are all undermined by the expansion of capitalism, but the proletariat is augmented. ‘In proportion as the bourgeoisie, i.e. capital, is developed, in the same proportion is the proletariat, the modern working class, developed.’ [5] The scale of production increases and so workers are drawn together in larger and larger units. ‘With the development of industry the proletariat
not only increases in number, it becomes concentrated in greater masses, its strength grows, and it feels its strength more.’ The proletariat therefore stands at the centre of the economic structure. Potentially it is the most powerful exploited class in history. This power gives the proletariat the capacity for self-emancipation, a capacity which is a vital element in Marx’s theory of revolution. [6] The second and equally important factor in Marx’s assessment of the proletariat is his view that the proletariat is the first class whose victory would result not in a new form of class society, but in the abolition of all classes. This view is based on the necessarily collective nature of the proletarian struggle. Odd exceptions apart, the individual Worker cannot approach his employer and ask for a wage increase with any chance of success; he is forced to combine with his fellows. The worker has no property in the means of production and he cannot obtain it as an individual, for modern industry cannot be divided up and parcelled out in millions of pieces. To capture the means of production the working class must do it collectively, through social ownership.
Marx’s insistence on the proletariat as the only revolutionary class and his reasons for it are well illustrated by his attitude to the other most obvious candidate for the title, the peasantry. In Marx’s day the peasantry formed the vast majority even in most European countries and were at least as poor and down-trodden as the proletariat. Moreover, there was a long tradition of violent peasant revolts. But Marx discounted all this because of the individual and fragmented nature of the peasant way of life.
The small-holding peasants form a vast mass, the members of which live in similar conditions but without entering into manifold relations with one another. Their mode of production isolates them from one another instead of bringing them into mutual intercourse ... In this way, the great mass of the French nation is formed by simple addition of homologous magnitudes, much as potatoes in a sack form a sack of potatoes. Insofar as millions of families live under economic conditions of existence that separate their mode of life, their interests and their culture from those of other classes, and put them in hostile opposition to the latter, they form a class. Insofar as there is merely a local interconnection among these small-holding peasants, and the identity of their interests begets no community, no national bond and no political organisation, they do not form a class. They are consequently incapable of enforcing their class interest in their own name, whether through a parliament or through a convention. They cannot represent themselves, they must be represented. [7]
The capacity of the proletariat, as against the peasantry, for self-representation, and therefore self-emancipation, is crucial for its status as a revolutionary class and for its capacity to create a revolutionary party.
However, one should not confuse the potentiality of the proletariat to create its own party with empirical actuality. Marx was aware of the gap between the proletariat as a class ‘in itself’ and the proletariat as a class ‘for itself’ [8], and the long road of struggle that lies between the two. Nor did Marx fail to see the debilitating effects of competitive bourgeois society on the organisation and unity of the working class.
Competition separates individuals from one another, not only the bourgeois but still more the workers, in spite of the fact that it brings them together. Hence it is a long time before these individuals can unite ... Hence every organised power standing over and against these isolated individuals, who live in relationships daily reproducing this isolation, can only be overcome after long struggles. [9]
He recognised also the power of bourgeois ideology.
The class which has the means of material production at its disposal has control at the same time over the means of mental production, so that thereby, generally speaking, the ideas of those who lack the means of mental production are subject to it. [10]
The formation of a workers’ political party was therefore necessary in order to combat these powerful tendencies towards fragmentation and to establish the independence of the proletariat as a class. Indeed Marx often suggests that the workers cannot be regarded as a class in the full sense of the word until they have created their own distinct party. Thus we find in The Communist Manifesto that ‘the organisation of the proletarians into a class, and consequently into a political party, is continually being upset Again by the competition between the workers themselves’ [11], and in the decision of the London Conference (1871) of the First International that ‘the proletariat can act as a class only by constituting itself a distinct political party’. [12] This basic idea remained central to the theory and practice of both Marx and Engels from the mid-1840s to the end of their lives.
 
2. Communists and proletarians
This now brings us to the fundamental problem of the marxist theory of the party. Marxists believe that the class struggle is the motor of history and that ‘the emancipation of the working class must be conquered by the working class themselves’. [13] At the same time they wish to create a political party to represent the historical interests of the class as a whole. What then is to be the relationship between this party and the mass of the working class? Marx addressed himself to this problem in the section of The Communist Manifesto entitled Proletarians and Communists.
In what relation do the Communists stand to the proletarians as a whole?
The Communists do not form a separate party opposed to other working-class parties.
They have no interests separate and apart from the proletariat as a whole.
They do not set up any sectarian principles of their own, by which to shape and mould the proletarian movement.
The Communists are distinguished from the other working-class parties by this only: 1. In the national struggles of the proletarians of the different countries, they point out and bring to the front the common interests of the entire proletariat, independently of all nationality. 2. In the various stages of development which the struggle of the working class against the bourgeoisie has to pass through, they always and everywhere represent the interests of the movement as a whole.
The Communists, therefore, are on the one hand, practically, the most advanced and resolute section of the working-class parties of every country, that section which pushes forward all others; on the other hand, theoretically, they have over the great mass of the proletariat the advantage of clearly understanding the line of march, the conditions, and the ultimate general results of the proletarian movement. [14]
These few dense and brilliant paragraphs contain both the germ of the solution to the problem of the party/class relationship, and a series of broad guidelines which have shaped the practice of the marxist movement down to the present day. In the first place, absolutely ruled out is the conspiratorial view of the role of the party as a small band of adventurers acting on behalf of, but apart from, the class. Also ruled out is the authoritarian view of the party handing down orders from above to be obeyed by the essentially passive masses, and the purely propagandistic view of the sect merely preaching its doctrines until the rest of the world is won over. Firmly established is the concept of leadership won on the basis of performance in the class struggle in the service of the working class, and the principle of raising, within the everyday economic and political struggles of the workers, the overall aims of the movement. Foreshadowed in these lines are the marxist strategy of the united front [15], the policy of working within trade unions while recognising the limitations of trade unionism, and the defence of democratic rights while striving to go beyond bourgeois democracy.
But, for all its importance, Marx’s formulation contains definite limitations and lacunae. It is written at a high level of generality and nowhere deals specifically with the organisational form to be adopted by communists. Indeed it contains no clear indication of what is meant by a party. It is this original imprecision which lies behind the only proposition in the passage to have been clearly invalidated by subsequent events, namely that ‘Communists do not form a separate party opposed to other working-class parties’. This makes sense as a general principle only if it is taken to be almost identical in meaning to the statement that ‘they have no interests separate and apart from those of the proletariat as a whole’. Nor is this vagueness in the use of the word ‘party’ an isolated case confined to The Communist Manifesto. Throughout his work Marx uses the term party in a variety of ways (Monty Johnstone has identified at least five major models [16]) to refer to such widely different phenomena as the extremely broad and loose Chartist movement, his own small group of associates and followers, and the general revolutionary cause. Thus Marx could write to Freiligrath that ‘the [Communist] League, like the Society of Seasons in Paris and a hundred other associates, was only an episode in the history of the party which grows everywhere spontaneously from the soil of modern society ... Under the term “party”, I understand party in the great historical sense of the word.’ [17] And he could write to Kugelmann that the Paris Commune was ‘the most glorious deed of our Party since the June insurrection in Paris [1848]’. [18]
Because of Marx’s vagueness on this point it is not possible to construct or reconstruct any single or systematic theory of the party from quotations taken out of their context. The only possible procedure is to examine the actual development of Marx’s political activity and to interpret his various comments on the question of the party in their historical context. [19] In doing this, one central fact has constantly to be borne in mind. Marx’s lack of a clear definition of the political party is neither accidental nor the product of laziness of thought. Rather, it reflects the fact that for a large part of Marx’s career political parties in the modern sense of the term did not yet exist, either for the bourgeoisie or for the proletariat. The modern mass party with its clearly defined membership, organisation and constitution is a recent phenomenon. It came into being primarily to meet the challenge of universal suffrage and fully developed bourgeois democracy, and it presupposed a substantial network of communications, mass media and literacy. Prior to this the modern political party was not required by the relatively primitive political system. All that was necessary were either loose and informal associations based on a network of local notables (usually landowners), or else small gatherings, in clubs and salons, of influential intellectuals. It is unreasonable to expect of Marx conceptions which go beyond the experience of his times. This is especially true as it is much harder to see ahead in the sphere of concrete forms of organisation than it is in the sphere of general economic and social development.
For the purpose of charting the evolution of Marx’s concept of the party his political life can conveniently be divided into four main periods: 1. 1847–1850, the period of the Communist League; 2. 1850–1864, the long interlude in the class struggle; 3. 1864–1872, the International Working Men’s Association; 4. 1873 onwards, the beginnings of mass social democracy.
 
3. The Communist League
In 1846 Marx and Engels had established Communist Correspondence Committees based on Brussels and maintaining links with Britain, France, and Germany. It was through these committees that they made contact with the League of the Just, an international secret society composed mainly of German artisans. By 1847 the League’s leaders had been won over, and Marx and Engels were invited to join. This they agreed to do on condition that the old conspiratorial forms of organisation be scrapped. The League of the Just then changed its name to The League of Communists and held a reorganisation congress in which Marx and Engels participated. The main points of the congress were the achievement of a ‘thoroughly democratic’ structure ‘with elective and always removable boards’ and the struggle against ‘all hankering after conspiracy’. [20] Marx and Engels fought for a turn towards open propaganda of communist ideas within the working class. We see therefore by 1847 the coming together of a number of key ideas for the marxist theory of the party. Firstly the need of the proletariat, wherever possible, for an international organisation. Secondly the link between the class struggle, the self-emancipation of the proletariat, and the need for an internally democratic organisation which openly proclaims its aims.
The League called itself, alternatively, an international body and the ‘Communist Party of Germany’, but in reality it was too weak to be either a forerunner of the First International or a genuine national party. Rather, with only 200–300 members [21], spread over several countries, it cannot be regarded as more than the embryo of a party, or, to borrow a term from Paris 1968, a ‘groupuscule’. Initially the strategy adopted was for Communists to work as far as possible inside already existing movements in the different countries. Thus in Britain Ernest Jones operated within the Chartists and in France the League’s members joined the Social Democrats of Ledru-Rollin and Louis Blanc. The weakness of the League was immediately shown up when it was plunged in the all-European upheaval of 1848. As Engels notes, ‘the few hundred League members vanished in the enormous mass that had been suddenly hurled into the movement’. [22] This is not to say that the League’s members had nothing to offer. On the contrary, as individuals they played an important part in the development of the revolution. As Stephen Born put it to Marx, ‘the League has ceased to exist and yet it exists everywhere’. [23]
Having no viable organisation as a base and a working class as yet small and politically immature combined with an extremely revolutionary situation, led Marx to depart somewhat from the main scheme set out in The Communist Manifesto. Instead of coming forward as the clear advocate of proletarian revolution and the representative of an independent working-class party, Marx was forced to act through the Neue Rheinische Zeitung as the extreme left-wing of radical democracy, working to push forward the bourgeois revolution to the point where the contradictions would open up beneath its feet.
Marx was aware of the problems inherent in his position and in April 1849, when German bourgeois radicalism had demonstrated its inability to carry forward the revolution, he and his associates, Wolff, Schapper and Becker, resigned from the Rhineland District Committee of the Democratic Associations. ‘In our opinion,’ they wrote, ‘the present form of organisation of the democratic associations embrace too many heterogeneous elements to make possible any useful activity in furtherance of its aim. In our opinion a closer association of workers’ organisations will be more useful because these organisations are composed of more homogeneous elements.’ [24] From this point on the struggle for the independent political organisation of the working class became central to the theory and practice of marxism.
The rapid collapse of the German revolution prevented the immediate practical realisation of this perspective, but in the autumn of 1849 Marx, now in exile in London, reconstituted the Central Committee of the Communist League and began its reorganisation in Germany, this time, of necessity, as a secret centralised party. In March 1850, in The Address of the Central Committee to the Communist League (commonly known as The March Address) Marx summed up the experience of this period and the organisational lessons to be drawn from it:
At the same time the former firm organisation of the League was considerably slackened. A large part of the members who directly participated in the revolutionary movement believed the time for secret societies to have gone by and public activities alone sufficient. The individual circles and communities allowed their connections with the Central Committee to become loose and gradually dormant. Consequently, while the democratic party, the party of the petty bourgeoisie, organised itself more and more in Germany, the workers’ party lost its only firm foothold, remained organised at the most in separate localities for local purposes and in the general movement thus came completely under the domination and leadership of the petty bourgeois democrats. An end must be put to this state of affairs, the independence of the workers must be restored ...
Reorganisation can only be carried out by an emissary and the Central Committee considers it extremely important that the emissary should leave precisely at this moment when a new revolution is impending, when the workers’ party, therefore, must act in the most organised, most unanimous and most independent fashion possible if it is not to be exploited and taken in tow again by the bourgeoisie as in 1848. [25]
In some respects it is in The March Address that Marx makes his closest approach to Lenin’s concept of a vanguard party (though of course there are still major differences). The key to these organisational proposals is that they are the product of the most direct involvement in revolutionary action that Marx was ever to experience, and that they are designed as a guide to action in a situation in which it is assumed that ‘a new revolution is impending’. The plan to tighten the organisation of the League and strengthen its independence does not stand on its own as an isolated organisational device, but is an integral part of a perspective of dynamic revolutionary action in which the working class is to assume leadership in the democratic revolution and push it in a socialist direction.
Alongside the new official governments they must establish simultaneously their own workers’ governments, whether in the form of municipal committees and municipal councils or in the form of workers’ clubs or workers’ committees ... Arms and ammunition must not be surrendered on any pretext; any attempt at disarming must be frustrated, if necessary by force. Destruction of the influence of the bourgeois democrats on the workers, immediate independent and armed organisation of the workers and the enforcement of conditions as difficult and compromising as possible upon the inevitable momentary rule of the bourgeois democracy – these are the main points which the proletariat and hence the League must keep in view during and after the impending insurrection. [26]
Thus the similarity between Marx’s concept of the party at this point and Lenin’s fifty or more years later derives in large part from the parallels in their situation. It is no coincidence that it was from The March Address that Trotsky derived his theory of ‘permanent revolution’ and that it is from Marx and Engels’ writings of this period that Lenin most frequently quotes when looking for textual support for Bolshevik tactics in the two Russian Revolutions.
But Marx never made a fetish of any particular organisational form or indeed of any particular party. As conditions changed so did his attitude. Consequently when, during the summer of 1850, it became clear that the perspective on which the organisational plans of the Address were based was false, and that there would be no early outbreak of the revolution, Marx rapidly abandoned his proposals. Almost inevitably this led to a split in the Central Committee of the League between those who recognised the ebb of the revolutionary wave and those who refused to face reality. The latter faction, led by Willich and Schapper, wished artificially to precipitate the revolution and became involved in all sorts of adventuristic émigré schemes, such as a plot for the armed invasion of Germany. This split effectively put an end to the Communist League as a meaningful organisation, and although an attempt was made to save it by transferring the Central Committee to Cologne, Marx soon resigned and shortly afterwards the League itself was dissolved.
 
4. The years of retreat
At this point Marx began a period of his life devoted, apart from the necessities of earning a living, almost entirely to his economic researches. He summed up his perspective for the coming years in the last issue of the Neue Rheinische Revue in November 1850.
In view of the general prosperity which now prevails and permits the productive forces of bourgeois society to develop as rapidly as is at all possible within the framework of bourgeois society, there can be no question of any real revolution ... A new revolution will be made possible only as the result of a new crisis, but it is just as certain as is the coming of the crisis itself. [27]
Émigré circles have always been notorious for their petty squabbles, scandals and internecine strife, therefore it was essential for Marx’s psychological survival and the success of his theoretical work that he withdrew from this debilitating milieu.
Marx and Engels greeted this rest from party politicking with heartfelt sighs of relief. ‘I am greatly pleased’, Marx wrote to Engels ‘by the public, authentic isolation in which we two, you and I, now find ourselves. It corresponds completely with our position and our principles.’ [28] To which Engels replied: ‘At last we have again – for the first time in a long while – an opportunity to show that we do not need any support from any party of any land whatever, and that our position is totally independent of such trash.’ [29] Franz Mehring warns against taking these off-hand and private remarks too seriously [30], but some commentators, notably Bertram D. Wolfe [31] and Shlomo Avineri [32], have sought to present them as being Marx’s ‘real’ views on the party. But this attempt involves taking these expressions of irritation out of both their overall historical context and their immediate context (i.e. that of private letters between close friends) [33] and setting them against statements that are clearly more weighed and considered and are written for public consumption. Taken literally, these and other comments by Marx and Engels could be held to imply opposition to all political activity, which is evidently ridiculous. Even during the fifties and sixties, when Marx was most deeply engrossed in Capital, he never completely withdrew from political life, continuing to contribute to the Chartist newspapers and keeping a watchful eye on Ernest Jones who, in 1857, he said should ‘form a party, for which he must go to the factory districts’. [34]
What then were the main factors involved in Marx’s 12 year absence from any political party? Firstly, there was, as already indicated, his view that bourgeois society had entered a prolonged period of stabilisation and expansion. Secondly there was the great importance he attached to his theoretical work. When approached by a German émigré in New York to revive the Communist League, Marx retorted ‘I am deeply convinced that my theoretical labours bring greater advantage to the working class than participation in organisations the time for which has passed.’ [35] Thirdly, there was the great gap which separated Marx’s conception of the revolutionary movement from that of the overwhelming majority of revolutionaries around at that time.
Since for Marx the driving force of history was the class struggle and his aim was the self emancipation of the working class, the function of a party was to lead and serve the proletariat in its battles and not to ‘set up any sectarian principles of their own by which to shape and mould the proletarian movement’. The revolutionary movement of the mid-nineteenth century, however, was dominated by completely alien conceptions and traditions. The dominant trends of the time were either hangovers from the conspiratorial Jacobin tradition of the French Revolution, or came from petty-bourgeois Utopian socialists who believed in reconciling capital and labour on the basis of their own enlightened ideals. Both were equally elitist in their attitude to the working class, the former wishing to act behind the back of and on behalf of the class, the latter demanding that the class remain passive until all men of goodwill had been persuaded by the force of reason. Marx had long since rejected these positions and whilst he was prepared to do battle with them in the context of a living working-class movement, outside such a context, in tiny and irrelevant clubs and societies, he considered he would be wasting his time if he were to get involved with them in any way.
 
5. The First International – practice and theory
What finally drew Marx out of his self-imposed isolation was an invitation to the founding meeting of the International Working Men’s Association held at St Martin’s Hall on 26 September 1864. The International was neither founded by Marx nor marxist in inspiration. Rather it grew out of the general rise in the economic struggles of the European working class, and working-class interest in such international questions as support for the North in the American Civil War, the cause of Polish independence, and the unification of Italy, and one of its most important practical activities was preventing the use of immigrant labour to break strikes. The immediate initiative for the St Martin’s Hall meeting came from trade unionists in London and Paris. But it was precisely this authenticity and spontaneity which attracted Marx. I knew,’ he wrote to Engels, ‘that this time real “powers” were involved both on the London and Paris sides and therefore decided to waive my usual standing rule to decline any such invitations ... for a revival of the working classes is now evidently taking place.’ [36]
Inevitably these positive features had their negative side in extreme theoretical and political heterogeneity and confusion. Among those participating in the International were followers of Mazzini who were essentially Italian nationalists, French Proudhonists who wanted to reconcile capital and labour, Owenites like Weston [37] who opposed strikes, and secret societies, outwardly of masonic form, such as the Philadelphians. [38] In order to work with this amorphous body and steer it along the lines he wanted, Marx was obliged to operate with great tact and not a little deviousness. Having manoeuvred himself into the job of drawing up the International’s Rules, and managing to slip in his own Inaugural Address [39], a considerable amount of compromise was needed to avoid alienating the other participants.
It was very difficult to frame the thing so that our view should appear in a form acceptable from the present standpoint of the workers’ movement. In a few weeks the same people will be holding meetings for the franchise with Bright and Cobden. It will take time before the reawakened movement allows the old boldness of speech. It will be necessary to be fortiter in re, suaviter in modo. [40]
Marx’s method was to stress the class character of the movement and its internationalism, with emphasis on the then popular theme of self-emancipation [41], without being specific as to revolutionary aims or methods. Thus the Rules state that ‘the emancipation of the working classes must be conquered by the working classes themselves’, and that ‘the economical emancipation of the working classes is therefore the great end to which every political movement ought to be subordinate as a means’, and that ‘the emancipation of labour is neither a local nor a national, but a social problem, embracing all countries in which modern society exists’. [42] But they do not mention collectivisation of the means of production, which would have upset the Proudhonists, or revolution, which would have frightened the English trade unionists. This strategy worked very well. The International avoided becoming, in Mehring’s phrase, ‘a small body with a large head’ [43], but at the same time Marx, by virtue of his superior overall view of the movement, gradually established his intellectual hegemony on the General Council. As the International grew in strength, benefiting particularly from the wave of strike struggles precipitated by the economic crisis of 1866-67, so Marx persuaded successive congresses to adopt progressively more socialist policies. The Congress of Lausanne (1867) passed the resolution: ‘The social emancipation of the workmen is inseparable from their political emancipation.’ [44] The Brussels Congress (1868) saw the defeat of the Proudhonists over the collective ownership of land, railways, mines and forests; and the London Conference (1871) decided to add to the Rules the statement that:
In its struggle against the collective power of the possessing classes the proletariat can act as a class only by constituting itself a distinct political party opposed to all the old parties formed by the possessing classes.
This constitution of the proletariat into a political party is indispensable to ensure the triumph of the Social Revolution and of its ultimate goal: the abolition of classes. [45]
But despite these advances the International remained an amalgam of too many divergent tendencies for it to become anything approaching an international communist party, nor did Marx ever attempt to impose such a conception on it. Rather he accepted that the International could be no more than a broad federation of workers’ organisations and parties in different countries and that it should ‘let every section freely shape its own theoretical programme’. [46]
This very looseness, which was the International’s strength in that it enabled Marx to hold together its various factions while at the same time providing general guidance, was also its weakness in that it made the International an easy target for infiltration by Mikhail Bakunin and his anarchist International Brotherhood, which, in the guise of the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy, entered the International in 1868, and proved to be a major factor in its eventual collapse. Bakunin was a romantic adventurer and conspirator rather than a theorist, and the programme he put forward was naive and confused. He advocated the ‘equality of classes’, the immediate abolition of the state, the abolition of the right of inheritance as the principal demands of the movement, and above all complete abstention from politics. Marx viewed these ideas with contempt – ‘a hash superficially scraped together from the Right and from the Left ... this children’s primer ... the mess he has brewed from bits of Proudhon, Saint-Simon and others’ [47] – but did not deny the anarchists the right to argue their case within the International. It was a dispute, not about doctrine, but about the kind of organisation the International was to be, which lay at the root of the damaging conflict between Marx and Bakunin. Bakunin, exploiting the numerous tensions and divisions in the International, launched a campaign against the ‘authoritarianism’ of the General Council which was calculated to gather the various malcontents around it. But within the framework of this ‘anti-authoritarianism’ Bakunin sought to realise the unelected ‘collective and invisible dictatorship’ [48] of his own secret societies and conspiracies. The real issue was, as Monty Johnstone says, ‘whether the International should be run as a public democratic organisation in accordance with rules and policies laid down at its congresses or whether it should allow Bakunin to “paralyse its action by secret intrigue”, and federations and sections to refuse to accept congress decisions with which they disagreed.’ [49]
The activities of Bakunin assumed the importance they did because they intersected with the other major factor in the demise of the International, the Paris Commune. Marx’s passionate vindication of the Commune in The Civil War in France led to the identification of the International with the Commune, and hence to a massive ‘red scare’ and witch-hunt against the International throughout Europe. At the same time, this appearance of the social revolution in reality, and the consequent clarity with which political questions were posed, inevitably shattered the flimsy unity on which the International was based.
To deal with this situation Marx, at the London Conference, asked for and obtained increased powers for the General Council, but this in turn threw those who resented the ‘interference’ of the General Council into the camp of Bakunin’s anti-authoritarianism. By 1872 Marx, it is clear, had decided that the International had had its day (though he did not care to say so publicly). At the same time he was determined that it should not fall into the hands of conspirators, either Bakuninist or Blanquist, who would compromise the positive achievements of the International with pointless adventures. Marx achieved these aims at the Hague Congress by securing the expulsion of Bakunin (on a rather dubious basis) [50] and by having the seat of the International transferred to America where it passed away peacefully in 1876.
The International Working Men’s Association was undoubtedly the most important practical political work of Marx’s life. It gave a great impetus to the development of the movement everywhere. It created a much more widespread awareness of at least some of Marx’s basic principles than had ever existed before. Above all, it established the tradition of internationalism and of international organisation at the heart of the working-class socialist movement. These were great achievements, but it is also evident that the International contained the seeds of its disintegration in the basis of its foundation. From the point of view of assessing Marx’s concept of the party, it is necessary therefore to examine the strengths and weaknesses of the theoretical ideas which underlay his work during this period.
Since for Marx the party was always considered in relationship to the working class, and the working class is defined basically by its economic situation, the key theoretical problem was the nature of the relationship between economics and politics, and specifically between the economic struggles of the working class and the development of its political consciousness and organisation. There are various texts of the period which show that, essentially, Marx held the view that political consciousness arises spontaneously from the economic circumstances and struggle of the workers. Thus in a speech to a delegation of German trade unionists in 1869 Marx said:
Trade unions are the schools of socialism. It is in trade unions that workers educate themselves and become socialists because under their very eyes and every day the struggle with capital is taking place ... The great mass of workers, whatever party they belong to, have at last understood that their material situation must become better. But once the worker’s material situation has become better, he can consecrate himself to the education of his children; his wife and children do not need to go to the factory; he himself can cultivate his mind more, look after his body better, and he becomes socialist without noticing it. [51]
While some of the more extreme statements here need not be taken too literally, Marx repeated essentially the same theoretical conception in a key passage in a letter to F. Bolte in 1871:
The political movement of the working class has as its ultimate object, of course, the conquest of political power for this class, and this naturally requires a previous organisation of the working class developed up to a certain point and arising from its economic struggles.
On the other hand, however, every movement in which the working class comes out as a class against the ruling classes and tries to coerce them by pressure from without is a political movement. For instance, the attempt in a particular factory, or even a particular trade, to force a shorter working day out of individual capitalists by strikes, etc., is a purely economic movement. On the other hand, the movement to force through an eight-hour, etc., law, is a political movement. And, in this way, out of the separate economic movements of the workers there grows up everywhere a political movement, that is to say, a movement of the class, with the effect of enforcing its interests in a general form, in a form possessing general socially coercive force. [emphasis in the original] [52]
The strength of Marx’s conception lies in its materialism, its emphasis on learning through experience and struggle; its weakness lies in its economic determinism and optimistic evolutionism. History has demonstrated not only the process of development outlined by Marx, but also a wide range of counteracting forces serving to block the transition from trade-union consciousness to socialist consciousness. In particular the ability of economic gains, even including those won through struggle, to serve as palliatives, not stimulants, and the grip of bourgeois ideology on the proletariat, with its consequent ability to divide and fragment the movement, were both seriously underestimated by Marx. In 1890 Engels commented that ‘Marx and I are partly to blame for the fact that the younger people sometimes lay more stress on the economic side than is due to it. We had to emphasise the main principle vis-à-vis our adversaries, who denied it, and we had not always the time, the place, or the opportunity to give their due to the other elements involved in the interaction’ [53], and the question of the development of socialist consciousness is one on which Marx was most guilty of overemphasising ‘the main principle’ at the expense of ‘other elements involved in the interaction’.
It was on this oversimplified and over-optimistic view of the transformation of the working class from a ‘class-in-itself’ into a ‘class-for-itself’ that Marx based his ideas on organisation and his activity in the International. For Marx the main problem was to establish a political organisation based on the idea of class struggle and involving wide layers of workers. This achieved, he believed the organisation would evolve in a revolutionary direction of its own accord.
There is, therefore, a strong element of fatalism in Marx’s attitude to the formation of the party. The struggle of ideas and tendencies within the working-class movement will sort itself out as the class tendencies of the workers assert themselves. The basic problem was that Marx failed to grasp the possibility of working-class political reformism (i.e. what we now call social democracy or labourism) taking a serious hold on the movement in such a way that it would not simply transform itself or make way for revolutionary action when its time was passed, but would constitute a major obstacle blocking the road to revolution. Because he did not see the danger, Marx also did not see the means of combating it – the creation of a relatively narrow and disciplined vanguard party.
 
6. Social democracy and the problem of reformism
From 1872 onwards Marx and Engels were never again directly involved in, or members of, any organisation or party, but they nonetheless regarded themselves as having ‘special status as representatives of international socialism’ [54], and in that capacity dispensed advice to socialists throughout the world. It was largely Engels who was active in this role, rather than Marx, whose health declined and who concentrated on his studies. But it seems reasonable, in this sphere at least, to regard Engels’ views as broadly representative of Marx’s.
The most important phenomenon of this period was the rise of social-democratic workers’ parties in a number of countries, especially in Germany. These organisations combined an openly socialist programme with a mass following in the working class. Observation of this development, combined with the experience of the International, seems to have led to a certain reappraisal, or at least a change of emphasis, in Marx and Engels’ views. Thus in 1873 we find Engels warning Bebel not ‘to be misled by the cry for “unity” ... a party proves itself victorious by splitting and being able to stand the split’ [55], and in 1874 predicting to Sorge that ‘the next International – after Marx’s writings have produced their effects for some years – will be directly Communist and will proclaim precisely our principles’. [56]
In Britain and the USA, where there were very strong working classes but the workers were politically subordinate to the ruling-class parties and the socialist currents were extremely weak, Marx and Engels continued with their old line of advocating the formation of a broad independent workers’ party without worrying about its programme or theoretical basis. Engels wrote a series of articles to this effect in The Labour Standard in 1881, arguing, in an anticipation of the way the Labour Party was to arise, that ‘at the side of, or above, the Unions of special trades there must spring up a general union, a political organisation of the working class as a whole’ [57], and in 1893 he urged all socialists to join the Independent Labour Party. In relation to America, Engels argued that:
The great thing is to get the working class to move as a class; that once obtained they will soon find the right direction ... To expect the Americans to start with the full consciousness of the theory worked out in older industrial countries is to expect the impossible ... A million or two working men’s votes next November for a bona fide working men’s party is worth infinitely more at present than a hundred thousand votes for a doctrinally perfect platform But anything that might delay or prevent that national consolidation of the working men’s party – on no matter what platform – I should consider a great mistake. [58]
But where France and Germany were concerned, where the movement was much more advanced, Marx and Engels’ attitude was very different. Here they saw the possibility, for the first time, of the creation of substantial marxist parties in the shape of the Parti Ouvrier Français and the German SDAP, and so as to realise that possibility they paid particular attention to questions of theory and programme. Thus when in 1882 the French party split between the marxists led by Guesde and Lafargue and ‘possibilists’ led by Malon and Brousse (anarchists turned reformists), Engels welcomed the event as ‘inevitable’ and ‘a good thing’, maintaining that ‘the sham St Etienne party [the possibilists] is not only no workers’ party but no party whatever because in actual fact it has no programme’ [59], and commenting ‘it seems that every workers’ party of a big country can develop only through internal struggle, which accords with the laws of dialectical development in general’. [60] But above all it was in their dealings with German social democracy that Marx and Engels maintained the highest degree of theoretical rigour.
When in 1875 the SDAP united with the Lassallean ADAV to form the German Social-Democratic Workers’ Party (SAPD, later SPD), Marx and Engels opposed this move as ‘precipitate on our part’ [61] and involving theoretical concessions. Marx immediately subjected the unification programme to a devastating critique [62], exposing not only the reactionary implications of Lassallean formulations such as the ‘iron law of wages’, ‘equal rights to the undiminished proceeds of labour’ and ‘producers’ cooperatives with state aid’, but also taking up the whole question of the class nature of the state in opposition to the call for a ‘free people’s state’, condemning the programme for its lack of internationalism, and complaining that ‘there is nothing in its political demands beyond the old and generally familiar democratic litany: universal suffrage, direct legislation, popular justice, a people’s army, etc.’ [63] In 1877 Engels, to preserve the hegemony of marxism in the German movement, undertook the huge Anti-Dühring project, and in 1879 Marx and Engels dispatched a Circular Letter to party leaders protesting in the strongest possible terms at the emergence within the party of non-proletarian tendencies which rejected the class struggle and hence the class nature of the party, and ‘openly state that the workers are too uneducated to emancipate themselves and must be freed from above by philanthropic big bourgeois and petty bourgeois’. [64] Also in 1879 they objected to ‘Liebknecht’s untimely weakness in the Reichstag’ [65] in the face of Bismarck’s anti-socialist law, and to the opportunistic support of Bismarck’s protectionist tariff policy by the SAPD parliamentary group, in response to which Marx declared ‘they are already so much affected by parliamentary idiotism that they think they are above criticism’. [66]
But this continuous stream of criticism should not deceive. It reflected not hostility to German social democracy but Marx and Engels’ exceptional interest in ‘and concern for the organisation which they repeatedly refer to as ‘our party’. Despite their vehement attacks on every open manifestation of reformism and capitulation to bourgeois democracy, Marx and Engels remained attached to the German party by ‘bonds of solidarity’ [67] and so, with their blessing, it became for the rest of the world the model of a marxist party. What Marx and Engels failed to grasp was that the main danger lay not in what the party said, but in what it did, in what it essentially was. This problem was highlighted a few years later in the so-called ‘revisionist debate’ when Bernstein demanded that the party adopt an openly reformist stance. In a very perceptive letter the Bavarian socialist, Ignaz Auer, wrote to Bernstein: ‘My dear Ede, one doesn’t formally decide to do what you ask, one doesn’t say it, one does it. Our whole activity – even under the shameful anti-socialist law – was the activity of a social-democratic reforming party. A party which reckons with the masses simply cannot be anything else.’ [68] The root of the problem lay in the conception of the relationship between the party and the working class, a conception which neither Marx nor Engels ever clearly challenged; i.e. that of a broad party steadily and smoothly expanding, organising within ever wider sections of the proletariat, until at last it embraced the overwhelming majority.
As Chris Harman has written: ‘What is central for the social democrat is that the party represents the class.’ [69] If the party represents the class, then it must contain within it the different tendencies existing within the class, and Marx and Engels, though they strove for the dominance of marxism, accepted this. Thus Engels wrote in 1890: ‘The party is so big that absolute freedom of debate inside it is a necessity ... The greatest party in the land cannot exist without all shades of opinion in it making themselves fully felt.’ [70] If the party represents the class during a period of capitalist expansion and stability in which the mass of the working class is reformist, then the party must be reformist too, even if it does not openly admit it. But reformist workers and reformist political leaders are not at all the same thing. The consciousness of the average worker is a mixture of many often contradictory elements and so under the stimulus of his material needs, his direct involvement in the struggle, and dramatic changes in the political situation, it is possible for his consciousness to change very rapidly. The consciousness of the leader, however, is much more definitely formed and coherent (it is this which makes him a leader) and therefore much more resistant to change; moreover the leader is not subject to the same material pressures as the worker, but rather is likely to have carved out for himself a position of privilege (e.g. as MP or trade-union leader). The consequence is that the relationship of representing the working class in its reformist phase turns into opposing and betraying it in its revolutionary phase. To be with the class in a revolutionary situation the party has to be somewhat ahead of it in the pre-revolutionary period. The party does not cease to represent the interests of the class as a whole, but to do this it has to restrict its membership to those for whom the interests of the class as a whole predominate over individual, sectional, national or immediate advantage, i.e. to revolutionaries. That Marx never fully developed or articulated this idea, really the essential starting point for a theory of the revolutionary party, is rooted in what we called earlier the ‘optimistic evolutionism’ of his view of the growth of working-class political consciousness, which he saw as rising relatively smoothly and evenly, roughly in proportion to the development of capitalism. That Marx did not progress beyond this view is not, however, surprising, or something for which he can be blamed. For the greater part of Marx’s life the problem of reformism had not emerged as in any way a major threat; the main tasks were overcoming the petty bourgeois, sectarian, conspiratorial and Utopian socialist traditions of revolutionary organisation inherited from the French Revolution, and establishing the political independence of the proletariat. Marx’s contribution to the achievement of these tasks by the proletariat in most European countries was immense. If in the course of the struggle he ‘bent-the-stick’ in the direction of economic determinism, then this is perfectly understandable. But it is also necessary to understand that in the sphere of his theory of the party, the legacy of Marx’s work, whatever its positive achievements, was something that had in time to be overcome by the marxist movement if capitalism was to be overthrown.

Notes
1. Marx and Engels, The German Ideology, cited in R. Dahrendorf, Class and Class Conflict in Industrial Society, London 1959, p. 14.
2. Marx and Engels, The Communist Manifesto, Moscow 1957, p. 48.
3. Marx, Capital, Vol. III, cited in Dahrendorf, op. cit., p. 13.
4. Marx and Engels, The Communist Manifesto, op. cit., p. 66.
5. ibid., p. 58.
6. See Hal Draper, The Principle of Self-Emancipation in Marx and Engels, Socialist Register, 1972.
7. Marx, The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte, New York 1963, pp. 123–24.
8. See Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy, Moscow 1966, p. 150.
9. Marx and Engels, The German Ideology, London 1965, p. 78fn.
10. ibid., p. 61.
11. Marx and Engels, The Communist Manifesto, op. cit., p. 64.
12. Cited in D. McLellan, The Thought of Karl Marx, London 1971, p. 177.
13. Provisional Rules of the First International, in D. Fernbach (ed.), Karl Marx: The First International and After, London 1974, p. 82.
14. Marx and Engels, The Communist Manifesto, op. cit., p. 72.
15. Trotsky was to refer to this passage when arguing his case for a united front against fascism in Germany. See Chapter 5 below.
16. Monty Johnstone, Marx and Engels and the Concept of the Party, Socialist Register, 1967, p. 122.
17. Marx to Freiligrath (1860), cited in D. McLellan, The Thought of Karl Marx, op. cit., p. 169.
18. Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow 1965, p. 263.
19. This seems to me to be generally the most desirable procedure, even if it were not, as is the case with Marx, the only possible one.
20. Engels, On the History of the Communist League, in Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Vol. II, Moscow 1962, p. 348.
21. The figure is taken from Monty Johnstone, op. cit.
22. Engels, Marx and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, in Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Vol. II, op. cit., p. 330.
23. Cited in Franz Mehring, Karl Marx, London 1966, p. 155.
24. Cited in ibid., pp. 185–86.
25. Marx, The March Address, in Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Vol. 1, op. cit., pp. 106–107.
26. ibid., p. 112.
27. Cited in Franz Mehring, op. cit., pp. 207–208.
28. Marx to Engels, 11 February 1851, cited in Bertram D. Wolfe, Marxism: 100 Years in the Life of a Doctrine, London 1967, p. 196.
29. Engels to Marx, 13 February 1851, cited in ibid., p. 196.
30. Franz Mehring, op. cit., p. 209.
31. Bertram D. Wolfe, op. cit., p. 209.
32. Shlomo Avineri, The Social and Political Thought of Karl Marx, Cambridge 1969, p. 255.
33. Even a cursory glance at the Marx-Engels correspondence reveals that because of their deep bond of friendship and understanding they use all sorts of rash and outrageous expressions which they would have never dreamt of uttering in public statements.
34. Marx to Engels, 25 November 1857, in Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, op. cit., p. 99.
35. Cited in Bertram D. Wolfe, op. cit., p. 200.
36. Marx to Engels, 4 November 1864, in Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, op. cit., p. 146.
37. It was in answer to Citizen Weston that Marx wrote his famous pamphlet Wages, Price and Profit.
38. See Boris I. Nicolaevsky, Secret Societies and the First International, in Milorad Drachovitch (ed.), The Revolutionary Internationals 1863–1943, London 1966.
39. Marx to Engels, 4 November 1864, in Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, op. cit., p. 148.
40. ibid., p. 149.
41. See Hal Draper, op. cit.
42. Provisional Rules of the First International, in D. Fernbach (ed.), Karl Marx: The First International and After, op. cit., p. 82.
43. Cited in ibid., p. 269.
44. ibid.
45. Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Vol. 1, op. cit., p. 388.
46. Cited in Monty Johnstone, op. cit., p. 131.
47. Marx, Engels, Lenin, Anarchism and Anarcho-Syndicalism, Moscow 1972, p. 56.
48. Bakunin to Richard, 1 April 1870, cited in Monty Johnstone, op. cit., p. 134.
49. Monty Johnstone, op. cit., p. 134.
50. Marx obtained Bakunin’s expulsion, not on a political basis, but by implicating him in the activities of the deluded Russian conspirator, Nechayev, and by charging him with swindling Marx in connection with 300 roubles for the translation of Capital.
51. Cited in D.McLellan, op. cit., pp. 175–76.
52. Marx to Bolte, 23 November 1871, in Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, op. cit., pp. 270–71.
53. Engels to Bloch, 21–22 September 1890, in Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, op. cit., p. 418.
54. Engels to Bernstein, 27 February–1 March 1883, in Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, op. cit., p. 358.
55. Engels to Bebel, 21 June 1873, ibid., pp. 283–85.
56. Engels to Sorge, 12–17 September 1874, ibid., p. 289.
57. Engels, Trades Unions II, The Labour Standard, 4 June 1881, in W.O. Henderson (ed.), Engels’ Selected Writings, London 1967, p. 109.
58. Engels to F.K. Wischnewstzky, 28 December 1886, in Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, op. cit., pp. 398–99.
59. Engels to Bernstein, 20 October 1882, ibid., p. 352.
60. ibid., p. 353.
61. Engels to Bebel, 12 October 1875, ibid., p. 298.
62. Critique of the Gotha Programme, in D. Fernbach (ed.), Karl Marx: The First International and After, op. cit.
63. ibid., p. 355.
64. Marx and Engels to Bebel, Liebknecht, Bracke and others, 17–18 September 1879, in Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, op. cit., p. 327.
65. Engels to Becker, 1 July 1879, ibid., p. 328.
66. Marx to Sorge, 19 September 1879, ibid., p. 328.
67. Marx and Engels to Bebel, Liebknecht, Bracke and others, ibid., p. 327.
68. Cited in James Joll, The Second International, London 1968, p. 94.
69. Chris Harman, Party and Class, in Duncan Hallas et al., Party and Class, London (n.d.), p. 50.
70. Engels to Sorge, 9 August 1890, cited in Monty Johnstone, op. cit., p. 157.
 

 Molyneux: Marxism and the Party (Introduction)



John Molyneux Archive   |   Marxism & the Party   |   ETOL Main Page

John Molyneux
Marxism and the Party

Introduction

The bankruptcy and barbarity of capitalism is clear for all to see. In the advanced countries living standards are slashed, social welfare is cut, mass unemployment has returned, democratic rights are eroded, and racism grows apace. In the third world the perennial consequences of imperialism – underdevelopment, poverty and starvation – remain unalleviated, while a succession of military coups shuts out all possibility of reform or improvement.
What is to be done? The road of reform, whether social democratic or Eurocommunist, leads only to incorporation into the system. Recourse, in blind desperation, to individual terrorism merely strengthens the authoritarian tendencies of the capitalist state. The only way out is through the mass struggle of the working class. But the whole history of the class struggle shows that the working class cannot achieve power purely spontaneously: it requires organisation and leadership. These however cannot be built in a day: they must be patiently constructed well in advance of the decisive revolutionary crisis. What we are talking about is the revolutionary party of the working class.
For the building of the party there must be a certain theoretical clarity. Why is a party necessary? What must its structure be? Above all what is its relationship to the class and its role in the revolutionary process?
These questions are not new. They have been asked and answered by all the leading theoreticians of the marxist movement from Marx onwards. If the revolutionary party is to be built, then this accumulated body of knowledge must be widely assimilated. In itself, of course, this is far from enough. Equally important, and far more difficult, is the concrete analysis of the present situation and the development of the strategy and tactics capable of linking revolutionaries and revolutionary ideas to the real movement of the working class. Nonetheless, learning the lessons of the past remains an essential prerequisite for tackling the problems of today.
This, in short, is the aim of this work; to present, as coherently as possible, the main ideas of the outstanding marxist theoreticians on the nature and tasks of the revolutionary party.
 

 Molyneux: Marxism and the Party (3. Lenin: from Bolshevism to the Comintern)



John Molyneux Archive   |   Marxism & the Party   |   ETOL Main Page

John Molyneux
Marxism and the Party

3. Lenin: from Russian Bolshevism
to the Communist International

As we have shown, by 1904 Lenin had developed a number of ideas which constituted a definite advance on the generally accepted view of the party. Because of this, and because of the historical continuity of the Bolshevik faction from the 1903 split to the 1917 revolution, it has commonly been assumed that Lenin had had almost from the first his own clearly worked out theory of the party, quite distinct from that of social democracy in the West. But this is to make the mistake of reading back into the past ideas that only became clear much later. In reality Lenin, at this stage, was not aware that he diverged in any fundamental way from social-democratic orthodoxy. He identified the Mensheviks with Bernsteinian ‘revisionism’ and himself with the mainstream Bebel-Kautsky tendency of the SPD.
The citations of Kautsky as the marxist authority are legion in Lenin’s works at this time and remain so throughout the pre-war period. Even Kautsky’s tendency to favour the Mensheviks is not allowed to affect this judgement; it is always attributed to Kautsky’s ignorance of the real situation in Russia. [1] As late as August 1913 Lenin can refer to Bebel as a ‘model workers’ leader’ [2], and praise him as the elaborator of ‘the fundamentals of parliamentary tactics for German (and international) Social Democracy, tactics that never yield an inch to the enemy ... (and are) always directed to the accomplishment of the final aim’. [3] As far as perceiving the conservatism of the SPD is concerned, not only Luxemburg, who saw its leaders at first hand, but also Trotsky were far in advance of Lenin. As early as 1906 Trotsky warned that:
The European socialist parties, particularly the largest of them, the German Social-Democratic Party, have developed their conservatism in proportion as the masses have embraced socialism and the more these masses have become organised and disciplined. As a consequence of this social democracy as an organisation embodying the political experience of the proletariat may at a certain moment become a direct obstacle to open conflict between the workers and bourgeois reaction. [4]
This point is stressed as a corrective to the widespread tendency to exaggerate the ‘unity’ of Lenin’s thought, to make of his ideas a totally consistent system in which everything from beginning to end fits neatly into place. [5] As Trotsky once commented: ‘If Lenin in 1903 had understood and formulated everything that was required for the coming times, then the remainder of his life would have consisted only of reiterations. In reality this was not at all the case.’ [6] There is a great gap between Lenin’s theory of the party in 1903–04 and that of 1919 at the founding of the Communist International. Lenin developed that theory, not all at once, but through a series of responses to and generalisations from the course of the class struggle. Consequently, as with Marx, an understanding of that theory cannot be extracted from one or two key texts, but must be drawn from an examination of Lenin’s practice as a whole.
 
1. The impact of 1905
After the 1903 split, the next event which had a major impact on Lenin’s theory of the party was the 1905 revolution. The first effect of 1905 was to deepen the split between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks. Originally the division had been only about organisation, apparently unrelated to questions of programme or strategy, but now a fundamental divergence emerged in the estimation of the driving forces of the revolution. Lenin, as we have indicated above, accepted the bourgeois nature of the revolution, but, because of the conservative, weak and cowardly nature of the Russian bourgeoisie, held that the bourgeois revolution would have to be made by the proletariat in alliance with the peasantry.
Attempting to concretise this position for the purpose of revolutionary action, Lenin argued that the social democrats should work to break the influence of the bourgeois liberals (Cadets etc.) on the peasantry, and then stage a joint proletarian-peasant insurrection to overthrow the autocracy. Issuing from a successful rising would be a provisional revolutionary government consisting of the revolutionary workers’ party (the Social Democrats) and the party of the revolutionary peasantry (the Socialist Revolutionaries) which would represent the ‘democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry’. After a brief period of energetic measures to sweep away every vestige of feudalism, the provisional revolutionary government would summon a constituent assembly, which because of the peasant majority of the population would inevitably be anti-socialist, and the social democrats would then become an opposition party leading the struggle for socialism. In this way, maintained Lenin, the Russian revolution would be thoroughgoing (like the great French Revolution, rather than a shabby compromise like Germany in 1848) and would secure the best possible conditions for the future battles of the proletariat. [7]
The Mensheviks however rejected this perspective. More and more they tended towards the view that because the revolution was bourgeois its driving force must be the bourgeoisie, with only a subsidiary role assigned to the proletariat. The job of social democrats was to pressurise the bourgeois liberals so as to ‘revolutionise’ them, but at the same time not to frighten them. They rejected the formula of ‘democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry’, and participation in a provisional revolutionary government as likely to ‘cause the bourgeois classes to recoil from the revolution and thus diminish its sweep’. [8] During the rise of the revolution, the Mensheviks were in large part swept along by events, but as soon as the movement began to ebb they more and more came to express regret at the extreme positions and actions into which they had been pushed – a process which culminated in Plekhanov’s notorious remark, ‘We should not have taken up arms.’ [9]
Lenin’s observation of the conduct of the Mensheviks convinced him of the connection between opportunism in organisation and opportunism in politics. Thus, although the joint action of Bolshevik and Menshevik workers in the revolutionary struggles produced great pressures for unification to which Lenin formally acceded, he became more determined than ever to strengthen the independent organisation of his own tendency. In his article of 1910 on The historical meaning of the inner-party struggle in Russia, it is on the issue of the role of the proletariat in the revolution that Lenin focuses, writing that ‘Bolshevism as a tendency took definite shape in the spring and summer of 1905’. [10]
The second effect of the revolution was to bring about a shift of emphasis in Lenin’s conception of the relationship between party and class. In What is to be done? Lenin had justified his view of the party with the argument that socialism had to be introduced into the working class ‘from without’, and that spontaneously the working class could not rise above the level of trade unionism. In the face of the enormous and spontaneous revolutionary achievements of the Russian working class, the tone of Lenin’s writings changes completely.
There is not the slightest doubt that the revolution will teach social-democratism to the masses of the workers in Russia ... At such a time the working class feels an instinctive urge for open revolutionary action. [11]
The working class is instinctively, spontaneously social-democratic. [12]
It is now that Lenin notes ‘how the elementary instinct of the working-class movement is able to correct the conceptions of the greatest minds’ [13] and from this point on he becomes circumspect about the formulations of What is to be done? ‘What is to be done?’, he writes in 1907, ‘is a controversial correction of “economist” distortions and it would be wrong to regard the pamphlet in any other light.’ [14] This reappraisal did not, however, involve a return to a spontaneist or fatalist attitude to the tasks of the party – on the contrary it was precisely on this score that Lenin most strongly attacked the Mensheviks. ‘Good marchers, but bad leaders, they belittle the materialist conception of history by ignoring the active, leading and guiding part in history which can and must be played by parties that understand the material prerequisites of a revolution and that have placed themselves at the head of the progressive classes.’ [15] The break with economistic fatalism that was achieved in What is to be done? and One Step Forward, Two Steps Back is maintained and developed, but freed of the elitist foundation that Lenin had at first given it. The formulations in Two Tactics are eminently dialectical. ‘Undoubtedly, the revolution will teach us, and will teach the masses of the people. But the question that now confronts a militant political party is: shall we be able to teach the revolution anything?’ [16]
The corollary of this theoretical shift was a struggle by Lenin within the Bolshevik faction against the influence of the ‘professional revolutionaries’ or ‘committeemen’ on whom he had placed so much emphasis a year or two earlier. In the pre-revolutionary period of clandestine activity these ‘committeemen’ provided the stability and the expertise necessary to firmly establish the party in such difficult circumstances, but they also became prey to a certain routinism which revealed its reactionary features with the arrival of the revolution. In particular they were the tangible embodiment of the theory of ‘bringing socialism to the working class from without’, and as such tended to have a superior attitude towards the workers, with the result that there were practically no workers on the Bolshevik committees. The question of bringing workers onto the committees came up at the Bolsheviks’ third congress in April 1905. Krupskaya has described the debate:
Vladimir Ilyich vigorously defended the idea of including workers. The people abroad, Bogdanov and the writers were also in favour. The Komitetchiks (committeemen) were against. Both sides became very heated ...
In his speech in this discussion Vladimir Ilyich said: ‘I think we should consider the question more broadly. To bring workers on to the committees is not only an educational but a political task. The workers have a class instinct, and even with little political experience they quite quickly become steadfast Social Democrats. I would very much like to see eight workers on our committees for every two intellectuals ...’
When Mikhailov (Pestolovsky) said, ‘so in practical work very small demands are made of intellectuals, but extremely big demands are made of workers’, Vladimir Ilyich cried out: ‘That is absolutely true!’ His exclamation was drowned in a chorus of – ‘Not true!’ from the Komitetchiks. When Rumyanstiev said ‘There is only one worker on the Petersburg committee, although work has been going on there for fifteen years’ Vladimir Ilyich shouted: ‘What a disgrace’. [17]
The debate about worker involvement on the committees, over which, incidentally, Lenin was defeated by the congress, was only one aspect of Lenin’s fight against conservative sectarianism in the Bolshevik ranks. Another issue over which he clashed with his supporters was the attitude of the party to the soviet. Trotsky, the Soviet’s chairman, has described the initial response of the Bolsheviks to this historic organisation.
The Petersburg Committee of the Bolsheviks was frightened at first by such an innovation as a non-partisan representation of the embattled masses, and could find nothing better to do than to present the soviet with an ultimatum: immediately adopt a Social-Democratic programme, or disband. The Petersburg soviet as a whole, including the contingent of Bolshevik workingmen as well, ignored this ultimatum without batting an eyelash. [18]
Even from abroad Lenin saw the sterility of this approach and opposed it in a letter to the party’s paper Novaya Zhizn, in which he argued that it was not a question of the soviet or the party, but of ‘both the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies and the party’ [19], and that it would be inadvisable for the soviet ‘to adhere wholly to any one party’. [20] ‘To my mind’, wrote Lenin, ‘the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies, as a revolutionary centre providing political leadership, is not too broad an organisation but on the contrary, a much too narrow one. The soviet must proclaim itself the provisional revolutionary government, or form such a government.’ [21]
The essential difference between the ‘committeemen’ and Lenin was that the former wished to apply in the revolution the concept of the party which had operated in the pre-revolutionary period, whereas Lenin wanted to completely re-organise the party so as to embrace the new forces and confront the new tasks thrown up by the revolution.
If we fail to show bold initiative in setting up new organisations, we shall have to give up as groundless all pretensions to the role of vanguard. If we stop helplessly at the achieved boundaries, forms and confines of the committees, groups, meetings, and circles, we shall merely prove our own incapacity. Thousands of circles are now springing up everywhere without our aid, without any definite programme or aim, simply under the impact of events ... Let all such circles, except those that are avowedly non-social-democratic, either directly join the party or align themselves with the party. In the latter event we must not demand that they accept our programme or that they necessarily enter into organisational relations with us. Their mood of protest and their sympathy for the cause of international revolutionary social democracy in themselves suffice, provided the social democrats work effectively among them. [22]
The party machine resisted Lenin’s exhortations but the course of events was on his side. By November 1905 he could note with satisfaction:
At the third congress of the Party I suggested that there be about eight workers to every two intellectuals in the party committees. How obsolete that suggestion seems today! Now we must wish for the new party organisations to have one social-democratic intellectual to several hundred social-democratic workers. [23]
Just as Lenin’s theoretical reappraisal of the spontaneous capacities of the proletariat did not involve a return to economic fatalism, neither did his new views on party organisation mean adoption of the Menshevik position of the broad party. The open-ended expansion envisaged by Lenin in the revolutionary period was possible only on the basis of the solid preparation of the party beforehand.
Is social democracy endangered by the realisation of the plan we propose?
Danger may be said to lie in a sudden influx of large numbers of non-social-democrats into the party. If that occurred, the party would be dissolved among the masses, it would cease to be the conscious vanguard of its class, its role would be reduced to that of a tail. That would mean a very deplorable period indeed. And this danger could undoubtedly become a very serious one if we showed any inclination towards demagogy, if we lacked party principles ... entirely, or if those principles were feeble and shaky. But the fact is that no such ‘ifs’ exist. We Bolsheviks have never shown any inclination towards demagogy ... We have demanded class consciousness from those joining the party, we have insisted on the tremendous importance of continuity in the party’s development, we have preached discipline and demanded that every party member be trained in one or other of the party organisations ...
Don’t forget that in every live and growing party there will always be elements of instability, vacillation, wavering. But these elements can be influenced, and they will submit to the influence of the steadfast and solid core of social democrats. [24]
Thus the experience of the ‘great dress rehearsal’ of the Russian Revolution raised Lenin’s theory of the party to a new level. It deepened his opposition to opportunism and strengthened his determination to build a specifically revolutionary party. It also clarified his understanding of the relationship between party and class. The party remains a vanguard, distinct from the class as a whole, but now it is the party of the advanced workers – a part of the class, not the party of the declassed intelligentsia introducing socialism ‘from without’. But it was not only the upsurge of revolution that affected Lenin, the period of reaction which followed also added important elements to his theory of the party.
 
2. Reaction steels
After the defeat of the 1905 revolution terrible reaction engulfed Russia for a number of years. Demoralisation set in all round and the Bolshevik organisations were shattered.
It is interesting to compare Lenin’s response to this situation with that of Marx after the defeat of the 1848 revolutions. Marx dissolved the Communist League, left the émigrés to their squabbles, and retired to the study. Lenin, however, clung desperately both to the remnants of his party organisation and to the party idea, defending them passionately against all assaults. ‘Let the Black-Hundred diehards rejoice and howl,’ he wrote, let the reaction rage ... A party which succeeds in consolidating itself for persistent work in contact with the masses, a party of the advanced class which succeeds in organising its vanguard and which directs its forces in such a way as to influence in a social-democratic spirit every sign of life of the proletariat – such a party will win no matter what happens.’ [25]
To preserve and build the kind of party he wanted Lenin had to fight many factional battles. The three most important of these were against (a) right wing ‘liquidationism’, (b) ultra-left ‘otzovism’ (‘recallism’) and (c) centrist ‘conciliationism’. These disputes became very fierce and very tangled, and the theoretical level of the polemics which they produced was not always very high. Consequently there is no need to go into detail about them here, but nonetheless certain important general principles emerged which are worthy of note, and which stood Lenin in good stead in later years. [26] Firstly, that the party is not only an organisation for attack, but also for ‘retreat in good order’. ‘Of all the defeated opposition and revolutionary parties, the Bolsheviks effected the most orderly retreat, with the least loss to their “army”, with its core best preserved.’ [27] Secondly, the principle of ‘combining illegal work with the utilisation of “legal opportunities”’. [28] And thirdly, the principle of carrying the fight against opportunism through to its organisational conclusions, and effecting a split with all non-revolutionary elements.
It was this last point which was really the distinct hallmark of Leninism, and which resulted in 1912 in the formal foundation of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks) as a completely separate and independent party. Kautsky had fought Bernstein theoretically, but the revisionists were not expelled from the SPD. Rosa Luxemburg fought Kautsky and the SPD centre, but built no separate organisation. Trotsky was opposed to both liquidationism and otzovism and was just as critical as Lenin of the political line of the Mensheviks [29], and yet he actively worked against a split. It was also an advance on Lenin’s own earlier position, in that the 1903 split had in large part been the work of the Mensheviks, and Lenin had frequently been willing to countenance reunification, whereas now he broke with the Mensheviks once and for all.
The result of Lenin’s determined struggles during the reaction was that the Bolsheviks started life as a fully independent party just as the working-class movement began to get going again. The slowly reviving movement received a great impetus from the massacre of gold miners in Lena on 4 April 1912, which produced a wave of strikes, protest meetings and demonstrations throughout the country, culminating in a 400,000 strong May Day strike. Lenin intervened in this situation through the production of a legal daily newspaper, Pravda, the first issue of which appeared 18 days after the Lena massacre. Pravda combined an intransigent revolutionary political line [30] with numerous reports from workers themselves chronicling their everyday conditions and struggles. In one year 11,000 such workers’ letters and contributions were published. [31] The daily circulation of Pravda reached over 40,000 and the formation of workers’ groups to collect money for the paper compensated for the lack of a mass legal party. On the basis of a painstaking analysis of these collections Lenin showed that the Bolsheviks had won clear hegemony over the politically conscious workers. In 1913 Pravda received donations from 2,181 groups, while the Menshevik papers got donations from 661 groups. In 1914 up to 13 May the figure for donations to Pravda was 2,873, as against 671 for the Mensheviks. [32] From this Lenin concluded, ‘Pravdism, Pravdist decisions and Pravdist tactics have united four-fifths of Russia’s class-conscious workers.’ [33] Lenin had thus become the first marxist to have created a party consisting solely of revolutionaries, without any reformist or opportunist wing, which also had a substantial base in the working class.
 
3. The most revolutionary section of the Second International
At this point it is useful to examine what the Bolshevik party, the tangible embodiment of Lenin’s ideas on the party, actually looked like in practice and see how it compared with the more ‘orthodox’ social-democratic parties.
Firstly, the Bolsheviks were, of course, an illegal party operating in a country where there were no democratic liberties and no effective trade unions, whereas most Western social democracies had long since obtained their legality. Consequently the Bolsheviks did not and could not develop, as did for example the SPD, a broad layer of functionaries consisting of local officials, trade-union leaders, members of parliament, local councillors etc. This is a stratum which is inevitably subject to enormous ‘moderating’ pressures from its environment. Raised to a privileged position vis-à-vis the rank-and-file workers, such functionaries find that there is a definite role for them to play, not only within the workers’ movement, but also within capitalism, as mediators between the classes, and therefore they have a direct interest in social peace. They thus constitute a major conservative force. Within international social democracy this stratum acted as a permanent base for reformism. The fact that the Bolshevik leadership and its local cadre were closer to the prison cell or Siberian exile than they were to ministerial posts or to trade-union officialdom, and that the party itself had no more than a threadbare administrative apparatus, made the party relatively (though not absolutely) immune to bureaucratic routinism.
Secondly, the Bolshevik party was heavily proletarian in composition. David Lane has produced the following breakdown of Bolshevik membership for 1905: workers, 61.9 per cent; peasants, 4.8 per cent; white collar, 27.4 per cent; others 5.9 per cent [34]; and concludes, ‘if judged by the bottom levels of the party and particularly by its popular support, it may be said that the Bolsheviks were a “workers” party’, whereas, ‘it seems probable that the Mensheviks had comparatively more “petty-bourgeois” members, and fewer working-class supporters at the lower levels’. [35] During the reaction there was a mass exodus of intellectuals from the movement, whereas the factory cells, albeit isolated, survived better, thus increasing the party’s proletarianisation. Lenin’s above-mentioned analysis of money collections between 1912 and 1914 confirms this picture. Of all the donations to Pravda in the first quarter of 1914, 87 per cent came from workers’ collections and 13 per cent from non-workers, whereas only 44 per cent of donations to the Menshevik papers came from workers and 56 per cent from non-workers. [36]
The combination of the illegal status of the party and its proletarian composition made for an organisational structure radically different from the normal social-democratic tradition. Despite their revolutionary rhetoric, the essential strategy of most of the parties of the Second International was the achievement of the parliamentary majority. Consequently the base units of these parties were organised on residential or geographical lines, so as to facilitate mobilisation of the party membership for electoral campaigns in the respective electoral districts. In Russia the absence of parliamentary elections (such elections as did take place to the Duma were on a factory basis) and the need for secrecy led the Bolsheviks to base their organisation on the factories. Osip Piatnitsky, an old Bolshevik organisation man, records that ‘during all periods the lower party organisation of the Bolsheviks existed at the place of work rather than at the place of residence’. [37] This structure, despite the smallness of the Bolshevik party, made for a more intimate relationship between the party and the proletariat than was achieved by the social-democratic parties, where contact with the factories tended to be maintained only indirectly through control of the trade-unions, and where a certain division of labour operated between the industrial struggle handled by the unions and the political struggle handled by the party. No such de facto separation occurred with the Bolsheviks. Piatnitsky has described the work of Bolshevik factory cells:
In Czarist Russia the cells ... utilised all the grievances in the factories; the gruffness of the foremen, deductions from wages, fines, the failure to provide medical aid in accidents, etc, for oral agitation at the bench, through leaflets, meetings at the factory gates or in the factory yards, and separate meetings of the more class-conscious and revolutionary workers. The Bolsheviks always showed the connection between the maltreatment of factories, and the rule of the autocracy ... At the same time the autocracy was connected up in the agitation of the party cells with the capitalist system, so that at the very beginning of the development of the labour movement the Bolsheviks established a connection between the economic struggle and the political. [38]
Thus the Bolshevik party, rather than being simply the political representative of the working class, was an interventionist combat party striving to lead and guide the class in all its battles.
Also important was the youth of the party membership. In 1907 approximately 22 per cent of the party members were less than 20 years old; 37 per cent were between 20 and 24, and 16 per cent between 25 and 29. [39] Trotsky has commented on the significance of this. ‘Bolshevism when underground was always a party of young workers. The Mensheviks relied upon the more respectable skilled upper stratum, always prided themselves on it, and looked down on the Bolsheviks. Subsequent events harshly showed them their mistake. At the decisive moment the youth carried with them the more mature stratum and even the old folks. [40] And Lane notes that ‘the Bolsheviks were younger than the Mensheviks at the lowest levels of party organisation and more so among the “activists” than among the ordinary members. This suggests that the Bolshevik organisational structure allowed the young to advance to positions of responsibility more easily than did the Menshevik ... Politically, these young men may have provided more dynamic and vigorous leadership for the Bolshevik faction.’ [41] Certainly the youth of the party was another major factor in freeing it from conservative routinism.
Finally, the Bolshevik party was a disciplined body. The internal regime of the party was characterised as democratic centralism, but this phrase in itself does not have great significance. As an organisational formula it was not at all specifically Leninist, being accepted in theory by both the Mensheviks and many other social-democratic parties. [42] What mattered was the interpretation given to democratic centralism in practice. Lenin defined it as ‘unity of action, freedom of discussion and criticism’ [43], by which he meant freedom of criticism within the bounds of the party programme and until a definite decision was reached, then the implementation of that decision by the party as one. No party which contains both a revolutionary and a reformist wing, i.e. groups with fundamentally divergent aims, can in practice be a disciplined organisation. Thus although German Social Democracy attached great importance to administrative centralisation and party unity, it had a very lax attitude to breaches of discipline by party dignitaries, trade-union leaders and so on. Discipline exists to achieve unity in action, but if organisational unity is placed above principle, then real discipline inevitably disappears. ‘Unless the masses are organised’, wrote Lenin, ‘the proletariat is nothing. Organised – it is everything. Organisation means unity of action, unity in practical operations. But every action is valuable, of course, only because and insofar as it serves to push things forward and not backward ... Organisation not based on principle is meaningless, and in practice converts the workers into a miserable appendage of the bourgeoisie in power ... Therefore class-conscious workers must never forget that serious violations of principle occur which make the severance of all organisational relations imperative.’ [44]
The Bolshevik party was compelled by its situation to be disciplined, and it was able to achieve the necessary discipline because it was politically united. But it is important to realise that this discipline did not, as was often claimed, rule out independent initiative from the rank-and-file of the party. The same repressive conditions which made unity in action a necessity also compelled the local sections of the party to act for themselves. Piatnitsky writes:
The initiative of the local party organisations, of the cells, was encouraged. Were the Bolsheviks of Odessa, or Moscow, or Baku, or Tiflis, always to have waited for the directives from the Central Committee, the provincial committees, etc. which during the years of the reaction and of the war frequently did not exist at all owing to arrests, what would have been the result? The Bolsheviks would not have captured the working masses and exercised any influence over them. [45]
All these factors combined made Lenin’s Bolshevik party, on the eve of the first world war, in the words of Trotsky, ‘the most revolutionary – indeed, the only revolutionary – section of the Second International’. [46]
 
4. The break with social democracy
Trotsky’s characterisation of the Bolsheviks as ‘the only revolutionary section of the Second International’, however, also indicates the limits of Lenin’s achievements up to this point, for it makes clear the fact that the Bolsheviks remained a section of social democracy. This in itself shows that although Lenin had developed in practice a party quite at variance with the social-democratic norm, he had not yet consciously generalised this experience into a distinct and new theory of the party. It was only the collapse of the International in the face of the world war that brought about Lenin’s complete theoretical break with the old socialism and the birth of a specifically Leninist theory of the party.
Lenin, it is well known, was taken completely by surprise by the support given to the war by all the main European socialist parties, in total defiance of all their past policy. His first reaction to the issue of Vorwärts recording the SPD’s vote for war credits was that it must be a forgery. But once he had grasped the scale of the capitulation his thought developed extremely rapidly. Lenin’s very first article after the outbreak of the war, The Tasks of Revolutionary Social Democracy in the European War, written not later than 28 August 1914, not only condemned the leaders of international social democracy for their ‘betrayal of socialism’ [47] and recorded the ‘ideological and political bankruptcy of the International’ [48], but also identified in this betrayal and abandonment of past positions a continuation of tendencies long at work in the pre-war period. Social-chauvinism is identified as the product and development of opportunism. This collapse [of the International] has been mainly caused by the actual prevalence in it of petty-bourgeois opportunism ... The so-called Centre of the German and other social-democratic parties has in actual fact faintheartedly capitulated to the opportunists.’ [49] From this Lenin immediately drew the conclusion that ‘it must be the task of the future International resolutely and irrevocably to rid itself of this bourgeois trend in socialism’. [50]
From this point on Lenin would have no truck with schemes to reunite or resurrect the old International. ‘On the contrary, this collapse must be frankly recognised and understood, so as to make it possible to build up a new and more lasting socialist unity of the workers of all countries. [51] By 1 November the Bolshevik Central Committee had issued the slogan ‘Long live a proletarian International freed from opportunism’. [52] In December Lenin was asking ‘is it not better to give up the name of Social Democrats, which has been besmirched and degraded by them, and return to the old marxist name of Communists? [53] and by February 1915 the Bolshevik party conference had committed itself officially to the eventual creation of a ‘Third International’. [54]
Up till 1914 Lenin had seen himself as an orthodox social democrat applying to the peculiar conditions of Tsarist Russia the tried and tested theory and method of Kautsky and Bebel. But the decision in favour of a Third International signified not a determination to uphold that tradition, abandoned by its leaders, but a thorough-going rejection of it. Lenin levelled two interconnected charges at the Second International: a) that it was the product of a prolonged period of ‘peace’ – ‘peace’ signifying not only peace between nations but also relative peace between classes – in which it had become so accustomed to legal methods and the growth of its legal mass-organisations that it was unwilling and unable to make the necessary transition to illegal work; and b) that it was a coalition between revolutionaries and opportunists to the advantage of the latter.
Typical of the socialist parties of the epoch of the Second International was one that tolerated in its midst an opportunism built up in decades of the ‘peaceful’ period ... This type has outlived itself. If the war ends in 1915, will any thinking socialist be found willing to begin, in 1916, restoring the workers’ parties together with the opportunists, knowing from experience that in any new crisis all of them to a man ... will be for the bourgeoisie. [55]
Compared with the Second International, which Kautsky aptly described as ‘an instrument for peace, unsuitable for war’, the Third International was to be precisely an instrument of war – international civil war against the imperialist bourgeoisie – and therefore could tolerate in its ranks neither a fifth column nor waverers. In mounting this critique of social democracy it is clear that Lenin based his ideas on his experiences with the Bolsheviks and the struggle against Menshevism, but now for the first time these experiences and the numerous theoretical insights that accompanied them were generalised internationally into a new theory of the party to replace everywhere the old forms of organisation.
A new theory of the party, however, could not stand on its own; it required the all-round regeneration of marxism. For a theory of the party is merely the application to organisation of an analysis of the class struggle as a whole. The social-democratic parties were both producer and product of a mechanistic and fatalist interpretation of marxism in which the unification of the proletariat and the growth of its political party were seen as proceeding smoothly and harmoniously in a steadily ascending line as an inevitable consequence of capitalist development. The tasks of marxists in this scheme were formulated by Kautsky as ‘building up the organisation, winning all positions of power, which we are able to win and hold securely by our own strength, studying the state and society and educating the masses; other aims we cannot consciously and systematically set either to ourselves or to our organisations’ [56], and the object as ‘the conquest of state power by winning a majority in parliament and by raising parliament to the rank of master of the government’. [57] The latter would inevitably be realised provided only that the party avoided the disruption of its prized ‘organisations’ through being drawn into foolish or premature conflicts. In practice the avoidance of such upsets became the main preoccupation of many of the social-democratic leaders. In the first years of the war Lenin set about systematically dismantling this perspective and establishing a new theoretical foundation for the future Third International. This project led Lenin into three main areas of theoretical investigation: (a) philosophy (b) economics (the analysis of imperialism) (c) politics (the state). Each of these had an important bearing on his theory of the party, and therefore, although it is not possible here to go deeply into any of these questions, it is necessary at least to indicate the main interconnections.
In relation to philosophy we have already argued that the key to Lenin’s attitude in the original split with the Mensheviks was his rejection of the latter’s fatalist (‘tailist’) approach to problems of organisation. At that time, Lenin’s position was the product more of his keen political instinct and practical judgement than of a philosophical break with mechanical materialism, as is illustrated by his formulations in Materialism and Empirio-Criticism. [58] At the end of 1914, however, Lenin plunged into the study of Hegel, in particular Hegel’s Science of Logic. Lenin, like Marx, never wrote his Dialectics, but nonetheless his marginal notes on Hegel [59] show clearly the philosophical ‘revolution’ brought about by this reading. For the first time Lenin grasps clearly and assimilates the marxian dialectics. Through the restoration of these dialectics and of practice to their rightful place in the marxist world view [60], Lenin established the philosophical basis for a party which aimed not passively to reflect the working class and await the working out of iron historical laws, but actually to intervene in the shaping of history.
In relation to economics, Lenin’s task was to show that the objective situation was ripe for the creation of a new international party which was revolutionary not only in its ultimate aims but also in its immediate advocacy and preparation of revolutionary methods of struggle.
In his booklet Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism, Lenin aimed to show that on a world scale revolution was on the order of the day. Lenin’s argument, in its bare bones, was that imperialism was the product of the transformation, through the law of concentration of capital, of capitalism based on free competition into its opposite, monopoly capitalism. This was accompanied by the dominance of finance capital over industrial capital, and the accumulation of a surplus of capital which could only find profitable outlets in the backward countries where labour was cheap and capital scarce. Consequently the world had been divided up between the great monopolies and their respective ‘home’ governments. Since such division could take place only on the basis of relative strength, and since the relative strengths of the monopolies and the capitalist powers would not remain stable, so struggle for redivision, again on the basis of strength (i.e. war), would inevitably set in. On this basis any achievement of peace would merely be the prelude to a new war. Above all imperialism aggravated the contradiction between the socialisation of production and its private appropriation; and thus imperialism marked the beginning of the decline of capitalism and the opening of the era of ‘wars and revolutions’.
In addition to establishing the objective basis for a new revolutionary international, Lenin’s analysis of imperialism also provided an economic foundation for his critique of the Second International. Recalling Engels’ comments on the bourgeoisification of a section of the English proletariat due to England’s industrial and colonial monopoly [61], Lenin argued that imperialist monopolies gained ‘superprofits’ from their exploitation of the colonies and that this enabled ‘the bourgeoisie of an imperialist “Great” Power [to] economically bribe the upper strata of “its” workers’. [62] In the nineteenth century this had been possible only in England, but it had operated there for decades to corrupt the labour movement. Now on the other hand ‘every imperialist “Great” Power can and does bribe smaller strata [than in England in 1848–68] of the “labour aristocracy”’. [63] In this way ‘in all countries the bourgeoisie has already ... secured for itself “bourgeois labour parties” of social chauvinists’. [64] Thus Lenin established that opportunism, or reformism, in the working-class movement was not just an alternative school of thought, a sign of immaturity or even simply a product of the pressure of bourgeois ideology; rather it was ‘substantiated economically’. [65] Opportunism was the sacrifice of the overall interests of the proletariat as a whole for the immediate interests of separate groups of workers. The concept of the ‘bourgeois labour party’ signifies that opportunism is regarded as the agent of the class enemy within the ranks of the proletariat.
This definition of opportunism, which no marxist had formulated so clearly before, is crucial for Lenin’s theory of the party. It is the basic reason why the party must strictly exclude all reformist trends from its ranks. It is a recognition that the revolutionary party must be organised for struggle not only against the bourgeoisie, but also (in a different way) against bourgeois organisations within the working class. It is an understanding and materialist explanation of the difficulties involved in the transition from the class-in-itself to the class-for-itself. In 1901 Lenin had grasped this problem but had explained it in terms of the inability of the working class to achieve socialist consciousness by its own efforts. Now he explained it in terms of the contradiction between the historical and immediate interests of the proletariat, which for limited periods and limited strata could predominate over the ultimate need for class unity. The socialist unification of the working class develops dialectically, through internal struggle. As the agent of this struggle, the revolutionary party must confine its membership to those for whom the overall interests of the proletariat stand higher than immediate interests, in a word, to internationalists.
Finally there is the question of the state, which was brought to the fore by the debates on imperialism and the war. [66] The essence of socialist revolution is the transfer of state power from the bourgeoisie to the proletariat. Since the organisation of the party is necessarily in part determined by the tasks it will have to perform in the revolution, how this transfer of power is envisaged is of great importance to the theory of the party. The theorists of the Second International did not rule out violence, particularly defensive violence, in the struggle for power, but essentially they expected the revolution to leave the state machine itself intact. The role of the party would be to take over the existing state, no doubt changing its leading personnel, reorganising it and so on, but not fundamentally challenging its structure. With such a view of the tasks of the revolution in regard to the state, the centre of gravity of the class struggle must inevitably be seen as being in parliament and parliamentary elections. Thus Kautsky wrote – ‘This direct action of the unions can operate effectively only as an auxiliary and reinforcement to, and not as substitute for, parliamentary action’ [67], and ‘[parliament] is the most powerful lever that can be used to raise the proletariat out of its economic, social and moral degradation’. [68] From this it follows that the leadership of the party comes to lie with its parliamentary representatives, since it is through a parliamentary majority that the revolutionary government will be formed. In this conception the role of the rank-and-file of the party, and even more so that of workers outside the party, is essentially passive: for even though they may be called upon to fight, they are not expected either to create new structures of power themselves or to participate in running them. Social democracy’s bureaucratic conception of the revolution entailed a bureaucratic organisation of the party.
For the Bolsheviks, as we have shown above, none of this has applied because no modern ‘democratic’ state existed in Russia and they had from the start been illegal. But now, with a new International in mind, Lenin had to confront this problem theoretically. The result was that he rediscovered, clarified and systematised Marx’s generalisation from the experience of the French revolutions of 1848–52 and 1871 that ‘the working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made state machinery, and wield it for its own purposes’. [69] Lenin, in his notebooks, summed up the question as follows:
Changes after 1871? They are all such, or their general nature or their sum is such, that bureaucracy has everywhere soared (both in parliamentarism, within it, – in local self-government, in the joint-stock companies, in the trust and so on). That is the first thing. And second: the workers’ ‘socialist’ parties have, by ¾ ‘grown into’ a similar bureaucracy. The split between the social-patriots and the internationalists, between the reformists and the revolutionaries, has, consequently, a still more profound significance: the reformists and the social-patriots ‘perfect’ the bureaucratic-state machine... while the revolutionaries must ‘smash’ it, this ‘bureaucratic-military state machine’, smash it, replacing it by the ‘Commune’, a new ‘semi-state’.
One could, probably, in brief and drastically, express the whole matter thus; replacement of the old (‘ready-made’) state machine and parliaments by Soviets of Workers’ Deputies and their trustees. Therein lies the essence!! [70]
A party aiming to smash the state cannot be organised in the same way as a party intending to take it over. Its centre of gravity must be not in parliament, but in factories, from which the new state will issue. The rank-and-file of the party cannot simply be passive voters or even propagandists. They themselves have to become leaders of their fellow workers, builders of their own new state machine. Moreover, the thesis that the bourgeois state had to be smashed, finally closed the option of a peaceful or constitutional revolution even for the ‘freest’ of democratic republics. [71] Proletarian revolution would by definition involve a mass struggle for power, and therefore every revolutionary party would have to be so organised as to be able to lead such a struggle. This meant the creation of parallel legal and illegal apparatuses, the organisation of fighting detachments, the creation of party groups within the armed forces and so on.
Finally, Lenin’s theory of the state radically altered current conceptions of the relationship of the party to the workers’ state during and after the conquest of power. If the revolution means the taking over of the existing state, then the class content of the state as a workers’ state is defined by the party that controls it. The party and the state must merge. In this sense, for social democracy, the party was the embryo of the new state. Lenin’s theory of the replacement of the existing state by Soviets (workers’ councils) established a clear distinction between the workers’ state and the revolutionary party. The class content of the new state is defined by the fact that it is the creation of the working class as a whole, and involves the class as a whole in its operation. ‘Under socialism ... the mass of the population will rise to taking an independent part, not only in voting and elections, but also in the everyday administration of the state.’ [72] The role of the party is not to be the workers’ state, but to be the advanced minority which leads and guides the process of the new state’s creation and consolidation. As Chris Harrnan has put it, ‘The Soviet state is the highest concrete embodiment of the self-activity of the whole working class; the party is that section of the class that is most conscious of the world historical implications of self-activity.’ [73] It is because the party and the state are not identical that more than one party can contend for influence and government within the framework of the institutions of workers’ state power.
Thus Lenin’s theory of the state was an indispensable compliment to his theory of the party. It was this that ensured that the restriction of the party to the advanced minority of the proletariat in no way implied the party substituting itself for the class as a whole or attempting to seize power as a minority. It was the theory of the state that brought the Leninist theory of the party into harmony with the fundamental principle of marxism that ‘the emancipation of the working class must be conquered by the working class itself’. [74]
As a result of these few years of intense theoretical labour, the theoretical foundations of the Second International had been completely demolished and Lenin’s new theory of the party was now fully formed (which is not to say that further additions or developments were excluded). The new theory represented not an isolated breakthrough but the crowning practical conclusions of a comprehensive renovation of the marxist world view. Nor did it come a moment too soon, it now faced the crucial test of practice with the outbreak of the Russian Revolution in February 1917. The question we must ask is how did it measure up to this test?
 
5. The party in the revolution
The momentous events of the Russian Revolution confirmed Lenin’s theory of the party in two fundamental ways. Firstly, it showed that an originally tiny organisation could, in the heat of the struggle, grow extremely rapidly and, even more important, gain the support of the overwhelming majority of the working class. In January 1917 the Bolshevik party membership stood at 23,600. By the end of April it had grown to 79,204, and in August it was estimated to be about 200,000. [75] Presumably by October it was even larger. Measured against the Russian population as a whole, 200,000 remained an almost insignificant figure, but the Bolshevik membership was concentrated in the small, but politically decisive, working class. Leonard Schapiro has recorded that: ‘A sample of replies from the organisations in twenty-five towns shows that the percentage of organised Bolsheviks among the factory workers in the towns at this date (August 1917) varied from 1 per cent to 12 per cent – the average for the twenty-five towns being 5.4 per cent. [76] For a disciplined activist party this was a very high proportion. It meant that in the key industrial centres, especially Petrograd, the Bolsheviks had complete political leadership of the proletariat. Thus the first representative body to yield a Bolshevik majority was a conference of Petrograd factory delegates at the end of May, and when the Menshevik/SR dominated executive of the Soviets called a mass demonstration in Petrograd on 18 June, about 400,000 marched and 90 per cent of the banners bore Bolshevik slogans. As for October, Lenin’s old opponent Martov wrote ‘Understand, please, what we have before us after all is a victorious uprising of the proletariat – almost the entire proletariat supports Lenin and expects its social liberation from the uprising.’ [77] In nine months the Bolsheviks rose from a seemingly irrelevant splinter group to the most powerful political force in Russia.
Secondly, the Revolution demonstrated the indispensability of a centralised revolutionary party for the conquest of state power by the working class. The February Revolution which overthrew Tsarism and gave birth to the Soviets was, of course, not led by the Bolsheviks nor by any political party. As E.H. Carr comments:
The February Revolution ... was the spontaneous outbreak of a multitude exasperated by the privations of the war and the manifest inequality in distribution of burdens ... The revolutionary parties played no direct part in the making of the revolution. They did not expect it and were at first somewhat nonplussed by it. The creation at the moment of the revolution of the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ Deputies was a spontaneous act of groups of workers without central direction. [78]
But precisely because of this, the victorious revolution made by workers and soldiers (peasants in uniform), did not place power in the hands of the working class. On the contrary it voluntarily surrendered power to the bourgeoisie in the form of the Provisional Government. The workers and soldiers certainly did not like this development. ‘As early as 3 March, meetings of soldiers and workers began to demand that the soviet depose forthwith the Provisional Government of the liberal bourgeoisie, and take power in its own hands’. [79] But, lacking organisation and political leadership, they were unable to impose their will. Only with the growth of the Bolsheviks into a mass party and with the emergence of a Bolshevik majority in the Soviets were these, embryos of workers’ state power able to fulfil their potentiality. Only through a party could a clear and concise political programme – ‘Bread, Land, and Peace’, ‘All Power to the Soviets’ – be formulated, capable of concretising the feelings of the masses and uniting the different strands of the revolution, the workers, the peasants and the soldiers.
Also the party was crucial for the mounting and success of the actual insurrection. In the first place, it was able through its capacity to assess the situation in Russia as a whole, its discipline and its moral authority with the workers, to prevent a premature rising in ‘the July Days’ which would have isolated the impetuous workers and soldiers of Petrograd from the rest of the country. Had the Bolsheviks been less disciplined and less well established they might easily have been caught up by events and dragged into a hopeless uprising which would have met the fate of the Paris Commune or the German revolution of 1919. [80] Then when, after the defeat of the Kornilov plot, the mood of the country, not just of Petrograd, had shifted in their favour, and it became clear that the Bolsheviks would have a majority at the second congress of Soviets, the party was able to seize the critical moment when power could be gained swiftly and smoothly. Carr writes that, ‘For the organisation of the almost bloodless victory of 25 October–7 November 1917 the Petrograd Soviet and its military-revolutionary committee were responsible.’ [81] But the soviet had a Bolshevik majority and the military-revolutionary committee contained only one non-Bolshevik (a young left-SR). Moreover the initial decision to launch the insurrection, which they were implementing, was taken not by the soviet but by the central committee of the party in secret session. [82] Nor could it have been otherwise, for timing and secrecy were of the essence. A public debate in the soviet would have alerted the Provisional Government and given it the chance to take pre-emptive action. By their nature the Soviets were politically heterogeneous. Only a disciplined and politically united body, the party, could discuss the tactical pros and cons of the insurrection and plan its execution. And immediately after the seizure of power only the Bolshevik party possessed the unity of will and purpose to form a government capable of dealing with the immensely difficult and chaotic situation facing the revolution.
The pre-eminent role of the Bolshevik party in the October insurrection combined with the relatively small number of participants in the fighting, and the brevity of the operation (at least in the capital) have led many commentators to depict the revolution as essentially a coup d’etat by a tiny but determined minority, acting quite independently of the class they claimed to represent. [83] This view seems strengthened by Lenin’s repeated insistence that it was ‘necessary to fight against constitutional illusions and hopes placed in the congress of Soviets, to discard the preconceived idea that we absolutely must “wait” for it. [84] Did not the actual course of the insurrection completely violate the distinction between party and state, which we discussed earlier, and did not this mean that in practice the Leninist conception of the party as a minority vanguard necessarily led to the seizure of power by that minority? In answering these questions it is necessary to look not just at the period when the whole fate of the revolution depended on a few days fighting, but at the evolution of Lenin’s policy throughout 1917. Lenin first set the Bolsheviks on course for the conquest of power with his April Theses’ but from the start he guarded himself ‘against any kind of Blanquist adventurism’. [85] ‘In the theses’, wrote Lenin, ‘I very definitely reduced the question to one of a struggle for influence within the Soviets of Workers’, Agricultural Labourers’, Peasants’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. To leave no shadow of doubt on this score, I twice emphasised in the theses the need for patient and persistent “explanatory” work “adapted to the practical needs of the masses”.’ [86] ‘Patient explanation’ remained the line of Lenin and the Bolsheviks through the spring and summer of 1917, and always the struggle for power was linked to winning over the Soviets. Even when in July Lenin considered that the Soviets had moved decisively into the anti-revolutionary camp and therefore wanted to withdraw the slogan ‘All Power to the Soviets’, he was still careful to warn that ‘a decisive struggle will be possible only in the event of a new revolutionary upsurge in the very depths of the masses’. [87] Nor did he then abandon the soviet idea. ‘Soviets may appear in this new revolution, and indeed are bound to, but not the present Soviets, not organs collaborating with the bourgeoisie, but organs of revolutionary struggle against the bourgeoisie. It is true that even then we shall be in favour of building the whole state on the model of the Soviets.’ [88] Only when the Bolsheviks had achieved a majority in the Soviets did Lenin place insurrection on the order of the day.
The fact that it was primarily the party, acting through the Petrograd Soviet, that effected the rising did not contradict this perspective because this was essentially a destructive operation. The new structure of state power was already in existence and recognised as the supreme authority by both the workers and the army. The action on the night of 24/25 October merely eliminated the Provisional Government, leaving the Soviets as the sole power. Furthermore, it was on their soviet majority, not the right of armed conquest, that the Bolsheviks based their claim to form the government. On 5 November Lenin wrote:
There must be no other government in Russia but a soviet government. Soviet power has been won in Russia and the government can be transferred out of the hands of one soviet party into the hands of another party without any revolution, simply by a decision of the Soviets, simply by new elections of deputies to the Soviets. The Bolshevik party was in the majority at the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets. Only a government formed by that party is, therefore, a soviet government. [89]
Thus, in general, the practical test of the Russian Revolution brilliantly confirmed Lenin’s theory of the party. It completely justified his conviction that a principled and disciplined vanguard would play a decisive role in the achievement of the socialist revolution. But here a note of caution must be sounded, for the process by which the Bolshevik party actually came to play this role was not at all automatic.
Before Lenin’s return to Russia, the Bolshevik leadership slipped into a position of conditional support for the Provisional Government and also for the war. When Lenin first declared in favour of the overthrow of the Provisional Government and ‘All Power to the Soviets’, he found no support from within the party’s leading circles. The latter, basing themselves on the longstanding Bolshevik formula of ‘the democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry’, denounced Lenin’s position as ‘unacceptable’ in Pravda. Even the most meticulously prepared revolutionary party could not anticipate all the concrete features of the revolution, and therefore had to learn from reality and from the workers. Within the party leadership Lenin was the agent of this learning process. ‘Theory my friend, is grey, but green is the eternal tree of life’ [90], wrote Lenin, condemning ‘those “old Bolsheviks” who more than once already have played so regrettable a role in the history of our party by reiterating formulas senselessly learned by rote, instead of studying the specific features of the new and living reality’. [91] That, starting from a position of seeming isolation, Lenin so rapidly won over the party to his position was due partly to his great personal prestige, but also to the fact that he was articulating theoretically the views of the advanced workers who were flooding into the party. Lenin’s tirades against the ‘old Bolsheviks’ dovetailed with the pressure coining up from the factory districts. Repeatedly through 1917 Lenin would comment that the party was to the left of its central committee, and the masses were to the left of the party.
Even after Lenin had won the victory in principle at the April Conference, sections of the party continued to vacillate, and this was most marked in relation to the question of insurrection. Kamenev, Zinoviev, Nogin, Miliutin and Ryhov formed a group within the leadership completely opposed to the staging of an insurrection. [92] Kamenev and Zinoviev stood, next to Lenin, as the party’s most authoritative leaders, and yet at the decisive moment they wavered. It took a month of battering by Lenin, including threats that he would resign and campaign among the rank-and-file [93], to overcome this opposition and shake the central committee out of its inertia. When, immediately after the seizure of power, the Zinoviev-Kamenev group demanded that the Bolsheviks enter a coalition with the Mensheviks and SR’s, Lenin once again threatened a split (‘an honest and open split would now be incomparably better than internal sabotage, the thwarting of our own decisions, disorganisation and prostration’ [94]) and declared that if the opposition had a majority in the party, they should form their coalition government and he would ‘go to the sailors’.
That sections of the Bolshevik party and at times the party as a whole, faltered in this way, does not, of course, invalidate the principles on which it had been built. Neither before nor since has any working-class party acquitted itself better in the conditions of revolutionary upheaval. But it does mean that the organisation of the party on Leninist lines is not, in itself, any guarantee of success. It is not an organisational key which opens all the doors of history. The revolutionary party is indispensable, but the most revolutionary of parties is subject to an element of conservative routinism simply because it has to be a permanent stable organisation. Equally the very creation of a party as a distinct body involves the risk that the party may separate itself from the class. The advantage of the Leninist party was that though it could not exclude these dangers it reduced them to a minimum. The greatness of Lenin in the Russian Revolution was that he – the party man par excellence – in the last analysis transcended his party. He was able, so to speak, to reach over the head of the party to the mass of the Russian workers and soldiers, not so much to address them as to respond to them, and so was able to force the party to respond as well. Expressing this idea as a theoretical generalisation one can say that for Lenin, although the party had often to maintain a high degree of autonomy vis-à-vis the working class, and although the claims of the party and its discipline were strong, in the final analysis the party remained subordinate to, and dependent upon, the class. The Leninist theory of the party in no way implies the fetishisation of party loyalty that characterised social democracy and was later to assume the most grotesque forms and dimensions in the official Communist Parties of the Soviet Union and the world.
 
6. The single world party
Lenin’s theory of the party was, we have argued, in its essentials fully formed by the beginning of 1917. Now with the theory vindicated by the October Revolution Lenin possessed the political authority and influence to bring into being the logical conclusion of that theory, namely the Communist International.
The first congress of the Communist International opened in Moscow on the 2 March 1919, but in reality this was little more than the planting of a banner and a declaration of intent. Only 35 delegates attended and most of these were from the small nations that formerly were part of the Russian empire. Not until the second congress in July 1920, which 217 delegates attended, did the new International take definite shape as a mass fighting organisation. The leadership of the Communist International was, naturally, the work of many hands and Lenin frequently took a back seat. Zinoviev was its president and many of its most important manifestoes were written by Trotsky. Nonetheless it is quite legitimate to consider the work of the Communist International in a study of Lenin’s theory of the party, as he was both its initiator and most ardent champion (sometimes even against his own supporters) and certainly either inspired or approved all its most important strategic decisions. [95] The discussion here will be extremely brief and inadequate. There are two reasons for this: firstly, an adequate treatment of all the questions of party strategy, tactics and organisation dealt with by the International in its first few years would require at least a book to itself; secondly, we have been concerned primarily with the development of Lenin’s theory of the party, and the work of the International involved in the main the application of ideas we have already discussed. Consequently only the main outlines will be indicated here, with the emphasis on those aspects of the Comintern which were in some way new departures.
The most immediately striking difference between the Second and Third Internationals, as organisations, lay in the fact that the former was a loose federation of independent national parties, whereas the latter was to be strictly centralised. As the Statutes adopted at the second congress put it: The Communist International must, in fact and in deed, be a single communist party of the entire world. The parties working in the various countries are but its separate sections.’ [96] Supreme authority was vested in the world congress to meet regularly once a year, but in between congresses the International was to be run by its elected Executive Committee, which was given extensive powers.
The Executive Committee conducts the entire work of the Communist International from one congress to the next ... and issues instructions which are binding on all parties and organisations belonging to the Communist International. The Executive Committee of the Communist International shall expel groups or persons who offend against international discipline, and it also has the right to expel from the Communist International those parties which violate decisions of the world congress. [97]
This conception of the International as a centralised world party was a major advance. In part it was designed to prevent any repetition of the nationalist fragmentation that destroyed the Second International in 1914. More positively its aim was to create a unified general staff of what was assumed to be the impending world revolution. Trotsky has neatly summarised the thinking that lay behind this form of organisation.
Lenin’s internationalism is not a formula for harmonising national and international interests in empty verbiage. It is a guide to revolutionary action embracing all nations. Our planet, inhabited by so-called civilised humanity, is considered as one single battlefield where various nations and social classes contend. [98]
One battlefield required one army and one high command. The Communist International was to be, as Lukacs has put it, ‘The Bolshevik Party – Lenin’s concept of the party – on a world scale.’ [99]
To realise this aim it was necessary to foster the rapid growth of genuine revolutionary parties in all the main capitalist countries. To do this the Comintern worked to draw together existing Communist groups and trends and unite them into stable parties, and to win over as large a proportion as possible of the rank-and-file of Europe’s socialist parties (notably the USPD, the Italian Socialist Party (PSI) and the French Socialist Party). In this process the main enemy was ‘centrism’ [100], in that the centrist leaders had to be discredited to capture their supporters, and in that they had to be prevented from entering the International and infecting it. It was precisely the pressure from the rank-and-file in favour of the International that drew reformists in its direction and created this latter danger. At the second congress Lenin warned that ‘The Communist International is, to a certain extent, becoming the vogue ... [and] may be faced with the danger of dilution by the influx of wavering and irresolute groups that have not as yet broken with their Second International ideology. [101] Just as in 1903 Lenin had insisted on Clause 1 of the Party Rules as a weapon against opportunism, he now drew up 21 conditions of admission to the Communist International. These were extremely stringent. Condition 2 demanded that ‘Any organisation that wishes to join the Communist International must consistently and systematically dismiss reformists and “centrists” from positions of any responsibility in the working-class movement.’ [102] Condition 4 insisted on ‘systematic propaganda and agitation ... in the armed forces’. [103] Condition 14 required that ‘Communist parties in countries where communists can conduct their work legally must carry out periodic membership purges (re-registrations) with the aim of systematically ridding the party of petty-bourgeois elements that inevitably percolate into them.’ Summing up the 21 conditions, Zinoviev declared, ‘Just as it is not easy for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle, so, I hope, it will not be easy for the adherents of the centre to slip through the 21 conditions.’ [104] Prominent leaders of the centre, Crispien and Dittmann from the USPD and Serrati from the PSI, were present at the congress but their objections were forcefully rebutted by Lenin as ‘fundamentally Kautskyan ... [and] imbued with a bourgeois spirit’. [105]
Parallel to the struggle against centrism, there was a debate with various revolutionary but ultra-left or syndicalist tendencies. This was conducted in a much more friendly fashion. The errors of the Left’ were put down primarily to their ‘youth’ and inexperience. Some of the ‘Left’, notably Pestaña from the Spanish syndicalists and Tanner from the British Shop Stewards’ Movement, were so disgusted by the opportunism of the social-democratic parties that they rejected altogether the need for a proletarian party. In reply Lenin, Trotsky and Zinoviev patiently set outtthe ABC of the Leninist theory of the party, stressing the contrast between a social-democratic and a communist party. [106] It is noticeable that there were no tirades against ‘economism’ and no mention of the ‘introduction of socialism into the working class from without’. The adopted theses stated ‘The revolutionary syndicalists often speak of the great part that can be played by a determined revolutionary minority. A really determined minority of the working class, a minority that is communist, that wants to act, that has a programme, that is out to organise the struggle of the masses – that is precisely what the communist party is. [107]
More difficult and more instructive was the argument with those who accepted the need for a revolutionary party but who wanted it to pursue a simon-pure policy of no compromise, no manoeuvres and no participation in bourgeois parliaments or reactionary trade unions – this was the line of the KAPD (recently split from the German CP), Bordiga in Italy, Gorter and Pamiekoek in Holland, Gallacher and Sylvia Pankhurst in Britain. To Lenin all this was ‘old and familiar rubbish’ [108], but his reply, Left Wing Communism – An Infantile Disorder, specially written for the second congress, was one of his most thorough and lucid expositions of the strategy and tactics of the revolutionary party. Recounting some of the lesser-known episodes in the history of Bolshevism, Lenin argued that it was necessary to remain in the trade unions and ‘carry on communist work within them at all costs’, [109] and that ‘whilst you lack the strength to do away with bourgeois parliaments and every other type of reactionary institution you must work within them’. [110] ‘The task devolving on Communists’, he wrote, ‘is to convince the backward elements, to work among them, and not to fence themselves off from them with artificial and childishly “Left” slogans.’ [111] Lenin was concerned that communists should not ‘regard what is obsolete to us as something obsolete to a class, to the masses’. [112]
The concept of the party presented by Lenin in Left Wing Communism is that not of a band of blinkered dogmatists marching in only one direction – straight forward – but of a highly aware and politically astute body able to manoeuvre, at times to compromise and to retreat, so as never to lose contact with the class it aims to lead, and yet able ‘through all the intermediate stations and all compromises ... [to] clearly perceive and constantly pursue the final aim’. [113] Of course it would not always be easy to distinguish between compromises that were necessary and those that were treacherous, but ‘It would be absurd to formulate a recipe or general rule (“No compromises”) to suit all cases’. [114] What was required, Lenin argued, was analysis of the concrete situation.
It is, in fact, one of the functions of a party organisation and of party leaders worthy of the name, to acquire, through the prolonged, persistent, variegated and comprehensive efforts of all thinking representatives of a given class, the knowledge, experience and – in addition to knowledge and experience – the political flair necessary for the speedy and correct solution of complex political problems. [115]
During 1919 and 1920 the main emphasis within the Comintern was placed on the struggle against opportunism with ultra-leftism being regarded as a much less serious deviation, but in 1921 this changed. Throughout Europe the working-class movement had been split and the opportunists and centrists had been expelled from the International – now the emphasis shifted to combating ‘leftism’. The basic reason for this was the change in the objective situation. The immediate post-war period had seen an international wave of direct revolutionary struggles and the bourgeoisie had been thrown into panic. The perspective of the International was one of immediate world revolution. But in country after country the working class had been beaten back and the bourgeoisie had regained confidence. In all cases the new communist parties had conspicuously failed to win the support of the majority of the working class.
The immediate catalyst of the reorientation of Comintern strategy was the disastrous March action of the KPD in 1921. Over-reacting to the deliberately provocative police occupation of the Mansfeld coal mines, the German Communist leaders attempted, without preparation and without majority support, to call a general strike and transform it into an uprising. When the workers failed to respond, party members were ordered to force them on to the streets and the unemployed, amongst whom the party had a strong base, were used to occupy factories against the will of the workers. The result was heavy fighting between communist and non-communist workers, the complete rout of the former and the decimation of the party (membership fell by almost two-thirds). [116] Not content with this the KPD’s ‘left’ leadership attempted to generalise their ludicrous adventurism into a system going under the name ‘the theory of the offensive’.
Clearly it was time to call a halt. Lenin declared that if the ‘theorists of the offensive’ constituted a definite trend, then ‘a relentless fight against this trend is essential, for otherwise there is no Communist International’. [117] The third congress of the International in June – July 1921 adopted the slogan ‘To the masses’ and stated that The most important question before the Communist International today is to win predominating influence over the majority of the working class.’ [118] Particular attention was now to be paid to ‘partial struggles and partial demands’. ‘The task of the communist parties is to extend, to deepen, and to unify this struggle for concrete demands ... These partial demands, anchored in the needs of the broadest masses, must be put forward by the communist parties in a way which not only leads the masses to struggle, but by its very nature organises them.’ [119] The logical consequence of this new line was the policy of the united front, which was promulgated by the Executive of the International in December 1921 and ratified by the fourth congress in 1922. The idea of the united front was that public approaches should be made to the leaders of the social-democratic parties proposing united action on a common programme of basic economic and political demands arising from the immediate needs of the working class. If the social democrats agreed, then the communist parties would have the chance to prove in practice their superiority as defenders of the proletariat. If the social democrats rejected the proposals, then the blame for any disunity would fall on them. But as well as being an indirect weapon against the social democrats, the united front was also designed to reconcile the existence of separate communist parties with the need of the working class for unity in the day-to-day struggle against the industrialists and the state. [120]
In order that the parties of the International should be able more effectively to carry out this day-to-day agitation for immediate demands and to lend it a revolutionary character, and to be better prepared for future revolutionary opportunities, it was thought necessary that they should ‘bolshevise’ not only their ideology, strategy and tactics, but also the details of their organisation and methods of work. We discussed earlier the differences between the organisation of the pre-revolutionary Bolshevik party and that current in the European social-democratic parties. In 1921 many of the Western CPs were still functioning on the social-democratic model. To correct this the third congress adopted theses on The Organisation and Construction of Communist Parties which were to be implemented by each national section. Apart from general remarks about democratic centralism the theses stressed the obligation of all members to work, the key role of factory and trade-union cells, the importance of report backs on all activity and the necessity of an illegal communications network, and gave instructions on how to prepare for meetings and work in trade-union branches.
Organising millions of workers in a single world party, the Communist International, during its first few years marks in many respects the highest point that has yet been achieved by the marxist revolutionary movement. And yet it was also a failure; not just in that it did not produce immediate world revolution, but also in that within a few years it ceased to be a revolutionary force at all and became the submissive instrument of Russian foreign policy. Russian domination was the rock on which the Communist International foundered. It was of course inevitable that the leaders of the world’s first successful workers’ revolution would be listened to with respect. Moreover this was, at first, a positive factor as the Russian leaders, especially Lenin and Trotsky, were clearly superior in theory and in practical experience to anyone in the new European parties. Lenin frankly acknowledged the fact of Russian leadership, but assumed that it would be only temporary. ‘Leadership in the revolutionary proletarian International has passed for a time – for a short time, it goes without saying – to the Russians, just as at various periods of the nineteenth century it was in the hands of the British, then of the French, then of the Germans. [121] As long as the Russian Revolution linked its fate to the success of the revolution internationally [122], the pre-eminence of the Russian leaders aided the International, but as soon as this orientation was abandoned the International was ruined.
Two factors explain the continued passive submission of the foreign communist parties to Russian direction. The first was the series of defeats inflicted on the international working-class movement. The Russians alone retained the prestige of success, and on the basis of nothing but setbacks no other party developed the confidence or authority to challenge them. The second was a failure of the Bolsheviks to communicate, or, put the other way round, a failure of the foreign parties to learn. The communists of Germany, Italy, France etc. found themselves continually being criticised and corrected, first from the left and then from the right. In the process they seem to have absorbed not the Leninist method as a whole, on which the corrections were based, but only the idea that Moscow was always right. Consequently they never developed the capacity for independent concrete analysis which Lenin considered to be a function of the party to produce in its leaders. In his last speech to the Communist International in November 1922, Lenin seemed to be beginning to grapple with this problem, though he did not have the chance to develop his ideas.
At the third congress in 1921, we adopted a resolution on the organisational structure of the communist parties and on the methods and content of their activities. The resolution is an excellent one, but is almost entirely Russian, that is to say, everything in it is based on Russian conditions. This is its good point but it is also its failing. It is its failing because I am sure that no foreigner can read it... and ... if by way of exception some foreigner does understand it, he cannot carry it out ... we have not learnt how to present our Russian experience to foreigners ... the most important thing for all of us, Russian and foreign comrades alike, is to sit down and study ... We are studying in the general sense. They, however, must study in the special sense, in order that they may really understand the organisational structure, method and content of revolutionary work. [123]
The failure of the International and its transformation into the tool of the emergent Russian state bureaucracy, does not discredit the concept of the centralised world party, for that concept was the reflection of the international nature of the class struggle. But it does show that the creation of an International intensifies not only the advantages, but also the dangers inherent in the creation of a party at all. A healthy International would have been a powerful counterweight to the processes of degeneration at work in Russia. As it was, the International proved a reliable prop and support for the Stalinist bureaucracy. What remained from the early years of the Communist International was, in Trotsky’s words, ‘an invaluable programmatic heritage’. [124] To this one can add that its documents, its theses, its debates and in some respects its practice give us the most complete picture of the application of the fully developed Leninist theory of the party.
 
7. The essence of Lenin’s theory
From the foregoing account it is clear that Lenin’s theory of the party was a highly complex, many-faceted doctrine. We have argued that to understand this theory fully it is necessary to trace its evolution relating each step in its development to the practical and theoretical problems which engendered it. This we have attempted to do and on this basis it is possible to venture a brief summary of the essence of the theory.
There are two basic themes in Lenin’s theory of the party: first, the absolutely independent organisation of the advanced workers, rigidly upholding the overall interests of the working class and all the exploited and the ultimate aim of international socialist revolution; second, the closest possible relationship with the mass of workers maintained by providing practical leadership in every struggle involving the workers or affecting their interests. The former means fixed, adherence to principle, a willingness to accept, for a period, the position of a tiny and apparently isolated minority, and the waging of an unrelenting struggle within the working class against all manifestations of opportunism. The latter means extreme tactical flexibility and the ability to exploit every avenue to maintain contact with the masses.
These two elements are not separate but dialectically interrelated and mutually dependent. Without firm principles and disciplined organisation the party will either be unable to execute the necessary abrupt tactical turns or will be derailed by them. Without deep involvement in the struggles of the working class the party will be unable to forge and maintain its discipline and will become subject to the pressure of alien classes. Unless the day-today struggle of the working class is linked to the ultimate aim of the overthrow of capitalism, it will fail in its purpose. Unless the party can relate the ultimate aim to immediate struggles, it will degenerate into a useless sect. The more developed the spontaneous activity of the workers, the more it demands conscious revolutionary organisation on pain of catastrophic defeat. But revolutionary organisation cannot be maintained and renewed unless it receives the infusion of fresh blood from the spontaneous revolt of the masses.
All the organisational forms characteristic of Bolshevism – the close watch on the party’s boundaries, the commitment to activity of all members, the strict discipline, the full inner-party democracy, the primary role of the workplace cell, the combination of legal and illegal work – derive from the need to combine these two elements. The Leninist party is the concrete expression of the marxist synthesis of determinism and voluntarism in revolutionary practice.
Throughout Lenin’s revolutionary career the two aspects outlined here were continually present, but at different times one aspect preponderated over the other in his concerns. In 1903 and 1914 and at the first two congresses of the Communist International it was the independence of the party that was dominant. In 1905 and at the third and fourth congresses of the International it was the relationship with the masses. In October 1917 the two were inextricably fused precisely because the revolution marked the fusion in the working class of its immediate demands and its historical interests. Part of Lenin’s unique genius was his ability to judge which aspect to stress, which way to ‘bend the stick’ at a particular time.
‘It is not enough’ he wrote, ‘to be a revolutionary and an advocate of socialism in general. It is necessary to know at every moment how to find the particular link in the chain which must be grasped with all one’s strength in order to keep the whole chain in place and prepare to move on resolutely to the next link.’ [125]
Of all marxists Lenin unquestionably made the largest and most significant contribution to the development of the theory of the party. His ideas transformed the organisation, strategy and tactics of first the Russian and then the world working-class movement. They are the criteria by which, and to a large extent the framework within which, all other contributions to the theory of the party, including that of Marx, must be assessed.

Notes
1. See Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 17, Moscow 1962, pp. 74–75.
2. ibid., Vol. 19, p. 301.
3. ibid., Vol. 19, p. 298.
4. Trotsky, The Permanent Revolution and Results and Prospects, New York 1969, p. 114.
5. The worst offenders in this respect are of course official Soviet historians and theorists for whom Lenin has become an infallible pope, but there is a tendency in this direction even in such works as Lukacs’ Lenin.
6. Trotsky, Hands off Rosa Luxemburg, in Mary Alice Waters (ed.), Rosa Luxemburg Speaks, New York 1970, p. 444.
7. Lenin’s arguments are summed up in Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution, Peking 1965.
8. Resolution of the 1905 Menshevik Caucasian Conference, cited in ibid., p. 102.
9. For Lenin’s condemnation of this and his comparison of Plekhanov’s attitude to 1905 with Marx’s to the Paris Commune, see Collected Works, Vol. 12, op. cit., pp. 104–12.
10. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 16, op. cit., p. 380.
11. Lenin, Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution, op. cit., pp. 2–3.
12. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 10, op. cit., p. 32.
13. Lenin, Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution, op. cit., p. 155.
14. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 13, op. cit., p. 108.
15. Lenin, Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution, op. cit., p. 155.
16. ibid., p. 2.
17. N.Krupskaya, Memories of Lenin, London 1970, pp. 115–16.
18. Trotsky, Stalin, London 1968, pp. 64–65.
19. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 10, op. cit., p. 19.
20. ibid., Vol. 10, p. 19.
21. ibid., Vol. 10, p. 23.
22. ibid.,Vol. 8, p. 219.
23. ibid., Vol. 10, p. 36.
24. ibid., Vol. 10, p. 32.
25. ibid., Vol. 15, p. 355.
26. Lenin summarised the experience of the Bolshevik party, laying special stress on the period of the reaction, as the basis for his arguments against ultra-leftism in Left Wing Communism – An Infantile Disorder.
27. Lenin, Left Wing Communism – An Infantile Disorder, Moscow 1960, p. 12.
28. ibid., p. 13.
29. See Trotsky, Our Differences, in 1905, New York 1971, pp. 299–318.
30. Because of the censorship Aesopian language had to be employed. Thus the Bolshevik programme was referred to as ‘the uncurtailed demands of 1905’.
31. See Tony Cliff, Lenin’s Pravda, International Socialism, No. 67, p. 12.
32. See Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 20, op. cit., p. 363.
33. ibid., p. 366.
34. D. Lane, The Roots of Russian Communism, Assen 1969, p. 26.
35. ibid., p. 50.
36. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 20, op. cit., p. 369.
37. O. Piatnitsky, The Bolshevisation of the Communist Parties by Eradicating the Social-Democratic Traditions, Communist International Publication 1934, printed by London Alliance in Defence of Workers’ Rights (n.d.), p. 5.
38. ibid., p. 6.
39. Figures calculated from D. Lane, op. cit., p. 37.
40. Trotsky, The Revolution Betrayed, London 1967, p. 159.
41. D. Lane, op. cit., p. 37.
42. Leonard Schapiro comments: ‘It will be recalled that, in the Russian context, the phrase originated in the German Social Democratic Movement, and was first used in 1865 by J.B. Schweitzer, one of the principal followers of Lasalle.’ Leonard Schapiro, The Communist Party of the Soviet Union, London 1970, p. 75fn.
43. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 11, op. cit., p. 320.
44. ibid., pp. 320–21.
45. O. Piatnitsky, op. cit., p. 13.
46. Trotsky, Stalin, op. cit., p. 168.
47. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 21, op. cit., p. 16.
48. ibid., p. 16.
49. ibid., pp. 16–17.
50. ibid., p. 17.
51. ibid., p. 31.
52. ibid., p. 34.
53. ibid., p. 93.
54. ibid., p. 162.
55. ibid., p. 110.
56. Karl Kautsky, cited in Lenin, Marxism On the State, Moscow 1972, p. 78.
57. ibid.
58. Lenin, Materialism and Empirio-Criticism, Collected Works, Vol. 14, op. cit.
59. Lenin, Philosophical Notebooks, Collected Works, Vol. 38, op. cit.
60. This theme is discussed in greater depth in relation to Gramsci in Chapter 6.
61. See Engels to Marx, 7 October 1858, in Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, op. cit., p. 110, and Engels to Kautsky, 12 September 1882, ibid., p. 351.
62. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 23, op. cit., p. 115.
63. ibid., p. 116.
64. ibid., pp. 116–17.
65. ibid., p. 116.
66. Because Lenin wrote The State and Revolution in August–September 1917 it is frequently assumed that the inspiration for this theoretical advance came from the experience of the Russian Revolution. In fact Lenin first referred to the need for a theoretical study of the state in response to an article by Bukharin (see Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 23, op. cit., pp. 165–66) and by February 1917 Lenin had completed all the preparations for this. His notebooks have been published as Lenin, Marxism on the State: Preparatory Material for the Book: The State and Revolution, Moscow 1972. (For some reason they are not included in the English editions of the Collected Works.) An examination of this material shows that it contains all the essential ideas of The State and Revolution.
67. Karl Kautsky, The Road to Power, Chicago 1910, p. 95, cited in Chris Harman, Party and Class, in Duncan Hallas et al., op. cit., p. 50.
68. Karl Kautsky, The Erfurt Programme, Chicago 1910, p. 188, cited in ibid., p. 49.
69. Marx, The Civil War in France, Peking 1966, p. 64.
70. Lenin, Marxism on the State: Preparatory Material for the book: The State and Revolution, op. cit., pp. 50–51.
71. To say this does not mean that the revolution must necessarily involve a great deal of bloodshed. This will depend on the balance of forces and the reaction of the ruling class. But it does necessarily involve the use of ‘illegal’ and ‘unconstitutional’ physical force, precisely because the revolution overthrows the old legality, the old constitution, and the corresponding power structures.
72. Lenin, The State and Revolution, Peking 1965, pp. 139–40.
73. Chris Harman, Party and Class, in Duncan Hallas et al., op. cit., p. 63.
74. Of course after the revolution in Russia (we shall discuss this question again in relation to the actual seizure of power in October) reality did not at all conform to this schema. At first slowly, and then with increasing speed, party and state began to merge, until before long they were to all intents and purposes identical. But this was not a gradual translation of theory into practice. Rather it was one aspect of the degeneration of the revolution as a whole, produced by the combination of Russia’s isolation, its backwardness, the devastation of its economy and the decimation and demoralisation of the Russian working class.
75. The August figure was a guess by Sverdlov, the party secretary. The January and April figures were official party figures but are also only approximations.
76. Leonard Schapiro, op. cit., p. 173.
77. Martov to Axelrod, 19 November 1917, cited in I. Getzler, Martov, Cambridge 1967, p. 172.
78. E.H. Carr, Vol. 1, p. 81.
79. Trotsky, The History of the Russian Revolution, London 1977, p. 236.
80. Trotsky writes: ‘Spartacus Week in January 1919 in Berlin belonged to the same type of intermediate, semi-revolution as the July Days in Petrograd ... The thing lacking was a Bolshevik party.’ ibid., p. 591.
81. E.H. Carr, Vol. 1, op. cit., p. 109.
82. The decision was taken by 10 votes to 2 on a resolution moved by Lenin on 10 October (i.e. 23 October in the Russian (Julian) Calendar). For the discussion see, The Bolsheviks and the October Revolution, Minutes of the Central Committee of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks) August 1917–February 1918, London 1974, pp. 85–89.
83. Thus Leonard Schapiro writes: ‘This is the story of how a group of determined men seized power for themselves in Russia in 1917, and kept others from sharing it.’ The Origin of the Communist Autocracy, London 1966, p. v.
84. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 26, op. cit., p. 144.
85. ibid., Vol. 24, p. 48.
86. ibid., p. 49.
87. ibid., Vol. 25, p. 189.
88. ibid.
89. ibid., Vol. 26, p. 303.
90. ibid., Vol. 24, p. 45.
91. ibid., p. 44.
92. For the arguments of this group see the document by Kamenev and Zinoviev on The Current Situation, in The Bolsheviks and the October Revolution, op. cit., pp. 89–95.
93. See Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 26, op. cit., p. 84.
94. ibid., p. 282.
95. We refer here, of course, to the early years of the Comintern, specifically to the period of its first four congresses.
96. Jane Degras (ed.), The Communist International 1919–1943. Documents, Vol. 1, p. 164.
97. ibid., p. 165.
98. Trotsky, On Lenin, London 1971, p. 143.
99. Georg Lukacs, op. cit., p. 59.
100. Centrism – the Leninist term for the Kautskyite ‘centre’ of German Social Democracy and similar trends in other countries, e.g. Martov in Russia, Serrati in Italy and MacDonald in England.
101. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 31, op. cit., pp. 206–207.
102. ibid., p. 207.
103. ibid., p. 208.
104. Jane Degras (ed.), op. cit., Vol. 1, p. 167.
105. Lenin, Collected Works, op. cit., Vol. 31, pp. 250–51.
106. For Lenin’s speech on the question see Collected Works, Vol. 31, op. cit., p. 235–39. For Trotsky’s see The First Five Years of The Communist International, Vol. 1, New York 1973, pp. 97–101.
107. Jane Degras (ed.), op. cit., Vol. 1, p. 131.
108. Lenin, Left Wing Communism – An Infantile Disorder, op. cit., p. 25.
109. ibid., p. 38.
110. ibid., p. 42.
111. ibid., p. 38.
112. ibid., p. 42.
113. Engels, cited ibid., p. 50.
114. ibid., p. 52.
115. ibid.
116. For a more detailed account of the ‘March action’ disaster, see Franz Borkenau, World Communism, Ann Arbor 1971, pp. 214–20.
117. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 32, op. cit., p. 469.
118. Jane Degras (ed.), Vol. 1, op. cit., p. 243.
119. ibid., p. 259.
120. For a further discussion of the united front see Chapter 5 below.
121. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 29, op. cit., p. 310.
122. The fourth congress was quite explicit on this point. A unanimously adopted resolution included the statement: ‘The fourth world congress reminds the proletariat of all countries that the proletarian revolution can never triumph completely within a single country, rather it must triumph internationally, as world revolution.’ Jane Degras (ed.), Vol. 1, op. cit., p. 444. This question also is taken up more fully in Chapter 5.
123. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 33, op. cit., pp. 430–32.
124. Trotsky, The First Five Years of the Communist International, Vol. 1, op. cit., p. v.
125. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 22, op. cit., p. 286.
 

 Molyneux: Marxism and the Party (5. Trotsky's dual legacy)



John Molyneux Archive   |   Marxism & the Party   |   ETOL Main Page

John Molyneux
Marxism and the Party

5. Trotsky’s dual legacy

There are two aspects to Trotsky’s contribution to the marxist theory of the revolutionary party. First, there is his defence, principally through the medium of the Left Opposition, of the Leninist conception of the party against the practical and theoretical assault mounted on it by Stalin and the Stalinist bureaucracy. Secondly, there is his attempt, culminating in the foundation of the Fourth International, to forge a genuine marxist alternative to the degenerated Communist International. Although, of course, there is continuity between these two aspects in that the latter grew logically out of the former, there is nonetheless a qualitative difference between them. At the period of the Left Opposition, Trotsky counterposed to Stalin’s opportunist policy a consistent revolutionary one. With the effort to build a Fourth International, Trotsky now had to embody his policy in an organisation of his own. Because of this difference it makes sense to divide our study of Trotsky’s theory of the party into two parts: the defence of Leninism; and the Fourth International.
 
A. The Defence of Leninism
Trotsky divided from Stalin and the official majority of the CPSU over two basic issues: the bureaucratic degeneration of the Russian state and the Stalinist theory of ‘socialism in one country’. The two issues were naturally connected. The bureaucracy arose by the exhaustion and dispersal of the revolutionary proletariat as a result of the cumulative sufferings of the first world war and civil war and the accompanying economic devastation, famine, epidemics and physical annihilation. [1] This bureaucracy, consisting in large part of careerists, administrators taken over from the old regime, ex-Mensheviks and long declassed workers, wanted above all an end to upheavals and to carry on business-as-usual. They had no interest in what seemed to them the romantic and dangerous adventure of world revolution. Thus the theory of socialism in one country was not a mere Stalinist invention. On the contrary, ‘it expressed unmistakeably the mood of the bureaucracy. When speaking of the victory of socialism, they meant their own victory.’ [2]
This then was a dispute over fundamentals, as deep as the split between communism and social democracy. It involved two completely different and opposed conceptions of socialism. For Trotsky, as for Marx and Lenin, socialism was a classless, stateless, self-governing community based on an abundance of material goods, in which ‘the free development of each is the condition for the free development of all’. [3] Dictatorship, state planning, economic growth and efficiency, iron discipline etc. were means to this end (means from which Trotsky did not shrink), but not ends in themselves. For Stalin, as for the bureaucracy of which he was the prime representative, socialism was identified precisely with nationalisation, state control and the economic and military growth of Russia into a front-rank world power. From Trotsky’s point of view, a degree of bureaucratisation was perhaps unavoidable, but it remained an ever-present danger to be closely watched and dispensed with as soon as possible. From Stalin’s, it was the essential core and foundation of a new regime. Given Trotsky’s conception of socialism, the prospect of its realisation in one country – and backward Russia at that – was a reactionary utopia. Given Stalin’s, it was the only practical and realistic perspective.
Being a dispute about fundamentals, this conflict necessarily expanded to the point where it affected every event and every policy in the life of the international working-class movement, including of course the nature, role, strategy and tactics of the revolutionary party and the revolutionary international. Trotsky’s disputes with Stalin over the Leninist theory of the party can, for clarity, be dealt with under two headings: party democracy in the CPSU, and the strategy of the international communist parties.
 
1. Party democracy
The gradual bureaucratisation of the Soviet state in the absence of an energetic and politically active working class necessarily raised the question of the bureaucratisation of the Communist Party and the destruction of its inner party democracy. For although there was a formal separation between state (soviet) and party institutions, the Bolsheviks constituted in reality a state party. Since the civil war the party had maintained a complete political monopoly and control over all key posts. Consequently if the state machine was becoming bureaucratised, it could not fail also to have an effect on the party. What made this so crucial was that the party, as the vanguard of the proletariat with its core of incorruptible old Bolsheviks, its revolutionary tradition, its maximum earnings rule [4] and its strict discipline, was generally regarded as the main bulwark against bureaucracy. If the party succumbed, there would, given the passivity of the workers, be no further line of defence. It was in 1923 that Trotsky felt the situation had become so serious that he had to launch an open struggle for democracy within the party, with a series of articles for Pravda entitled collectively The New Course. [5]
The tone of The New Course is cautious and some of the formulations are hesitant, but in many respects it is an admirable presentation of the case for democracy within the revolutionary party and is of lasting value. Trotsky does not pose the question of democracy as an abstract right but locates its necessity in the development of the party and the new historical stage being entered. First, he examines relations between the old and new generation (pre- and post-October) of party members, ‘The conquest of power was followed by a rapid, even abnormal, growth of the party.’ [6] There was an influx both of inexperienced workers with little consciousness and of certain alien elements, functionaries and hangers-on. ‘In this chaotic period [the party] was able to preserve its Bolshevist nature only thanks to the internal dictatorship of the old guard, which had been tested in October.’ [7]
But since then the situation had changed. Now the new generation, for the sake of its own political development and for the future of the party as a whole, must be drawn actively into the political life and decision-making process of the party. Then Trotsky looks at the social composition of the party, showing how the need to fill administrative posts with workers led to the weakening of ‘its fundamental cells, the factory nuclei’ [8], and this was an important source of bureaucratism. Trotsky argues for the necessity of strengthening the proletarian base of the party and for the use of the students and youth as a force against bureaucracy. On the necessity of internal democracy Trotsky writes:
The essential incomparable advantage of our party consists in its being able, at every moment, to look at industry with the eyes of the communist machinist, the communist specialist, the communist director, and the communist merchant, collect the experience of these mutually complementary workers, draw conclusions from them, and thus determine its line for directing economy in general and each enterprise in particular. It is clear that such leadership is reliable only on the basis of a vibrant and active democracy inside the party. [9]
These remarks are directed to a party in power and in a specific situation, but the principle contained in them, the necessity of democracy for correct leadership, is of general validity.
The main burden of the leadership’s answer to Trotsky’s criticism was an outraged defence of the great traditions of the old guard and an emphasis on the imperative need for party unity and the dangers of factionalism. Trotsky’s reply points out that ‘tradition’ has a negative as well as a positive side in the revolutionary movement. Citing numerous examples, including the stand of the Old Bolsheviks against Lenin’s April Theses, he argues that Bolshevism’s ‘most precious fundamental tactical quality is its unequalled aptitude to orient itself rapidly, to change tactics quickly, to renew its armament and to apply new methods, in a word, to carry out abrupt turns’, [10] and that no tradition, however revolutionary, in itself provides infallible supra-historical guarantees against degeneration. On the question of factions Trotsky recognises the great danger of factionalism in the situation, and the possibility that factional differences may rapidly come to reflect the pressure of social and class forces hostile to the proletariat, but contends that an undemocratic party regime is in itself a cause of factionalism.
The leading organs of the party must lend an ear to the voice of the broad party mass, not consider every criticism as a manifestation of factional spirit, and thereby drive conscientious and disciplined communists to maintain a systematic silence or else constitute themselves as factions. [11]
The essence of Trotsky’s case in The New Course is that
it is in contradictions and differences of opinion that the working out of the party’s public opinion inevitably takes place. To localise this process only within the apparatus which is then charged to furnish the party with the fruit of its labours in the form of slogans, orders etc. is to sterilise the party ideologically and politically. [12]
At the same time, the claims of authority in the immensely difficult objective situation still exercise a strong hold over Trotsky. While demanding inner-party democracy he nonetheless accepts that ‘We are the only party in the country and, in the period of the dictatorship, it could not be otherwise.’ [13] And in so doing Trotsky participated in the current practice of raising to the level of a general principle what was originally envisaged as a merely temporary measure due to the extraordinary situation of the civil war. Max Shachtman, an erstwhile follower of Trotsky, sees in this a fundamental contradiction.
Trotsky ... gave no sign of realising ... that the denial of democratic rights to those outside the party could be enforced only by the denial, sooner or later, of the same rights to the members of that very party itself. For this is a veritable law of politics; every serious difference of opinion in a serious political party entails an appeal – direct or indirect, explicit or implicit, deliberate or unintentioned – to one or other segment of the people outside this party. [14]
This is a substantial point, but it does not really undermine Trotsky’s whole position. There is no doubt that in the long run, ‘sooner or later’, dictatorship by one party will lead to dictatorship within the party, but, as Trotsky often says, in politics time is an important factor. From Trotsky’s point of view the Bolsheviks were engaged in an exceptionally difficult and delicate holding operation: between ‘sooner’ and ‘later’ there was the possibility of relief from the international revolution.
As Stalin extended his despotic control over the party and the country and as, his policy diverged ever further from revolutionary marxism, so the calls for party democracy became more insistent and opposition to Stalin’s organisational methods became irreconcilable.
The 1927 Platform of the Joint Opposition signed by Trotsky, Zinoviev and eleven other members of the Central Committee contains a ringing indictment of the party regime:
The last few years have seen a systematic abolition of inner-party democracy – in violation of the whole tradition of the Bolshevik party, in violation of the direct decisions of a series of party congresses. The genuine election of officials is in actual practice dying out. The organisational principles of Bolshevism are being perverted at every step. The party constitution is being systematically changed, to increase the volume of rights at the top, and diminish the rights of the branches at the bottom.
The leadership of the regional committees, the regional executive committees, the regional trade union councils etc. are, in actual fact, irremovable ... The right of each member of the party, of each group of party members, to ‘appeal its radical differences to the court of the whole party’, [Lenin] is in actual fact annulled. Congresses and conferences are called without a preliminary free discussion (such as was always held under Lenin) of all questions by the whole party. The demand for such a discussion is treated as a violation of party discipline ...
The dying out of inner-party democracy leads to a dying out of workers’ democracy in general – in the trade unions, and in all other non-party mass organisations. [15]
In this Platform, the analysis, warnings and suggestions of The New Course have crystallised into programmatic demands: prepare for the fifteenth congress upon a basis of real inner-party democracy; every comrade and group of comrades to have an opportunity to defend their point of view before the party; improve the social composition by admitting into the party only workers from the factories and the land; proletarianise and cut down the party apparatus; reinstate immediately the expelled Oppositionists; reconstruct the Central Control Committee independently of the apparatus. But at this stage the condemnation and the demands still operate within the framework of complete loyalty to the Russian Communist Party and acceptance of its political monopoly.
We will struggle with all our force against the formation of two parties, for the dictatorship of the proletariat demands as its very core a single proletarian party. [16]
By 1933, after the paralysis of the Comintern in the face of Hitler (see below) and the total liquidation of all opposition and criticism in Russia, Trotsky abandoned this last constraint. Declaring that the Bolshevik Party of Lenin had been completely destroyed by Stalinism, he called for the building of revolutionary parties anew and the overthrow of the bureaucracy by political revolution. In 1936 in his major work The Revolution Betrayed, Trotsky was able to make a completely unequivocal exposition of his views on party democracy.
The inner regime of the Bolshevik party was characterised by the method of democratic centralism. The combination of these two concepts, democracy and centralism, is not in the least contradictory. The party took watchful care not only that its boundaries should always be strictly defined, but also that all those who entered these boundaries should enjoy the actual right to define the direction of the party policy. Freedom of criticism and intellectual struggle was an irrevocable content of the party democracy. The present doctrine that Bolshevism does not tolerate factions is a myth of the epoch of decline. In reality the history of Bolshevism is a history of the struggle of factions. And, indeed, how could a genuinely revolutionary organisation, setting itself the task of overthrowing the world and uniting under its banner the most audacious iconoclasts, fighters and insurgents, live and develop without intellectual conflicts, without groupings and temporary factional formations’? The farsightedness of the Bolshevik leadership often made it possible to soften conflicts and shorten the duration of factional struggle, but no more than that. The Central Committee relied upon this seething democratic support. From this it derived the audacity to make decisions and give orders. The obvious correctness of the leadership at all critical stages gave it that high authority which is the priceless moral capital of centralism. The regime of the Bolshevik party, especially before it came to power, stood thus in complete contradiction to the regime of the present sections of the Communist International, with their ‘leaders’ appointed from above, making complete changes of policy at a word of command, with their uncontrolled apparatus, haughty in its attitude to the rank and file, servile in its attitude to the Kremlin. [17]
Trotsky not only restores the original Bolshevik position on factions but also breaks with the doctrine of the one-party state.
In the beginning the party had wished and hoped to preserve freedom of political struggle within the framework of the Soviets. The civil war introduced stern amendments into this calculation. The opposition parties were forbidden one after another. This measure, obviously in conflict with the spirit of soviet democracy, the leaders of Bolshevism regarded not as a principle but as an episodic act of self-defence. [18]
He rejects the identification of class dictatorship with party dictatorship.
Since a class has many ‘parts’ – some look forward and some back – one and the same class may create several parties. For the same reason one party may rest upon parts of different classes. An example of only one party corresponding to one class is not to be found in the whole course of political history – provided, of course, you do not take the police appearance for the reality. [19]
And the 1938 programme of the Fourth International states that ‘Democratisation of the Soviets is impossible without legalisation of soviet parties. The workers and peasants themselves by their own free vote will indicate what parties they recognise as soviet parties.’ [20]
When one surveys the record of Trotsky’s struggle for workers’ democracy in the Russian Communist Party and the Russian state, it is clear that he made many mistakes. With the benefit of hindsight one can say that he should have begun his resistance earlier, that there were times when he made a virtue out of necessity, that in 1923–24 he should have fought more energetically and consistently, that he should have appealed sooner to the rank-and-file of the party and sooner to the mass of workers themselves. Many of these criticisms may be justified, but they are also one-sided for they neglect the immense difficulties of the situation which Trotsky faced, in particular the deep passivity of the Russian workers, including the mass of party members, during this period. Also Trotsky clearly considered it the duty of revolutionaries, in the absence of any existing alternative, to remain loyal to the party of the revolution to the last possible moment. This was a weighty consideration, much easier to dismiss when the degeneration has run its course than in the midst of the struggle. A balanced view must recognise the immense achievement of Trotsky in defending and preserving the marxist and Leninist tradition of party democracy, of the party as a collective and living organism, against enormous odds, without collapsing, as did so many others, into either social-democratic or anarchist rejection of democratic centralism and the vanguard party.
 
2. The strategy of the international Communist Parties
The theory of socialism in one country was first proclaimed by Stalin in autumn 1924 in complete violation of all the traditions of marxism. Its most immediate effects were not on Russia itself but on the Communist International and the strategy of communist parties throughout the world. As long as the survival of the Russian Revolution was linked to the achievement of world revolution, the most concrete form of solidarity with Russia and the first duty of every ‘foreign’ party was to make the revolution in its own country. But once the building of socialism was held to be possible in Russia alone, the world revolution became not a necessity but an optional extra, and the role of the Comintern, in the eyes of Moscow, became to ensure that nothing untoward interrupted this process of ‘socialist’ construction. In this way the CPs were transformed from agents of working-class revolution into agents of the foreign policy of the Russian bureaucracy. This transformation inevitably meant a series of departures from and revisions of Leninist traditions of revolutionary politics. The principal defender of those traditions was Leon Trotsky. [21]
It is impossible to deal here with all the questions of party strategy on which Trotsky clashed with Stalin, but four examples will serve to illustrate Trotsky’s contribution to the theory of the party in this sphere.
Trotsky opposed from the beginning Stalin’s policy that the Chinese CP should subordinate itself to the bourgeois nationalist Kuomintang, which led to the bloody defeat of the Chinese revolution in 1927. He insisted throughout on the Leninist principle of the complete organisational and political independence of the revolutionary party.
Equally he opposed the collaboration with the TUC leadership through the Anglo-Soviet Trade Union Committee which fatally compromised the independence of the British CP and left it uncritical of the ‘left’ trade-union leaders who betrayed the General Strike.
Trotsky also mounted a brilliant and prophetic critique of Stalinist policy in Germany in 1929–33. The KPD, operating with Stalin’s theory of ‘social fascism’, treated the social democrats as the main enemy and played down the threat of fascism. Against this disastrous strategy Trotsky insisted on the urgent need for a united front of working-class parties against Hitler.
Finally Trotsky demonstrated the fatal weakness of the Popular Front strategy adopted in 1934 which tied the working class and its party to the bourgeoisie and led to further defeats in Spain and France. [22] This critique is especially relevant today, as some variation of popular frontism is now the policy of almost every CP throughout the world and we have recently seen repeated its full tragic consequences in Chile.
Taken as a whole, the Stalinist period constituted a sustained perversion and distortion of the Leninist theory of the party to the point where it was transformed into its opposite. From a theory of the selection and organisation of the revolutionary vanguard of the proletariat, it became a myth of infallibility serving to justify every form of bureaucratic manipulation and cynical betrayal. So
successful was this operation that Leninist and Stalinist theories of the party, so different in practice, became generally identified as one and the same in the eyes of the public. Were it not for the tireless work of Trotsky, this identification may well have passed effectively unchallenged in the marxist movement and genuine Leninism been completely buried under a mountain of lies.
 
B. The Fourth International
Trotsky’s defence of the Leninist theory of the party as an integral part of his defence of marxism and Leninism as a whole was an immense achievement, but not one with which he could rest content. Since the turn of the century he had been committed to international proletarian revolution, and once he was convinced that the Stalinised Communist International could no longer achieve that end, he had no choice but to attempt to build a new organisation himself. It was the total collapse of the KPD before Hitler and the failure of a single section of the Comintern to protest at the official line which finally decided Trotsky to take this course.
An organisation which was not roused by the thunder of fascism and which submits docilely to such outrageous acts of bureaucracy demonstrates thereby that it is dead and cannot be revived. [23]
Just as Lenin, after the capitulation of the Second International on 4 August 1914, immediately declared for a Third International, so Trotsky in 1933 issued the call for the Fourth International.
 
1. The struggle for the Fourth International
Trotsky’s support in 1933 was very limited, and there could be no question of immediately setting up the new international. Instead it would have to be built gradually. Unfortunately the objective circumstances for doing this were extremely unfavourable. Lenin, although extremely isolated at the beginning of the first world war, had at least the advantage of a solid national base in the shape of the Bolshevik party. Even so it was not until two years after the victory of the Russian Revolution that the Third International could be founded. Trotsky had no such base, nor was he destined to see a second victory of the proletarian revolution in his lifetime. On the contrary, the 1930s were a period of profound defeats for the working class, beginning with the crushing of the German proletariat (the most total and shameful defeat of a militant, politically-conscious working class in history). Fascist or similar regimes already gripped the centre of Europe, and then followed the triumph of Franco in Spain. Meanwhile, throughout the thirties, the depression and long-term unemployment sapped the fighting strength and weakened the organisations of workers everywhere.
In addition to this general picture of black reaction, there were certain specific factors which worked against the growth of Trotskyism. The terrible threat of fascism created an immense pressure among workers for the closing of ranks, for unity in the face of the enemy and against new splits. Combined with this pressure for unity was the feeling of the need to have some ally, some great military power to stand against Hitler, and this of course meant Soviet Russia. To abandon the might of Stalin for the minuscule forces of Trotskyism was difficult in the extreme. In this way Hitler actually aided Stalin and Stalinism within the labour movement.
Then there was the fact that Trotsky was subjected to historically unprecedented vilification and slander within the working-class movement. The charge that Trotsky and all the other defendants in the Moscow Trials were agents of Hitler and the Mikado is and was manifestly absurd, and yet the power of ‘the big lie’ was such that millions of people throughout the world believed it. Nor was it just hardened communists who accepted the Trotsky fascist slander. Many Western artists and intellectuals, exemplified by Romain Rolland, lent their voices to the charge. Others such as Bernard Shaw or André Malraux, feeling the pressure of the popular front, equivocated or remained silent. Thus Stalin’s great frame-up was, in the short term, highly successful. In the first place, it ensured that only those of considerable strength of character, capable of withstanding constant denunciation and obloquy, would adhere to Trotskyism. Secondly, it created an enormous barrier between the Trotskyists, including those with the most exemplary revolutionary records, and the politically-conscious workers, depriving them of an honest hearing for their case. Criticism, no matter how well argued, is unlikely to be heeded if it is believed that it comes from a ‘fascist agent’.
Finally there was the simple fact that it was exceedingly hard to persuade people that it was necessary to begin all over again so soon after the establishment of the Third International. Trotsky expressed the situation as follows:
We are not progressing politically. Yes it is a fact which is an expression of a general decay of the workers’ movements in the last fifteen years ... Our situation now is incomparably more difficult than that of any other organisation at any other time, because we have the terrible betrayal of the Second International. The degeneration of the Third International developed so quickly and so unexpectedly that the same generation which heard its formation now hears us and they say ‘But we have already heard this once’. [24]
The effect of this appallingly difficult situation was that the Trotskyist movement was stamped with three characteristics. Firstly it was extremely small, consisting in many countries of mere handfuls. Secondly it was overwhelmingly petty-bourgeois in social composition. Thirdly it was, at least in its upper ranks, an organisation of exiles – not necessarily exiles from their countries, though this was true of some, but exiles from their adopted homeland, the mass workers’ movement. Now small groups always split more easily and more often than large parties, for there is so much less to lose. Petty-bourgeois intellectuals are always more prone to factionalism than are workers. ‘All the people of this type’ wrote the American Trotskyist leader, J.P. Cannon, ‘have one common characteristic: they like to discuss things without limit or end.’ [25] And exile politics is notorious for its intrigue and scandal. At bottom these phenomena all have the same cause – isolation from the great disciplinary force of the class struggle – and the movement for the Fourth International suffered grievously from all of them. From the beginning Trotskyism was plagued by factionalism, splits and extreme sectarianism.
Trotsky fought as best he could to break out of this hopeless milieu and to find a way for his movement to reach the workers. At first he orientated his followers towards the various left, social-democratic and centrist groups (such as the British ILP and the German Socialist Workers’ Party) which were independent of the Second and Third Internationals, in the hope that this could constitute a new Zimmerwald. [26] Then he directed them towards short-term entry into the mass social-democratic parties [27], and led them out again. In 1937 and again in 1939 Trotsky proposed to the American Socialist Workers’ Party the expulsion of petty-bourgeois members who failed to recruit workers to the party. [28] But it was all to no avail. Each new tactic caused new splits and each failed to achieve its aim. The Trotskyist movement never succeeded either in recruiting a substantial number of workers or in becoming an integrated part of the labour movement.
The question that we must now ask is: what was the effect of these conditions on Trotsky’s theory of the party? For although it is possible for the theoretician to resist the demoralising impact of unfavourable events by holding firm to the theoretical acquisitions of the past and to the previous high points of the movement, as Lenin did during the Stolypin reaction in Russia, and as Trotsky did later, nonetheless it is impossible for theory to be totally unaffected by practice. So it was for Trotsky. The yawning gap between the enormous demands of the situation and the pathetically weak forces with which he could set about meeting them led Trotsky into not only an exaggeration of the viability and strength of his tiny organisation. He was also misled in his theoretical overestimation of the role that could be played by an international leadership divorced from the masses and in the substitution of the party programme, drawn up from the sidelines of the class struggle, for the party itself as the embodiment of the actual vanguard of the proletariat, and the generaliser of the experiences of the working class in the midst of great events. These points, can best be illustrated by examining the decision taken in 1938 to actually found the Fourth International and the perspectives that accompanied it.
 
2. The theoretical basis of the Fourth International
The most immediately striking feature of the Fourth International was the contrast it presented with the first three workers’ Internationals. The founding conference was a pitiful gathering compared with those of its predecessors. Held secretly in France in the home of Trotsky’s old friend Alfred Rosmer, the conference lasted only a day and was attended by only 21 delegates. These delegates claimed to represent organisations in 11 countries, but most of these organisations were the tiniest of sectlets and one, the so-called ‘Russian section’, was a complete fiction and represented by a GPU agent (Etienne). Only Max Shachtman, the American delegate, came from a section with more than a couple of hundred members. In 1935 Trotsky had denounced as ‘a stupid piece of gossip’ the idea that ‘the Trotskyists want to proclaim the Fourth International next Thursday’. [29] Why then, despite the fact that there had been no significant growth in his movement, did Trotsky nonetheless go ahead with this proclamation?
The answer lies in Trotsky’s theory of the ‘crisis of leadership’ of the proletariat. It was Trotsky’s conviction that both capitalism and Stalinism had reached an impossible impasse. The successful resolution of this crisis for all humanity depended entirely on the emergence of a new revolutionary leadership. In the inevitably approaching revolutionary situations the crucial factor would be the quality of the revolutionary leadership, and equally in such situations it would be possible for initially tiny organisations to rapidly gain a mass following and exercise a decisive influence on events.
The programme adopted at the founding conference, The Death Agony of Capitalism and the Tasks of the Fourth International, opens as follows:
The world political situation as a whole is chiefly characterised by a historical crisis of the leadership of the proletariat ... The objective prerequisites for the proletarian revolution have not only ‘ripened’; they have begun to get somewhat rotten. Without a socialist revolution, in the next historical period at that, a catastrophe threatens the whole culture of mankind. The turn is now to the proletariat, i.e. chiefly to its revolutionary vanguard. The historical crisis of mankind is reduced to the crisis of the revolutionary leadership. [30]
The ‘crisis of leadership’ theory was a distillation of the revolutionary experience of a whole epoch, from the positive example of October 1917 through the negative examples of Hungary 1919, Italy 1920, Germany 1923 and 1933, China 1925–27 and Spain 1931–37. But this ‘general’ correctness of the theory does not exhaust the problem. Trotsky never for one moment claimed that the leadership created or ‘made’ the revolution (as for example some Guevarists have suggested), merely that it was a decisive link’ in the chain of events, the other primary components of the chain being the objective economic and political crisis of capitalism, the mass upsurge of the working class and the existence of a well prepared revolutionary party. But without this chain ‘the leadership’ would be isolated, suspended in a vacuum and relatively impotent, and its position would be worse insofar as it had an inflated or false picture of its own capabilities and significance. The problem for Trotsky was that when in September 1938 he founded the Fourth International (World Party of the Socialist Revolution), vital links in the chain did not exist. There was neither an upsurge of the working crass nor anywhere in the world a solidly-based revolutionary party.
Trotsky was naturally acutely aware of this. He ‘solved’ the problem by a series of predictions in which he forecast the inevitable emergence of the component links in the revolutionary chain in the near future.


Firstly, he believed that capitalism had entered its final crisis. ‘The economic prerequisite for the proletarian revolution has already in general achieved the highest point of fruition that can be reached under capitalism. Mankind’s productive forces stagnate.’ [31] The situation was such that there could be ‘no discussion of systematic social reforms and raising of the masses’ living standards’ [32], as a consequence of which social democracy would be fatally undermined.
 
Secondly, he saw the approaching world war as unleashing, like its predecessor only more so, an enormous revolutionary wave: ‘Second births are commonly easier than first. In the new war, it will not be necessary to wait a whole two years and a half for the first insurrection.’ [33]
 
Thirdly, he believed the Stalinist regime in Russia to be highly unstable – ‘like a pyramid balanced on its head’ – and unable to withstand the shock of war. ‘If it is not paralysed by revolution in the West, imperialism will sweep away the regime which issued from the October revolution.’ [34] And while Trotsky was for the defence of the Soviet Union, he could not fail to reckon with the fact that such an overthrow would deal a fatal blow to what he regarded as the main counter-revolutionary force in the workers’ movement.
 
Fourthly, in line with Lenin’s Imperialism and his own theory of permanent revolution, he thought that the colonies would be unable to gain independence without a head-on conflict with imperialism, and, since the national bourgeoisies would shrink from this conflict, the rising national liberation movements would have to take the road of socialist revolution. ‘The banner on which is emblazoned the struggle for the liberation of the colonial and semi-colonial peoples, i.e. a good half of mankind, has definitely passed into the hands of the Fourth International.’ [35]


Taken as a whole this amounted to a perspective in which
The epoch ... about to begin for European humanity will not leave a trace in the labour movement of all that is ambiguous and gangrened ... The sections of the Second and Third Internationals will depart the scene without a sound, one after the other. A new and grand regrouping of the workers’ ranks is inevitable. The young revolutionary cadres will acquire flesh and blood. [36]
For each of the predictions that made up this perspective there was much evidence, but the fact remains that every one of them was falsified by history. Preparations for the war began to lift capitalism out of the slump, and the ultimate crisis of the system diagnosed by Trotsky turned after the war into the system’s most sustained and spectacular boom. Stalin’s regime did not collapse in the war but emerged victorious and greatly strengthened, extending its control over the whole of Eastern Europe. [37] Far from ‘departing the scene without a sound,’ the social-democratic and communist parties gained, on the basis of these developments, a new lease of life throughout Europe. Imperialism was able, for the most part, to grant independence to the colonies through a deal with the colonial bourgeoisies, thus severing the connection between national liberation and proletarian revolution. The Fourth International was thus left high and dry. Trotsky had predicted:
During the next ten years the programme of the Fourth International will become the guide of millions and these revolutionary millions will know how to storm heaven and earth. [38]
But when, ten years later in 1948, the Second World Congress of the Fourth International was convened, it still represented only tiny groups.
The falsification of Trotsky’s predictions rendered his abstractly correct theory of ‘crisis of leadership’ irrelevant for practical purposes. But let us assume that the perspective, in its essentials, had proved correct; would all then have been well? Would the tiny Fourth International have been able to assume leadership of the unfolding world revolutionary process confidently and guide it to victory? Of course such a question, like all historical ‘might-have-beens’, is strictly speaking unanswerable, but it is clear that at least two major problems, deriving from the decision to found the International, would have arisen.
Firstly, the Trotskyist groups were so small and weak (much weaker than, for example, the Bolsheviks as early as 1903, or the Spartacists in 1914, or Trotsky’s Mezhrayontsy group in 1917 [39]) that it would have been very hard for them to make themselves felt in the midst of a great revolutionary upheaval. A small party, it is true, can grow amazingly in time of revolution, but unless it possesses at the outset at least a certain size and viability, it is likely to be overwhelmed by events. This is the point of the long labour of party-building in the pre-revolutionary period. Trotsky hoped to overcome this difficulty by means of a system of ‘transitional demands’ which would enable the small group to relate to and spearhead the struggle of the masses. He wrote:
The strategic task of the next period ... consists in overcoming the contradiction between the maturity of the objective revolutionary conditions and the immaturity of the proletariat and its vanguard ... It is necessary to help the masses in the process of the daily struggle to find the bridge between present demands and the socialist programme of the revolution. This bridge should include a system of transitional demands, stemming from today’s conditions and from today’s consciousness of wide layers of the working class and unalterably leading to one final conclusion; the conquest of power by the proletariat. [40]
But because Trotsky decided to proclaim the International without having a base in the working class, he was impelled to draw up these ‘transitional demands’ and formulate them in a fixed system, in isolation from and in advance of mass struggles. This was a false method. Demands which really stem from ‘today’s consciousness’ and actually lead to the ‘conquest of power’ cannot simply be drawn out of the head of a theoretician, no matter how brilliant, but must be the articulation of the struggles of the masses. For this there is required a party with roots to act as a two way transmission between the workers and the leadership. The Fourth International, however, was too weak to play this role. Trotsky’s ‘transitional programme’, The Death Agony of Capitalism and the Tasks of the Fourth International, was accepted without amendment and almost without discussion, but its demands – for a sliding scale of wages, for the opening of the books of big business, for the nationalisation of the banks, for the workers’ militia – were never taken up by the workers.
Nor is it possible, as Trotsky assumed, to predict accurately and draw up in advance the programme of the revolution. The overall lines of battle can be foreseen, but not the particular forms of the struggle, and yet it is on these particular forms that specific demands must be based. To lead the Russian Revolution the Bolsheviks had to completely revise their programme, and even such basic slogans as ‘Down with the Provisional Government’ and ‘All Power to the Soviets’ had at times to be withdrawn and then advanced again.
The second problem would have been that Trotsky’s perspective included a ‘new and grand regrouping of the workers’ ranks’. This would have been bound to occur through splits in the social-democratic and Stalinist parties and through the emergence of many new revolutionary and semi-revolutionary organisations. Yet Trotsky, by founding the International before any of these developments had taken place or even begun, was attempting to prejudge quite specifically the organisational form taken by this regroupment. In such circumstances the prior existence of an International of sects, with many sectarian habits, which these new organisations and movements would have been required to join, would most likely have constituted a serious obstacle to the creation of a genuine mass workers’ International.
In reviewing the question of the Fourth International and Trotsky’s theory of the party, it is useful to refer to words he wrote in 1928 (directed against the Stalinist policy of the Anglo-Russian Trade Union Committee):
It is the worst and most dangerous thing if a manoeuvre arise out of the impatient opportunistic endeavour to outstrip the development of one’s own party and to leap over the necessary stages of its development (it is precisely here that no stages must be leaped over). [41]
The proclamation of the International may not have been opportunism, but it was certainly an attempt to outstrip the development of his own party. Essentially it was a grand gesture, the raising aloft of a spotless revolutionary banner. As such it played its part, along with the rest of Trotsky’s work, in keeping alive the flame of unfalsified marxism when it was all but extinguished, but it also bequeathed to the Trotskyist movement a false view of the role and nature of revolutionary leadership, a number of misconceptions about ‘the programme’ and ‘transitional demands’ and a host of illusions as to its own strength and significance.
 
3. The degeneration of the Fourth International
At this point it is important to look briefly at what happened to the Fourth International after Trotsky’s death, for it was then that the mistakes of Trotsky’s last years fully revealed themselves. In 1938 Trotsky had written:
If our International be still weak in numbers, it is strong in doctrine, programme, tradition, in the incomparable tempering of its cadres. Who does not perceive this today, let him in the meantime stand aside. Tomorrow it will become more evident. [42]
The rest of the ‘International leadership’, without serious experience in the labour movement and without any independent theoretical achievements to their credit, proved incapable of orientating themselves in a changing world.
It is one of the defects of an International without a base that its ‘world’ perspectives can depart ever further from reality without being subject to the test and check of practice, and this was exactly what happened. Despite all evidence to the contrary, the leadership of the Fourth International clung to its programme and announced the confirmation of its perspectives. At times this process became farcical, as when James P. Cannon, leader of the American Socialist Workers’ Party, wrote, six months after VE day:
Trotsky predicted that the fate of the Soviet Union would be decided in the war. That remains our firm conviction. Only we disagree with some people who carelessly think the war is over ... The war is not over, and the revolution which we said would issue from the war in Europe is not taken off the agenda. [43]
On other occasions the blindness was more serious, as when Ernest Mandel wrote in 1946:
There is no reason whatever to assume that we are facing a new epoch of capitalist stabilisation and development. On the contrary, the war has acted only to aggravate the disproportion between the increased productivity of the capitalist economy and the capacity of the world market to absorb it. [44]
In such a situation splits and splintering of the movement were inevitable. The issue which produced these splits and wrecked the International was the ‘Russian question’ and, deriving from it, the question of Eastern Europe. For Trotsky, Russia remained a workers’ state because of its nationalised property relations, but the role of the Stalinist bureaucracy was seen as reactionary at home and counter-revolutionary in the world arena. This last assumption was in fact the historical justification for the existence of the Fourth International. The communist conquest of Eastern Europe was completely excluded in this analysis, but once it occurred, another question arose which could not be avoided and could not be answered by reference to ‘the programme’: what was the class character of the East European communist states? Here the Trotskyist movement was caught on the horns of a dilemma. If the East European countries were workers’ states, then not only did this make nonsense of the view that Stalinism was counter-revolutionary, but also it contradicted the marxist theory of socialist revolution, for in almost all cases the working classes of Eastern Europe had played no part in their ‘emancipation’. If they remained capitalist, then how could the complete identity of their economic, social and political structure with that of the Soviet Union be explained? The only way out consistent with revolutionary marxism was to abandon the characterisation of Russia as a workers’ state [45], but this would have meant explicit revision of the sacred programme.
Instead the Fourth International zig-zagged and split. At first it tried to maintain the position of the ‘buffer-states’ being still capitalist, then under the impact of the 1948 Stalin-Tito split, it went over to the implicitly pro-Stalinist view that the Red Army had given birth to a string of ‘deformed workers’ states’. This was accompanied by an opportunistic attempt to flirt with Marshal Tito, and then, under the leadership of Michel Pablo, a massive lurch towards Stalinism which culminated in the theory that a new world war was approaching in which the Stalinist parties would be forced to radicalise themselves. From this Pablo drew the logical conclusion that the Trotskyist parties should dissolve themselves and resume the position of a left tendency within the communist parties. This whole process had been accompanied by innumerable splits and expulsions, but now a major break occurred. Large sections of the International, led by the American SWP, recoiled at this liquidationism and broke with the leadership – but it was merely Pablo’s conclusions that were rejected, not his premises. The International movement founded by Trotsky was now in ruins – theoretically, politically and organisationally.
The upshot of this whole sorry tale is that today there are at least four organisations claiming to be the Fourth International and numerous others trying to reconstruct it. In Britain alone there are now something in the region of a dozen ‘orthodox’ Trotskyist groups all of whom claim adherence to the ‘gospel’ of the 1938 programme.
Naturally the Leninist theory of the party, for so long defended by Trotsky, has not remained unscathed by this degeneration of Trotskyism. While all Trotskyist sects adhere to the letter of this theory, its ‘spirit’ has undergone two kinds of revision. The first could be characterised as extreme dogmatic sectarianism. In this variant the organisation, no matter how manifest its smallness and insignificance, proclaims and demands its right to the leadership of the working class. It defines itself as the revolutionary party not on the basis of its role in the class struggle but on the basis of its possession of the ‘correct theory’ and the ‘correct line’. Essentially the party is seen as separate, not only from the working class as a whole but also from the advanced workers. If, for Lenin, the party was both educator and educated, in this version of Trotskyism the party attempts to play schoolmaster to the working class. Internally such organisations tend to authoritarianism and witch-hunting and even at times to the cult of the leader. Externally they exhibit gross delusions of grandeur, paranoia and above all an inability to look reality in the face.
The second variation can be described as petty-bourgeois opportunism. Although ritual obeisance is paid on occasion to ‘the role of the working class’, the failure to achieve a base in the working class is, in practice, accepted as a fact of life and substitutes are sought. These substitutes range from movements in solidarity with the third world, to students in revolt, to black power, to women’s liberation, but all of them involve, a) remaining within and adapting to a petty-bourgeois milieu, and b) postponing to the indefinite future the central task of penetrating and organising the industrial working class. The sect thus comes to resemble an academic discussion group, with a premium on theoretical sophistication, which is absolutely uninhabitable for workers.
Both these versions of ‘Trotskyism’ rely heavily for their theory of the party on the theory of the early Lenin that socialism must be introduced into the working class from the outside, for both of them use it as an alibi and justification for their isolation from the working class. In fact, in the name of Lenin and Trotsky, they have arrived at a complete caricature of the authentic Leninist and Trotskyist theory of the party.
Of course it is unreasonable to hold Trotsky responsible for all the absurdities committed by his epigones. Nonetheless there is a certain continuity between the errors in his conception of the Fourth International and its later evolution. To employ a metaphor of Trotsky’s, the scratch in his theory of the party, produced by the desperate circumstances of the 1930s, became infected and led ultimately to the gangrene of abandoning the conception of the revolutionary party as the organisation of the advanced workers.

Notes
1. For an account of the basic causes of the degeneration of the Russian Revolution see Chris Harman, How the Revolution was Lost, International Socialism, No. 30.
2. Trotsky, The Revolution Betrayed, London 1967, p. 292.
3. Marx and Engels, The Communist Manifesto, op. cit., p. 76.
4. This rule prohibited party members earning over a certain maximum (approximately equal to the wage of a skilled worker). It was later secretly abolished by Stalin.
5. Trotsky, The New Course, Ann Arbor 1965.
6. ibid., p. 12.
7. ibid.
8. ibid., p. 21.
9. ibid., p. 25.
10. ibid., p. 51.
11. ibid., p. 29.
12. ibid., p. 28.
13. ibid., p. 27.
14. Max Shachtman, Introduction to Trotsky, The New Course, op. cit., p. 3.
15. The Platform of the Joint Opposition 1927, London 1973, pp. 62–63.
16. ibid., p. 113.
17. Trotsky, The Revolution Betrayed, op. cit., pp. 94–95.
18. ibid., p. 96.
19. ibid., p. 267.
20. Trotsky, The Death Agony of Capitalism and the Tasks of the Fourth International, London 1972, p. 51.
21. For Trotsky’s critique of international Communist policy (1924–39) see especially The Third International After Lenin, New York 1970, Problems of the Chinese Revolution, Ann Arbor 1967, The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany, New York 1971 and The Spanish Revolution (1931–39), New York 1973.
22. See Trotsky, Introduction to Terrorism and Communism, Ann Arbor 1961.
23. Trotsky, The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany, New York 1971, p. 420.
24. Trotsky, Fighting Against the Stream, cited in Duncan Hallas, Against the Stream, International Socialism, No. 53 p. 36.
25. James P. Cannon, History of American Trotskyism, cited in ibid., p. 32.
26. Zimmerwald was the famous conference at which the internationalist social democrats regrouped themselves in 1915.
27. This tactic was known as the ‘French turn’ because it began with entry into the French Socialist Party, and was the inspiration for the tactic of entrism practised by many Trotskyist groups in later years.
28. See Trotsky, In Defence of Marxism, London 1966, pp. 136, 140.
29. Cited in Duncan Hallas, Against the Stream, op. cit.
30. Trotsky, The Death Agony of Capitalism and the Tasks of the Fourth International, op. cit., pp. 12–13.
31. ibid., p. 43.
32. ibid., p. 15.
33. Trotsky, The Revolution Betrayed, op. cit., p. 231.
34. ibid., p. 227.
35. Trotsky, The Death Agony of Capitalism and the Tasks of the Fourth International, op. cit., p. 43.
36. Trotsky, Introduction to the 1936 French edition of Terrorism and Communism; see Terrorism and Communism, Ann Arbor 1961, p. xxxv.
37. Trotsky’s prediction that the Stalinist regime would collapse in war was based on his view that the Soviet bureaucracy was not a fully fledged social class, but a parasitic caste, without deep roots in Russian society – it was he argued, ‘a policeman in the sphere of distribution’ (see The Revolution Betrayed, op. cit., p. 112) not a ‘ruling class indispensable to the given system of economy’ (see In Defence of Marxism, op. cit., p. 29). This characterisation followed from Trotsky’s analysis of the Soviet Union as a degenerated workers’ state. That the Stalinist bureaucracy demonstrated a totally unexpected stability and durability is one piece of evidence that Trotsky’s analysis was incorrect and that the bureaucracy is indeed a social class presiding over a state capitalist economic system. (See Tony Cliff, State Capitalism in Russia, London 1974, especially pp. 166–68, and pp. 275–77.
38. Cited in Duncan Hallas, Against the Stream, op. cit., p. 37.
39. The Mezhrayontsy, or inter-borough organisation, had a somewhat larger membership in Petrograd alone than did most of the national sections of the Fourth International, yet in 1917 no-one doubted that it was too small to really influence events. Only by merging his organisation with the Bolsheviks was Trotsky able to participate effectively in the shaping of history.
40. Trotsky, The Death Agony of Capitalism and the Tasks of the Fourth International, op. cit., pp. 14–15.
41. Trotsky, The Third International After Lenin, New York 1970, p. 140.
42. Trotsky, The Death Agony of Capitalism and the Tasks of the Fourth International, op. cit., p. 58.
43. James P. Cannon, The Militant, 17 November 1945, p. 7, cited in Duncan Hallas, The Fourth International in Decline, International Socialism, No. 60, p. 17.
44. Cited in ibid., p. 19.
45. One who did take this step was Trotsky’s wife Natalia Sedova. Resigning from the Fourth International in 1951 she wrote:
Obsessed by old and outlived formulas, you continue to regard the Stalinist state as a workers’ state. I cannot and will not follow you in this ... Virtually every year after the beginning of the fight against the usurping Stalinist bureaucracy, L.D. Trotsky repeated that the regime was moving to the right ... if this trend continues, he said, the revolution will be at an end and the restoration of capitalism will be achieved ... That, unfortunately, is what has happened even if in new and unexpected forms ... you now hold that the states of Eastern Europe over which Stalinism established its domination during and after the war, are likewise workers’ states. This is equivalent to saying that Stalinism has carried out a revolutionary socialist role. I cannot and will not follow you in this. (Natalia Trotsky and the Fourth International, London 1972, pp. 9–10).
Another was Tony Cliff, who, in 1947, produced the first fully worked out analysis of state capitalism in Russia (See State Capitalism in Russia, op. cit.).
 

 Molyneux: Marxism and the Party (4. Rosa Luxemburg's alternative view)



John Molyneux Archive   |   Marxism & the Party   |   ETOL Main Page

John Molyneux
Marxism and the Party

4. Rosa Luxemburg’s alternative view

Lenin’s theory of the party has had many critics and opponents both from outside and from within the working-class movement, but its most important critic and the most articulate proponent of an alternative view of the party, who was also a revolutionary socialist, was Rosa Luxemburg.
 
1. Polemics against Lenin – the spontaneity of the masses
Rosa Luxemburg was a Polish revolutionary who spent the most important years of her life as theoretical leader of the extreme left of German Social Democracy. In 1899 she emerged, with her pamphlet Social Reform or Revolution, as the principal opponent of Bernsteinian revisionism, and thereafter she increasingly recognised and fought against the inertia and conservatism of the Kautskyite centre. But it was her close interest in the development of the Russian socialist movement [1] that led her to formulate her own distinctive view of the role of the revolutionary party and its relationship to the working class. Disturbed by the 1903 split in the Russian party and by what she regarded as Lenin’s ‘ultra-centralism’, she took issue with Lenin in a famous pamphlet, written in 1904, called Organisational Questions of Russian Social Democracy. [2]
In this work she begins, as a marxist should, by situating the problem of party organisation firmly in the context of the peculiar tasks and problems facing the proletarian movement as a whole in Russia. Because, she argues, Russia has not yet achieved a bourgeois revolution and still suffers the domination of an absolute monarchy, the proletariat has not had the benefit of the political education and organisation that a period of bourgeois democracy inevitably brings. In Russia, therefore, she writes:
The social democracy must make up by its own efforts an entire historical period. It must lead the Russian proletarians from their present ‘atomised’ condition, which prolongs the autocratic regime, to a class organisation that would help them to become aware of their historic objectives and prepare them to struggle to achieve those objectives ... Like God Almighty they must have this organisation arise out of the void, so to speak. [3]
In this context of a struggle against the disconnected clubs and local groups characteristic of the past period in Russia, she finds it ‘understandable why the slogan of persons who want to see an inclusive national organisation should be “centralism”.’ [4]
But, she warns, ‘Centralism does not completely cover the question of organisation for Russian Social Democracy.’ [5] For although, ‘it is undeniable that a strong tendency towards centralisation is inherent in the social-democratic movement (springing from the economic make up of capitalism)’ [6], it can be carried to a point when it hinders the unfettered development and initiative of the working class itself.
The social-democratic movement is the first in the history of class societies which reckons, in all its phases and through its entire course, on the organisation and the direct, independent action of the masses. Because of this, social democracy creates an organisational type that is entirely different from those common to earlier revolutionary movements, such as those of the Jacobins and the adherents of Blanqui. [7]
Because the proletariat learns and develops both its class-consciousness and its organisation in the course of the struggle itself,
there do not exist detailed sets of tactics which a Central Committee can teach the party membership in the same way as troops are instructed in their training camps. [8]
For this reason social-democratic centralism cannot be based on the mechanical subordination and blind obedience of the party membership to the leading party centre. For this reason the social-democratic movement cannot allow the erection of an air-tight partition between the class-conscious nucleus of the proletariat already in the party and its immediate popular environment, the non-party sections of the proletariat. [9]
Lenin, Rosa Luxemburg argues, has forgotten or does not appreciate this basic distinction between the organisation of social democracy and that of Jacobinism or Blanquism. In opposition to Lenin’s dictum that the revolutionary social democrat is nothing other than a ‘Jacobin indissolubly joined to the organisation of the proletariat, which has become conscious of its class interests’, she writes ‘The fact is that the social democracy is not joined to the organisation of the proletariat. It is itself the proletariat.’ [10] Therefore at all costs it must not be straitjacketed by an ultra-centralised and disciplined form of organisation, but allowed free rein to develop. The great forward steps of the movement in terms of tactics and methods of struggle are not invented by leaders or by a central committee, but are the ‘spontaneous product of the movement in ferment’. [11]
The unconscious comes before the conscious. The logic of the historic process comes before the subjective logic of the human beings who participate in the historic process. The tendency is for the directing organs of the socialist party to play a conservative role. [12]
For Luxemburg, Lenin’s failure to appreciate this conservative tendency was particularly dangerous in Russian conditions where the proletarian movement was young and as yet not fully matured in its political education.
To attempt to bind the initiative of the party at this moment, to surround it with a network of barbed wire, is to render it incapable of accomplishing the tremendous tasks of the hour ... [13]
Nothing will more surely enslave a young labour movement to an intellectual elite hungry for power than this bureaucratic strait-jacket, which will immobilise the movement and turn it into an automaton manipulated by a Central Committee. [14]
In addition to these general warnings on the dangers of Lenin’s ‘ultra-centralism’, Luxemburg also takes up the question of the party rules and opportunism. Echoing the arguments of Trotsky (see Chapter 2 above), she dismisses ‘the idea that the road to opportunism can be barred by means of clauses in a party constitution’. [15] Opportunism is an historic product and an inevitable phase of the movement. She maintains that: It is naive to hope to stop this current by means of a formula written down in a constitution. [16]
Concluding her critique of Lenin’s organisational theses, Luxemburg returns to her starting point, situating the dispute in the overall development of the class struggle in Russia in an eloquent and memorable passage.
In Lenin’s overanxious desire to establish the guardianship of an omniscient omnipotent Central Committee in order to protect so promising and vigorous a labour movement from any mis-step, we recognise symptoms of the same subjectivism that has already played more than one trick on socialist thinking in Russia.
It is amusing to note the strange somersaults that the respectable human ‘ego’ has had to perform in recent Russian history. Knocked to the ground, almost reduced to dust by Russian absolutism, the ‘ego’ takes revenge by turning to revolutionary activity. In the shape of a committee of conspirators, in the name of a non-existent Will of the People, it seats itself on a kind of throne and proclaims it is all-powerful. But the ‘object’ proves to be the stronger. The knout is triumphant, for czarist might seems to be ‘legitimate’ expression of history.
In time we see appear on the scene an even more ‘legitimate’ child of history – the Russian labour movement. For the first time bases for the formation of a real ‘people’s will’ are laid in Russian soil.
But here is the ‘ego’ of the Russian revolutionary again! Pirouetting on its head, it once more proclaims itself to be the all-powerful director of history – this time with the title of His Excellency the Central Committee of the Social Democratic Party of Russia.
The nimble acrobat fails to perceive that the only ‘subject’ which merits today the role of director is the collective ‘ego’ of the working class. The working class demands the right to make mistakes and learn in the dialectic of history.
Let us speak plainly. Historically, the errors committed by a truly revolutionary movement are infinitely more fruitful than the infallibility of the cleverest Central Committee. [17]
Thus, for Luxemburg, Lenin’s whole organisational plan was a subjectivist or voluntarist (in philosophical terms, idealist) deviation from an historical materialist approach produced by the combination of an immature proletarian movement and the enormous tasks facing it. Against Lenin’s emphasis on the role of the party and its leadership, she stressed the potentially conservative role of such a body and contrasted it to the revolutionary spontaneity of the masses in struggle.
Rosa Luxemburg developed these themes further in her pamphlet, The Mass Strike, the Political Party and the Trade Unions, written in 1906, to explain to the German working class the significance of the events of the previous year in Russia. It shows how many of the ideas posed theoretically and generally in Organisational Questions of Russian Social Democracy became concrete reality in the enormous revolutionary upheaval that was Russia in 1905. Above all it is a celebration of the initiative and daring with which the working class finds solutions to problems that have baffled the theorists for decades.
1905, Luxemburg showed, was merely the culmination of five years of turmoil in which Russia was continually aflame with mass strikes. These strikes were the outward manifestation of the inner maturation of the revolution itself: Often they began without any preparation or even strike funds and, contrary to all previous schemes, rather than following upon trade-union organisation, they preceded it and gave it a powerful impetus. Often, also, the immediate cause was a minor grievance; the mass strike of January 1905 in St Petersburg which led to the march on the Winter Palace began over the sacking of two men at the Putilov Works. What united all these actions was their spontaneity. They had no predetermined plan and were not called for by any party or body of leaders and were only possible because the revolution itself had unleashed hitherto undreamed of initiative, courage and self-sacrifice in the masses. An attempt, Luxemburg noted, at the end of the movement, by the Central Committee of the RSDLP, to call a mass strike over the opening of the Duma, fell absolutely flat.
Also central to Luxemburg’s critique of established preconceptions of the class struggle was her attack on the mechanical separation of the economic and political struggles (a dichotomy clearly present in What Is To Be Done?). The Russian workers had not conformed to these categories either.
But the movement as a whole does not proceed from the economic to the political struggle, nor even the reverse. Every great political mass action, after it has attained its political highest point, breaks up into a mass of economic strikes. And that applies not only to each of the great mass strikes, but also to the revolution as a whole. With the spreading, clarifying and involution of the political struggle, the economic struggle not only does not recede, but extends, organises and becomes involved in equal measure. Between the two there is the most complete reciprocal action ...
Every new onset and every fresh victory of the political struggle is transformed into a powerful impetus for the economic struggle ... And conversely. The workers’ condition of ceaseless economic struggle with the capitalists keeps their fighting energy alive in every political interval ...
In a word, the economic struggle is the transmitter from one political centre to another; the political struggle is the periodic fertilisation of the soil for the economic struggle. Cause and effect here continually change places; and thus the economic and the political factor in the period of the mass strike now widely removed, completely separated or even mutually exclusive, as the theoretical plan would have them, merely form the two interlacing sides of the proletarian class struggle in Russia. [18]
As we can see, The Mass Strike pamphlet is of a piece with the polemic against Lenin. Just as Lenin’s organisational plan was subjectivist, so are those who seek to plan mass strikes. Her main theme in both works is to warn against overestimating the capacities of the party and especially the party leadership.
There are quite definite limits set to initiative and conscious direction. During the revolution it is extremely difficult for any directing organ of the proletarian movement to foresee and to calculate which occasions and factors can lead to explosions and which cannot. Here also initiative and direction do not consist in issuing commands according to one’s inclinations, but in the most adroit adaptability to the given situation, and the closest possible contact with the mood of the masses. [19]
Twelve years later Rosa Luxemburg returned to essentially the same ideas when, in her work The Russian Revolution, she criticised the Bolsheviks for their restrictions on democracy.
The tacit assumption underlying the Lenin-Trotsky theory of the dictatorship is this: that the socialist transformation is something for which a ready-made formula lies completed in the pocket of the revolutionary party, which needs only to be carried out energetically in practice. This is unfortunately – or perhaps fortunately – not the case ... The socialist system of society should only be, and can only be, a historical product, born out of the school of its own experiences, born in the course of its realisation, as a result of the developments of living history ... The whole mass of the people must take part in it. Otherwise, socialism will be decreed from behind a few official desks by a dozen intellectuals. [20]
 
2. The role of the party
From this passionate emphasis on the self-activity and initiative of the working class, which dominated all her political thought and action, what conclusions did Rosa Luxemburg draw as to the role and nature of the revolutionary party? To answer this question it is first of all necessary to be clear as to the conclusions she did not draw, for she has so often been misrepresented on this score by would-be supporters and critics alike.
She did not, as has frequently been suggested, propound a theory of purely spontaneous revolution in which the revolutionary party and political leadership were irrelevant. This is easy to establish for her whole political career and practically everything she wrote testifies against it. From when, as little more than a schoolgirl, she joined the Polish Proletariat Party to the end of her life, she was always a member of a political party. Indeed the SDKPL, organised by her closest comrade Leo Jogiches in conditions similar to those in Russia, was extremely hard, centralised and conspiratorial. In Organisational Questions of Russian Social Democracy she wrote that ‘social democracy is, as a rule, hostile to any manifestations of localism or federalism. It strives to unite all workers and all worker organisations in a single party.’ [21]
In The Mass Strike she devoted a section of the pamphlet to arguing the need for united action between the trade unions and the Social Democratic Party under the general authority of the party. [22] After 1914 and the collapse of the Second International into chauvinism, Luxemburg, like Lenin, advocated the building of a centralised as against a federal International. At the end of The Junius Pamphlet she wrote in the appended Theses on the Tasks of International Social Democracy:
3. The centre of gravity of the organisation of the proletariat as a class is the International. The International decides in time of peace the tactics to be adopted by national sections on the questions of militarism, colonial policy, commercial policy, and the celebration of May Day, and finally, the collective tactic to be followed in the event of war.
4. The obligation to carry out the decisions of the International takes precedence over all else. National sections which do not conform with this place themselves outside the International. [23]
From this it is clear that Rosa Luxemburg recognised the need for the working class to be led by a revolutionary party every bit as much as did Lenin. It was in the conception of what kind of party this was to be and what its tasks were that the differences with Lenin lay. Because of her supreme confidence in the abilities of the workers in struggle, she saw the principal tasks of the party in terms of political leadership as opposed to the issuing of calls to action and the actual organisation of the struggle. ‘Instead of puzzling their heads with the technical side, with the mechanism, of the mass strike, the social democrats are called upon to assume political leadership in the midst of the revolutionary period.’ [24]
Essentially this is a propagandistic conception of the tasks of the party and this has implications for the degree of centralism and discipline required by the party organisation. The strict discipline demanded by Lenin was above all to achieve unity in action. A party which generally speaking restricted itself to propaganda would have no need of such a stern regime; the free play of ideas would be much more important. One of the best illustrations of the difference between Luxemburg and Lenin in this respect is the contrast in their attitudes to party administration and routine. Lenin was always intensely involved in all the minutiae of party organisation, finance and the preparation of congresses, but Luxemburg took hardly any part in these matters in either the Polish or German parties. Her biographer, Nettl, writes:
At some stage a formal party decision (by the SDKPL) was reached that she should not concern herself with organisational matters at all, that she should not participate in any of the official conferences or congresses. [25]
Also, because her mind was focused on the task of propaganda, the distinction between the party member subject to the discipline of the party organisation and the party’s supporters or sympathisers, which was so vital for Lenin, concerned her much less, as her warning against ‘the erection of an air-tight partition’ between the party members and their ‘immediate popular environment’ showed.
Thus for Luxemburg the influence of the party over the proletariat was to be exercised primarily through its ideas, its programme and its slogans rather than through the power of its organisation or its own initiation of actions, whereas in Lenin these two elements were much more evenly balanced.
It is important to keep these differences between Luxemburg and Lenin, significant though they were, in perspective. The attempt has been made to suggest that Luxemburg’s divergence from Lenin over the nature of the party made her in some way fundamentally separate from the mainstream of revolutionary marxism in the twentieth century – that she represented a democratic, almost liberal, version of marxism as opposed to the dictatorial intransigence of Lenin. Bertram D. Wolfe, one of the leading proponents of this view, writes in his introduction to The Russian Revolution and Marxism and Leninism:
Though they [Lenin and Luxemburg] were both called ‘revolutionary’ socialists, their diverse temperaments, and differing attitudes on the nature of socialist leadership, on party organisation, and on the initiative and self-activity of the working class, kept them poles apart. [26]
The argument here is that Luxemburg’s objections to Lenin’s ‘ultra-centralism’ were fundamental whereas their agreement as revolutionary socialists was something accidental or superficial. But this is a gross distortion, perpetrated so as to enlist Rosa Luxemburg in the ideological battle of the cold war. It is conclusively refuted in the very document that Wolfe advances as his main piece of evidence, The Russian Revolution. [27]
The Bolsheviks have shown that they are capable of everything that a genuine revolutionary party can contribute within the limits of the historical possibilities ... It is not a matter of this or that secondary question of tactics, but of the capacity for action of the proletariat, the strength to act, the will to power of socialism as such. In this Lenin and Trotsky and their friends were the first, those who went ahead as an example to the proletariat of the world; they are still the only ones up to now who can cry with Hutten ‘I have dared’.
This is the essential and enduring in Bolshevik policy. In this sense theirs is the immortal historical service of having marched at the head of the international proletariat with the conquest of political power and the practical placing of the problem of the realisation of socialism, and of having advanced mightily the settling of the score between capital and labour in the entire world. In Russia the problem could only be posed. It could not be solved in Russia. And in this sense, the future everywhere belongs to Bolshevism. [28]
Moreover within months of writing these words Luxemburg was engaged in the most concrete form of practical solidarity with Lenin by participating in the foundation of the German Communist Party. [29]
Rosa Luxemburg was a thinker of great stature and independence. As such she inevitably differed with Lenin on many points of theory and tactics; but what she shared with Lenin – total commitment to revolutionary marxism and the international class struggle of the proletariat – was much more fundamental. They debated fiercely, yes, but within a shared framework, and not at all in the way that both of them fought Bernstein and the later Kautsky. Only on the basis of an understanding of this shared framework, their common starting point, can their disagreements on the nature and role of the party be properly grasped and estimated.
 
3. The background to Luxemburg’s views
If, as we have argued, Lenin and Luxemburg started from the same fundamental premises, how then are their very real differences on the question of the party to be explained? Explanations in terms of Luxemburg’s temperament do not get us very far. Whatever temperamental aversion she may have felt for Lenin’s methods, she was a sufficiently disciplined revolutionary to have overcome her personal feelings had she thought it politically necessary, just as Trotsky did in 1917. Even less can they be attributed to any intellectual weakness on her part, for there was little exaggeration involved when Franz Mehring described her as: ‘the most brilliant intellect of all the scientific heirs of Marx and Engels’. [30]
The real roots of Luxemburg’s differences with Lenin lay in the very different historical situations in which they operated. Although both Organisational Questions of Russian Social Democracy and The Mass Strike took the Russian workers’ movement as their subject, it is clear that Luxemburg wrote very much with an eye to the German situation and with the German experience in mind. In The Mass Strike this orientation is explicit, but even in the earlier work we find that when she wants a concrete example of the dangers of over-centralism and the conservative tendencies of leadership it is German Social Democracy and its adaptation to parliamentarianism that she cites. [31] Above all it was the German situation which shaped her conception of the party; and the conditions facing the German and Russian labour movements could hardly have been more dissimilar.
In the first place, on coming to Germany Luxemburg joined socialist party the world had seen – with hundreds of thousands of members, thousands of local organisations, eighty or so daily papers and several decades of struggle behind it. Lenin, however, had to build up a party from scratch. Thus, whereas Lenin had to take very seriously all the practical (and therefore the theoretical) problems of organisation, efficiency and professionalism, Luxemburg could take all this for granted. Exactly how the party should be organised was never an issue in the SPD, and there is no evidence that she ever thought seriously about the details of organisation at all. In this respect the contrast with Lenin could not be more complete.
In the second place was the fact that both the SPD and their associated trade unions had already reached an advanced stage of bureaucratisation in what was the fatherland of bureaucracy and order. As we have already noted in this study, the German workers’ movement sustained a huge layer of privileged and sedentary officials whose watchword ‘organisation’ served as a perennial alibi for avoiding action. Either the organisation was not yet strong enough for action or, alternatively, the action would jeopardise the organisations. This Rosa Luxemburg saw more clearly and earlier than any other marxist, certainly long before Lenin, and she reacted violently against it. It was in order to break through this great morass of conservative officialdom that she urged so forcefully the spontaneous creativity of the masses.
Moreover it was precisely spontaneity and struggle that were lacking in the German labour movement. The level of strike activity in the German working class in the first years of the century was very low. In the six years 1900 to 1905 there was an average of 1,171 strikes per year involving an average of 122,606 strikers per year (which puts the average number of workers per strike at only 104). [32] Compare this record with the figures for Russia where, with a very much smaller labour force, there were 87,000 strikers in 1903; 2,863,000 strikers in 1905 (1,843,000 of them involved in political strikes); and 550,000 political strikers in 1912. [33] From this it can be seen that the German workers’ movement, for all its great socialist party and magnificent organisations, was relatively weak and passive in the elementary class struggle against the employers, while in Russia, where there was no mass party and where trade-union organisation was practically non-existent, the workers fought great battles against both the bosses and the state. It was in the nature of a revolutionary like Rosa Luxemburg, just as it was in the nature of Lenin, to put all the emphasis on what appeared to be the key missing element in the situation – which for her was spontaneity and mass action from below. Thus Lenin, taking spontaneity as given, could write; ‘Give us an organisation of revolutionaries and we will overturn Russia’, whereas Luxemburg said, in effect, ‘Give us the spontaneity of the masses and we will have the revolution.’
In addition to these general factors, Luxemburg was also influenced by the specific situation within the SPD. The obvious first step towards building a genuine revolutionary party in Germany would have been the formation of a faction inside the SPD. But this would have been extremely difficult, for she would have had very little support for her views – even Lenin would not have supported such a venture before August 1914. The authority of the party’s two great leaders, Kautsky as theoretician and Bebel as practical organiser, was immense – far greater than that of Plekhanov, the only comparable figure in Russia – and the influence that Luxemburg did have in the German movement she owed, at least in part, to their tolerance of her and to the fact that until 1910 she had the ear of Kautsky. What is more she needed an alliance with the centre of the party to combat the threat of Bernsteinism.
Finally, there was the fact that having a faction invariably raises the question of a split and this Rosa Luxemburg was completely against. It is possible that she was influenced in this by the fate of the Independent Socialist Party, quite a large group of revolutionaries who split from the SPD in 1891, accusing it of reformism. This had a very short life before completely disappearing. As late as January 1917 Luxemburg was still arguing against a split:
However commendable and comprehensible the impatience and bitterness which leads so many of the best elements to leave the party today, a flight remains a flight. It is a betrayal of the masses who, sold to the bourgeoisie, writhe and choke from the stranglehold of Scheidemann and Legien. One may withdraw from small sects when they do not suit one any longer in order to found new sects. It is nothing more than immature fantasy to want to liberate the mass of the proletariat from this heavy and terrible yoke of the bourgeoisie by a simple withdrawal, and thus set a brave example. The discarding of membership cards as an illusion of liberation is nothing but the illusion, stood on its head, that power is inherent in a membership card. Both are different poles of organisational cretinism, the constitutional sickness of old German Social Democracy. [34]
 
4. The strengths and weaknesses of her position
We have shown how Luxemburg’s emphasis on spontaneity and her conception of the role of the party were conditioned by her specific historical situation, but explanation is not justification. It is necessary also to make an assessment of her views in terms of their ability to solve the problems facing the working class in its struggle for power. We should begin by stating her merits, since her ideas have too frequently been dismissed by marxists simply on the authority of What is to be done?
Rosa Luxemburg was right that the most important advances in the field of tactics and methods of struggle of the proletariat are not invented by any central committee or leadership but are discovered and created by workers themselves in the heat of the battle. This has been demonstrated again and again, both on the grand scale with the spontaneous creation of a new type of state (the Paris Commune; the Russian Soviets), and in a similar way with factory occupations and the innovation of the flying picket (British miners and building workers in 1972).
She was right that the class struggle in full flow does not allow the mechanical separation of the economic and the political, and her formulations on this question in The Mass Strike are far more dialectical than some of the abstract schemas in What is to be done? Again recent struggles of the British working class illustrate this admirably. The existence of the Tory Industrial Relations Act and the wages freeze in the early 1970s meant that purely trade-union, economic disputes such as the dockers’ struggles against containerisation in 1972, the strike for trade-union recognition at the Con-Mech factory in 1973 and the miners’ strike in 1974 inevitably transformed themselves into mass political battles against the law and the government. Indeed, since modern capitalist governments are today more and more compelled to intervene in industry and to make wage restraint the centre of their whole strategy, the political and economic struggle of the working class is more closely fused than ever and this aspect of Luxemburg’s thought has become increasingly relevant.
Luxemburg was right to warn about the inherent conservative tendencies at the top of socialist parties and even in parties as a whole, which are produced by isolation from the dynamic forces at work unseen in the depths of the working class. Lenin himself, as we have seen, experienced this within the Bolshevik party both in 1905 and 1917. A contemporary marxist, Duncan Hallas, has explained clearly how this can happen even on the factory floor itself:
It sometimes happens that even the best militants find themselves overtaken by events and occupying a position for a shorter or longer time, to the right of previously unmilitant workers. The experience is familiar to active rank-and-file trade unionists. Slogans and demands that were yesterday acceptable only to the more conscious people can quite suddenly be too limited for the majority when a struggle develops beyond the expected point. Inevitably the greater experience and knowledge of the activists induces a certain caution, normally appropriate, but which, in a rapidly changing situation, can sometimes be a real barrier to advance. [35]
She was right also to oppose to Lenin’s conception of the introduction of socialism into the working class ‘from without’, the enormous role and achievements of spontaneity. The party is neither the fount of all wisdom nor the omnipotent managing director of the class struggle, and there is an element of truth in the charge that Lenin was bending the stick too far in the direction of voluntarism (though, as we have shown, this was also, in a sense, his great achievement).
Thus on a number of points Rosa Luxemburg was closer to a correct marxist analysis than was the Lenin of 1901–04. [36] Unfortunately her conception also contained decisive weaknesses which were clearly exposed in the course of history. It is easy to see the one-sidedness of her views on the spontaneity of mass strikes. While such strikes can, and frequently do, break out spontaneously, this is not necessarily the case, nor is it always an advantage. The British General Strike of 1926 illustrates this well. All the force, energy and initiative for the strike came from below, but the strike was planned and was called by the leadership, the General Council of the TUC, and most important it was effectively demobilised by that leadership at the crucial moment. In the months prior to the strike the British ruling class prepared very carefully, both politically and militarily, for the confrontation. Clearly in that situation marxist criticism would be directed not at the idea that the strike could be planned but against the General Council for failing to plan and prepare sufficiently when it was known that the enemy was doing so. But this was a relatively minor fault, which Luxemburg was easily capable of correcting. [37] Much more significant is the fact that her strategy failed the all important test of the German revolution itself.
In the long awaited German revolution of 1918–19 Rosa Luxemburg’s Spartacus League (originally formed as a faction inside the SPD in 1916) proved itself to be the only consistently revolutionary force in Germany. Nonetheless it was too weak in numbers, experience and in organisational cohesiveness to decisively influence events. Rather it was continually blown about in the revolutionary gale unable to formulate a coherent strategy other than calling repeatedly for mass action and all power to the workers’ and soldiers’ councils. Radek, present as an emissary from Russia, reported that at the onset of the revolution the Spartacists had no more than fifty organised people in Berlin [38], and even at the Conference at which the Spartacus League founded the German Communist Party, he felt moved to comment: ‘I still did not feel that I was in the presence of a party.’ [39]
Even Rosa Luxemburg’s most ardent and uncritical supporter, Paul Frölich, confirms this picture of weakness (though he does not recognise its harmful effect on strategy): ‘When the revolution came the Spartakusbund was only a federation of local groups existing in almost all the larger towns, and not yet a political party.’ [40] In addition it suffered all the ‘infantile disorders’ of a youthful organisation. Luxemburg and the Executive were overruled by a substantial majority at the KPD founding conference on the question of participation in the elections to the National Assembly. (The Bolsheviks had disposed of this kind of ultra-leftism a decade before the test of 1917.) Unable to make a substantial impact within the workers’ councils, the Spartacus League was forced into an unstable alliance with the USPD (Independent Social Democrats, who had split from the SPD in 1917) and the Revolutionary Shop Stewards, and then had to attempt to disentangle itself when the latter elements vacillated. In the end, despite the words of its own programme that: ‘The Spartakusbund will never take over governmental power except in accordance with the clear and explicit will of the great majority of the proletarian masses in Germany’ [41], it was overtaken by events and led into a hopelessly premature rising which resulted in the crushing of the revolution and the murder of Luxemburg and Liebknecht.
Luxemburg was undoubtedly aware of the mistakes that were being made, but was powerless to prevent them. Thus her failure to weld the advanced workers together in a disciplined independent vanguard party eventually cost her her life. That she had not begun this task as Lenin had in 1903 was due perhaps to unavoidable historical factors, but that it was not done later was in part a conscious decision. Nettl records that: ‘The Spartacus leaders deliberately decided to forego any sustained attempt to create an organisation in 1918. They held that the revolutionary possibilities made this an unnecessary dispersal of effort.’ [42]
The other great defect in Luxemburg’s strategy was her underestimation of the ability of reformist leaders to hold back and disorientate the working class. Although she was the first to perceive the theoretical implications of Bernsteinism and the passivity of the Kautskyite centre, she nonetheless failed to foresee the paralysing and divisive effect these tendencies would have on the working class even in the midst of the mass actions she longed for. In 1913 she wrote: ‘Leaders who hang back will certainly be pushed aside by the storming masses.’ [43]
But in reality this did not prove so simple. Instead the social democrats were able to exploit the long-established allegiance of millions of workers to sabotage the revolution. It was because of her failure to grasp this problem early enough that Luxemburg did not see the need to combat opportunism organisationally – that is, by clauses in the party constitution, by splitting etc. – as well as by political debate.
 
5. The theoretical roots of her errors
We have already indicated the background to Luxemburg’s views and one can see how both the strengths and weaknesses of her position were historically conditioned. But what of the theoretical roots of her errors? We must turn for the source of these mistakes to two interrelated areas of her thought: her analysis of the process by which the proletariat develops its revolutionary consciousness, and her conception of the dynamics of the revolution itself.
For the mainstream of social democracy consciousness was seen as developing through a harmonious process of gradual accumulation without contradictions and without qualitative leaps. Luxemburg’s emphasis on the spontaneity of the masses placed her furthest of all the western marxists from this orthodox view, but she still did not break the circle completely. It was not that she over-estimated the heights to which workers could spontaneously rise but that she overestimated the evenness with which this process could occur. Clearly she recognised that some workers are more capable and courageous than others and that some have a higher level of socialist consciousness than others. What she did not fully comprehend was that between the revolutionary worker who wishes to overthrow capitalism and the less advanced worker who wishes to improve his conditions within capitalism there exists a certain contradiction (albeit not an insoluble one); and that on the basis of this contradiction there arise parties claiming to be parties of the working class, but which actually operate as bourgeois agents within the labour movement.
It was because of this gap in her theory that she failed to see the necessity of organising the advanced revolutionary workers separately and independently so as to increase their influence within the class as a whole, and to equip them for struggle against opportunist and reformist influences on the class. Her underestimation of the negative effects of bad leaders also derives from this source. For if the working class radicalised not only spontaneously but also uniformly, then indeed ‘leaders who hung back would be pushed aside by storming masses’. [44]
As for Luxemburg’s concept of the revolution, a comment by Tony Cliff can serve as our starting point:
The main reason for Rosa Luxemburg’s overestimation of the factor of spontaneity and underestimation of the factor of organisation probably lies in the need, in the immediate struggle against reformism, for emphasis on spontaneity as the first step in all revolutions. From this one stage in the struggle of the proletariat she generalised too widely to embrace the struggle as a whole. [45]
We can further develop this by saying that Luxemburg tended to identify the mass strike (which frequently coincides with the spontaneous outbreak of revolutions) with the climax of the revolution itself. In The Mass Strike she wrote as follows:
Today when the working classes are being enlightened in the cause of the revolutionary struggles, when they must marshal their forces and lead themselves, and when the revolution is directed as much against the old state power as against capitalist exploitation, the mass strike appears as the natural means of recruiting the widest proletarian layers for the struggle, as well as being at the same time a means of undermining and overthrowing the old state power and of stemming capitalist exploitation ...
The chief form of previous bourgeois revolutions, the fight at the barricades, the open conflict with the armed power of the state, is in the revolution of today, only the culminating point, only a moment in the process of the proletarian class struggle. [46]
But in fact the general strike, whatever its size, strength and militancy, merely raises the question of power – it does not and cannot resolve it. Only the destruction of the old state power through insurrection can do that. And insurrection must, by its very nature, be organised: it must be a unified, simultaneous action of decisive sections of the proletariat, prepared in advance and in secret and set for a definite date. Its execution demands, therefore, a well established chain of command with influence and authority extending throughout the class. In other words the insurrection, as was shown by our analysis of the October Revolution in Chapter 3, can be organised successfully only by the party – and not just any kind of party, but a disciplined combat party capable of moving as one.
It would not be true to say that Rosa Luxemburg never considered the question of insurrection (she wrote a small pamphlet on it in January 1906 [47]) but it is mentioned only incidentally in The Mass Strike and there is no evidence that she ever faced the problem squarely or thought through its implications for the nature of the party. Had she done so, she would have been forced to revise her propagandistic conception of the role of the party (for it is precisely with the insurrection that the balance between propaganda and action in the work of the party shifts decisively in favour of the latter) and also her views on discipline and centralism. Lenin, by contrast, had related the nature of his organisation to the seizure of power from the beginning.
The problem of the insurrection and the party is also related to the unevenness in the consciousness of the proletariat in a way that is particularly relevant to the fate of Rosa Luxemburg in the German Revolution. The opposite side of the same coin, which causes some sections of the class to lag behind others (and to continue to adhere to reformist parties), is the impulse the revolution gives to the advanced workers to attempt to seize power prematurely. Exactly this occurred in the Russian Revolution with the ‘July Days’ and in the German Revolution with the January Rioting. In Russia, as we noted in Chapter 3, the Bolsheviks were able to clearly oppose the adventure, prevent it doing too much damage, preserve their organisation and prepare for the next round in the battle. In Germany the Spartacus League was swept along by events to disaster. The difference lay, not in Lenin’s ‘intelligence’ or ‘realism’, as against Rosa Luxemburg’s ‘revolutionary romanticism’, but in the existence in Russia of a hardened party with authority among the advanced workers and its absence in Germany.
 
6. Marx, Lenin and Luxemburg
The reference points for any overall judgement of Rosa Luxemburg’s theory of the party must necessarily be Marx and Lenin. In many respects Luxemburg was closer to Marx than was Lenin. She shared Marx’s strengths, his opposition to sectarianism and his emphasis on the mass activity of the working class. She also shared his weakness: an over-optimistic and foreshortened view of the process by which the class-in-itself transforms itself into a class-for-itself – the assumption that the objective economic unity of the working class would spontaneously lead to its ultimate political unity. Consequently she shared with Marx a certain tendency toward fatalism in the sphere of organisation. We have already noted that against Lenin she was not entirely in the wrong in the polemics of 1904, but Lenin was able, through the experience of 1905, to correct the onesidedness of his early formulations and so make good his decisive advance over Marx, whereas Rosa Luxemburg was not. Had she lived to assimilate and reflect on the experience of the German Revolution, it is possible, indeed probable, that she would have achieved this correction.
As it stands Rosa Luxemburg’s theory of the party and its relationship to the working class remains a useful weapon in a labour movement which, throughout the world, has suffered decades of bureaucratic domination by social democracy and Stalinism alike. But ultimately it is a useful weapon only insofar as it is integrated into the framework of Leninism. As an alternative to Leninism, Luxemburgism must be judged invalid.

Notes
1. It was Rosa Luxemburg’s continued involvement in the Social Democratic Party of the Kingdom of Poland (SDKPL) which explains her particular concern with Russia, since Poland was then part of the Russian Empire.
2. This was published in English under the misleading title of Leninism or Marxism?, in Rosa Luxemburg, The Russian Revolution and Leninism or Marxism?, edited and introduced by Bertram D. Wolfe, Ann Arbor 1971.
3. ibid., pp. 82–83.
4. ibid., p. 83.
5. ibid.
6. ibid., p. 85.
7. ibid., p. 86.
8. ibid., p. 88.
9. ibid.
10. ibid., p. 89.
11. ibid., p. 91.
12. ibid., p. 94.
13. ibid.
14. ibid., p. 104.
15. ibid., p. 103.
16. ibid.
17. ibid., p. 108.
18. ibid., p. 185.
19. ibid., p. 188.
20. ibid., p. 69–71.
21. ibid., p. 85.
22. Rosa Luxemburg, The Mass Strike, the Political Party and the Trade Unions, in Mary Alice Waters (ed.), Rosa Luxemburg Speaks, New York 1970, pp. 207–208.
23. Rosa Luxemburg, The Junius Pamphlet, in Mary Alice Waters (ed.), op. cit., p. 331.
24. Rosa Luxemburg, The Mass Strike, the Political Party and the Trade Unions, op. cit., p. 189.
25. J.P.Nettl, Rosa Luxemburg, Vol. 1, London 1966, p. 265.
26. Bertram D. Wolfe, Introduction to Rosa Luxemburg, The Russian Revolution and Marxism or Leninism?, op. cit., p. 1. This view has some strange and heterogeneous supporters, including Stalinists, for whom any criticism of Lenin was tantamount to heresy and for whom Luxemburg’s emphasis on working-class spontaneity represented not only a deviation but also a threat. (For an account of Luxemburg at the hands of Soviet and East European historians see J.P.Nettl, op. cit., Vol. II, Chapter XVIII, and Trotsky, Hands off Rosa Luxemburg, in Mary Alice Waters (ed.), op. cit., pp. 441–50); and various anarchists, anarcho-syndicalists, and ‘Luxemburgists’ who have sought to form groups or movements independent of Stalinism or Trotskyism. (See Trotsky, Rosa Luxemburg and the Fourth International, in Mary Alice Waters (ed.), op. cit., pp. 451–54).
27. This critique of some aspects of Bolshevik policy in the Russian Revolution was written by Luxemburg in prison in 1918, and never published in her lifetime. It did not see the light of day until Paul Levi published it in 1921, when he was expelled from the Communist International.
28. Rosa Luxemburg, The Russian Revolution and Leninism or Marxism?, op. cit., p. 80.
29. Wolfe’s contention that Luxemburg opposed the formation of the Third International is, typically, based on the misleading elevation of a tactical disagreement over timing into a matter of principle.
30. Cited in Paul Frölich, Rosa Luxemburg, London 1972, p. 140.
31. See Rosa Luxemburg, The Russian Revolution and Leninism or Marxism?, op. cit., p. 93.
32. These figures are calculated from the strike statistics in Sozialgeschichtliches Arbeitsbuch, Materialien zur Statistik des Kaiserreichs 1870–1914, Munich 1975, p. 132.
33. Figures from Trotsky, The History of the Russian Revolution, London 1977, p. 59.
34. Cited in Tony Cliff, Rosa Luxemburg, London 1959, p. 52.
35. Duncan Hallas, The Way Forward, in John Palmer and Nigel Harris (eds.), World Crisis, London 1971, p. 266.
36. For a marxist who takes a similar view see Tony Cliff, Rosa Luxemburg, op. cit., p. 45.
37. It should be noted that when, in 1910, the German working class went into battle for equal suffrage, Luxemburg herself ‘demanded that the Party Executive work out a great plan of action’. Paul Frölich, op. cit., p. 171.
38. See J.P. Nettl, Vol. II, op. cit., p. 747.
39. ibid., p. 752.
40. Paul Frölich, op. cit., p. 279.
41. ibid., p. 270.
42. J.P. Nettl, op. cit., Vol. II, p. 724.
43. Cited in Paul Frölich, op. cit., p. 143.
44. Once we have grasped this fundamental weakness many of Rosa Luxemburg’s other errors fall into place – for example her opposition to the right of nations to self-determination and to the Bolshevik policy of land to the peasants. In both these cases it was the uneven development of socialist consciousness among the masses that dictated the tactics of the Bolsheviks and in both cases Luxemburg failed to grasp this.
45. Tony Cliff, Rosa Luxemburg, op. cit., p. 43.
46. Rosa Luxemburg, The Mass Strike, the Political Party and the Trade Unions, op. cit., p. 202.
47. For extracts from, and a discussion of, this pamphlet, see Paul Frölich, op. cit., pp. 102–108. Unfortunately Frölich makes an unconvincing attempt to equate Luxemburg’s views on insurrection with Lenin’s.
 

 Molyneux: Marxism and the Party (7. The revolutionary party today)



John Molyneux Archive   |   Marxism & the Party   |   ETOL Main Page

John Molyneux
Marxism and the Party

7. The revolutionary party today

1. The theory of the party since the war
We have now traced the development of the marxist theory of the party from Marx’s original establishment of the idea of a party of the working class, through Lenin’s concept of the vanguard party, Rosa Luxemburg’s emphasis on the creativity of the masses, Trotsky’s lonely defence of Leninism, to Gramsci’s analysis of the struggle for hegemony. Our account is now essentially complete, for since Trotsky and Gramsci there has been no major contribution to the theory of the party.
The reason for this stagnation is not hard to find. The post-war period has been dominated by the most sustained boom in the history of capitalism, which has resulted for the most part in the reformist integration of the working class. Crushed between the relative passivity of the working class and the dead hand of Stalinist ‘orthodoxy’, genuine marxism was, as it were, forced underground. Those few who remained committed to the goal of international proletarian revolution were necessarily preoccupied with the defence of marxist fundamentals (the role of the working class, the labour theory of value, the contradictions of capitalism) and with coming to grips with the major changes taking place in the world (the phenomenon of state capitalism, the permanent arms economy, the changes in imperialism). They lacked the practical experience of revolutionary struggle to make the further development of the marxist theory of the party either possible or urgent.
There have been forthcoming, however, number of non-marxist alternatives to the revolutionary workers’ party as means of achieving the overthrow of capitalism. The post-war period has seen the revival of various forms of voluntarism, spontaneism and popular frontism, but all have failed the test of practice. Voluntarism received its most extreme and important expression in the theory that the revolution could be made by a small but determined band of rural guerillas, without waiting for objective conditions to ripen and without mobilising the mass of the working class. [1] But after its initial spectacular success in Cuba [2], the strategy of the guerilla foco failed to make headway in Latin America and eventually foundered in the Bolivian jungle with the death of Che Guevara in 1967. Nor did the attempt to preserve the method but shift its venue to the towns, exemplified by the Tupamaros of Uruguay, meet with more than temporary success. [3] Spontaneism – the rejection of organisation, authority and above all of the political party – was largely a product of the student revolt which spread across the world in the 1960s. But the highest achievement of this phase of the movement, the French May events of 1968, was also the most compelling demonstration of its inadequacy. Precisely because of the absence of a mass revolutionary workers’ party, the French Communist Party was able to dampen down the militancy of the great general strike and engineer a feeble compromise with de Gaulle, thus defusing the acute social crisis almost as rapidly as it had emerged. [4] Finally, the strategy of the popular front and the peaceful transition to socialism were once again put to the test in the shape of the Popular Unity government of Salvador Allende in Chile, with disastrous consequences which are known to all. [5]
This demonstration of the bankruptcy of these alternatives (and the cases just cited are merely the clearest of many examples) has combined with the rapid deepening of the crisis of world capitalism and the consequent rise in working-class struggle during the last decade to refocus attention on the marxist theory of the party. The result has been on the one hand the appearance of a number of studies devoted to disinterring the marxist tradition on the question of the party and indicating perspectives for the present [6], and on the other the emergence in various countries of sizeable organisations (not mass parties but large enough to constitute a serious beginning) with the aim of building the revolutionary party. It is as a continuation and systematisation of the former project and as an aid to the latter that the present work was conceived. What remains, therefore, is to summarise the main principles of the marxist theory of the party, as drawn from this study of its development, and to indicate key points for their application today.
 
2. Key characteristics and tasks of the revolutionary party
The role, tasks and organisational forms of the party are not fixed for all time and all places; they must necessarily be derived from and adapted to the concrete situation in which the party operates. Nonetheless, on the basis of over a century and a quarter of struggle, we can make the following generalisations:
The class nature of the party. The revolutionary party must be a working-class party. This elementary and fundamental principle, established by Marx, needs repeating once again because it has so often been forgotten or ignored in recent years. The party must be proletarian, not only in the sense that its programme is an articulation of the socialist aspirations of the working class, but also in its social composition and the field of its everyday activities. No guerilla band, peasant movement, student movement or grouping of intellectuals, no matter how fine its programme, can be the substitute for a party with its roots in the industrial proletariat. A young organisation finding itself, as often happens, predominantly petty bourgeois in composition must make a strenuous effort of self-criticism and self-transformation in order to make the transition to a workers’ party.
The party as vanguard. The need for a party derives from the uneven development of the working-class, and the party aims to embrace not the entire class (which in ‘normal’ times is dominated by bourgeois ideology) but its class-conscious vanguard. This point, established by Lenin, has been so often distorted and misinterpreted that it requires the following clarification: the party is a vanguard, but the vanguard is not a tiny elite standing outside the main body of the class; it is the hundreds of thousands of workers who actually lead the class in its everyday battles in the factories, the pits, the offices, the housing estates and the streets. The party leads the class, it does not tail-end it, but it leads from within, not from the outside.
The party is an organisation for combat. This has two aspects. Firstly, the party does not claim its leadership of the class as of right but has to fight to win it by producing concrete proposals for action on every issue facing the working class, from the smallest question of factory conditions to the greatest questions of international politics. The party must prove in practice, in struggle, that it is the best defender of the interests of the working class and all the exploited. Secondly, the party must ultimately gear itself for the class struggle in its most acute form, mass uprising and insurrection. This does not mean prematurely adopting a paramilitary stance in such a way as to sacrifice the party’s legality and prevent it carrying out its more basic tasks in the everyday struggle, but it does involve, at a certain point, making careful preparations and creating the kind of organisation that can rapidly shift to a military footing. Because in these ways the party is a combat organisation, it has no room for a layer of passive card holders or of privileged, secure bureaucrats. Its membership must be active and self-sacrificial, and is likely therefore to be young.
Democratic centralism. No useful generalisations can be made as to specific organisational structures – these must be extremely flexible – but that the party regime must combine democracy and centralism is not a mere organisational formula, rather it flows directly from the tasks of the party and the nature of the class struggle. Democracy is essential because the party is not the master of the working class but an instrument of its self-emancipation. Without democracy and free discussion there is no way that the party can formulate policies which really meet the needs of the working class and fit the concrete situation. Centralism is essential because the party must wage a bitter struggle against a highly centralised enemy – the capitalist state. Without unity in action, as every trade unionist knows, defeat is inevitable.
With regard to democratic centralism, there are two pitfalls which are particularly likely to afflict new and as yet small organisations of the kind that mostly exist on the revolutionary left round the world today. The first is the danger of a small group, at best the embryo of the party, adopting the full panoply of administrative structures appropriate to a mass party, and so becoming ludicrously top-heavy. The second is the danger, especially when an organisation has to make the transition from propaganda to agitation, of being ultra-democratic and discussing all questions endlessly. The party is not a debating society – it discusses in order to reach a decision, and then carries out that decision in a united fashion.
The independence of the party. The party takes its stand on marxist principle as the representative of the historical interests of the working class – it must never sacrifice its independence to any other political force, openly bourgeois, reformist or centrist. This in no way precludes any number of alliances, compromises, temporary agreements etc. with other organisations, but it does preclude giving up the right to free criticism, a separate political line and a separate organisation. This applies even in the extreme case of entry into or affiliation to a larger party (e.g. the British Labour Party). Dependence, it must be remembered, need not be a matter of formal agreements or limitations. The British Communist Party, for example, is formally an independent organisation, yet politically it is tied to ‘left’ trade-union leaders and ‘left’ Labour MPs. A marxist party must never allow itself to become uncritically attached to any populist demagogue or prominent left-reformist, no matter how radical.
The party and the unity of the working class. The party is the vanguard of the class and must maintain its independence, but its aim is the unity of the working class. Three things follow from this. First, that the party must struggle relentlessly as a matter of the strictest principle against all those divisions in the working class -divisions of race, of nationality, between men and women, skilled and unskilled, employed and unemployed, old and young, etc. -which are so assiduously fostered by the ruling clap and by means of which it maintains its power. Secondly, the party must not allow its existence as a separate organisation to disrupt the unity needed by the class in its daily struggle against the employers and the state.
From this imperative derives the strategy of the united front with reformist organisations, but this strategy (applicable in many but not all conditions) is merely one expression of the general principle governing the party’s relationship with all other political tendencies in the working class — march separately, strike together. Thirdly, although the party must guard against the dilution of its programme and policies under pressure from the backward workers, it must on no account fence itself off from these workers and must exploit every avenue to reach them. Thus, while millions of workers remain in reactionary trade unions, the party must work in those unions no matter how treacherous and corrupt their leadership. While the mass of workers retain illusions about social-democratic parties, the party must urge support for those parties against the openly bourgeois parties, so that these illusions can be dispelled by experience. While the majority of the class places its faith in parliamentary democracy, the party must participate in elections, using them to make revolutionary propaganda and to undermine the parliamentary system from within.
The educational tasks of the party. The party must undertake a continuous and complex work of education. It must train revolutionary leaders steeped in the marxist tradition, but capable of making concrete analyses and of independent judgement. It must produce a broad layer of, to use Gramsci’s term, ‘organic intellectuals’, workers with a clear conception of the overall nature of the struggle and the methods of waging it. It must work for the widest possible dissemination of basic marxist and socialist principles amongst the working class by ceaselessly translating its theory into topical and easily understood examples and exposures in its press and all its propaganda. In relation to education, two points have to be borne in mind: the process of education must be predominantly practical rather than academic in character (since the latter leads inevitably to the dominance of petty-bourgeois elements), and, as Rosa Luxemburg emphasised, the party must be able to learn from the workers as well as teach them. The party is the collective memory and brain of the working class, but it is a brain that needs constant renewal and updating.
The struggle for hegemony. The party must work to bring together all the forces of the oppressed in a common struggle against capitalism, under the leadership of the proletariat. Historically and on a world scale this has been principally a question of realising an alliance of the proletariat and the peasantry, and every workers’ party must be sure to include in its programme the defence of the interests of the poor peasants. In addition to this, the last decade has seen the emergence of a series of new forces – the black movement, the women’s movement and the student movement being the most important – which possess great revolutionary potential but which pose for the party certain strategic problems. On the one hand, and this applies particularly to small organisations without a strong proletarian base, the party can throw itself so uncritically and enthusiastically into these movements that it succumbs to their necessarily fragmented character and neglects its fundamental work in the industrial working class. On the other hand the party can dogmatically dismiss the special problems and claims of the various oppressed strata and present their movements with an ultimatum that they accept in advance the leadership of the proletarian party, which results not in unity but in estrangement. What is needed, therefore, is unconditional support for the justified demands of the oppressed strata combined with principled but patient insistence on the need for unity in the struggle against the common enemy, on the class character of that struggle and on the leading role of the working class. Above all, the full struggle for hegemony, which involves establishing the dominance of revolutionary culture in every area of the social life of the people, can be conducted effectively only by a party which has already secured a substantial base in the working class.
The International. The proletariat is an international class and the socialist revolution is an international process. Consequently all the characteristics of a revolutionary party we have listed here must ultimately be realised on an international scale in a single world party. At the present time such an International does not exist, nor can it be built in a day. A ‘world party’ consisting, like the Fourth International, of a handful of like-minded sects, is a fiction which cannot produce an international leadership with any real authority. On the other hand, a federation of basically heterogeneous organisations, like the First International, will fall apart at the decisive moment. The Third International was formed on the authority of the victorious Russian Revolution, but a repetition of this sequence of events cannot be passively awaited. How then can the International be built? At present the only realistic course is for the existing revolutionary workers’ organisations to engage in practical collaboration wherever possible and in the constant exchange of theoretical positions, so that gradually, on the basis of this joint work and under the impact of events, closer links and greater political homogeneity can be achieved. But this work must be carried out with the clear perspective that its aim is the creation of a new revolutionary workers’ International. For the building of revolutionary parties and their international unification is now the principal and most urgent strategic task facing revolutionaries throughout the world. Unless this is achieved, the working class will be unable to resolve in its favour the crisis of capitalism which grows more acute by the day.
 
Finally, running through everything that the party is and does, the thread connecting all its key characteristics and tasks is the striving to unite theory and practice. The party exists to translate the general aims of socialism into concrete practical activities and to link every immediate struggle to the ultimate aim of socialism. Through the party, theory – the materialist interpretation of history, the analysis of capitalism and its contradictions and the understanding of the historical role of the working class – informs practice, and through the party, practice – the struggle to change the world – stimulates, directs, tests and ultimately realises theory.
When capitalism is stable and the working class presents no open challenge to the system, theory and practice are inevitably divorced. In such conditions the revolutionary party can be prepared but not built. It remains an abstract necessity. But when, as now, the system is racked by crisis, then theory and practice draw together, and building the party becomes no longer an abstract aspiration, but both a practical necessity and a real possibility.

Notes
1. As Che Guevara put it when summing up the essence of guerilla warfare:
1. Popular forces can win a war against the army.

2. It is not necessary to wait until all conditions for making revolution exist; the insurrection can create them.

3. In underdeveloped America the countryside is the basic area for armed fighting. (Guerilla Warfare, New York 1961, p. 15.)
2. The Cuban situation was exceptional in two respects: (a) the Batista regime was in a state of advanced dissolution and decay and gave up almost without a fight; (b) the United States believed they could use the rebels to serve their own purposes and were not initially hostile – an error they did not repeat. Also, speaking of ‘success in Cuba’ should not be taken to mean success of the socialist revolution. The Cuban revolutionaries themselves did not claim as much at the time. Only after Cuba had opted for the Communist bloc in 1961 did the Cuban revolution become retrospectively ‘socialist’. In fact the absence of a successful struggle for self-emancipation by the working class meant that the economic structure of Cuba necessarily became state capitalist.
3. See Frank Roberts, The Tupamaros, International Socialism, No. 66.
4. See Tony Cliff and Ian Birchall, France: The Struggle Goes On, London 1968.
5. For an analysis and critique of the strategy of Popular Unity by a participant in the events, see Helios Prieto, Chile: The Gorillas are Amongst Us, London 1974.
6. For example: Lucio Magri, Problems of the Marxist Theory of the Revolutionary Party, New Left Review, No. 60; Rossana Rossanda, Class and Party, Socialist Register, 1970; Jean-Paul Sartre, Masses, Spontaneity, Party, Socialist Register, 1970; Ernest Mandel, The Leninist Theory of Organisation, London (n.d.); Monty Johnstone, Marx and Engels and the Concept of the Party, Socialist Register, 1967; Chris Harman, Party and Class and Tony Cliff, Trotsky on Substitutionism, in Duncan Hallas et al., Party and Class, London, (n.d.).
 

 Molyneux: Marxism and the Party (2. Lenin and the birth of Bolshevism)



John Molyneux Archive   |   Marxism & the Party   |   ETOL Main Page

John Molyneux
Marxism and the Party

2. Lenin and the birth of Bolshevism

Although marxism in general is, as Gramsci put it, a ‘philosophy of action’ and thus hostile to fatalism, Marx himself, as we have shown, owing to the prevailing conditions and his determination to avoid sectarianism never fully emancipated himself from a fatalist conception of political organisation. The political party of the proletariat would emerge gradually, spontaneously, from the broad struggle of the working class. In social democracy this fatalist tendency thoroughly consolidated itself in the sphere of organisation and then extended itself to the theory of capitalist development, the proletarian revolution, and the nature of human activity itself. The practice of Bolshevism and the organisational ideas of Lenin marked a break with this fatalism, and thus constituted a tremendous step forward for marxist theory not only in relation to social democracy but also in relation to Marx. Only with Lenin was the concept of a broad party that represents, or is, the working class replaced by that of a ‘minority’ party (in the pre-revolutionary period) which is the vanguard of the class and which, since it is the organisational embodiment of the socialist future of that class, has a duty to defend itself from and struggle against all manifestations of opportunism.
 
1. The background to Bolshevism
Bolshevism was no ‘Venus’ born fully grown from the waves – it developed and grew through a host of struggles, internal and external. Nor can it be seen simply as the product of Lenin’s organisational genius. The idealisation of Lenin that is general in marxist circles combined with the tendency of Stalinist theoreticians to write Russian revolutionary history as though there were only two protagonists, the Russian people and Lenin (most other individuals having become unpersons), has created an image of Bolshevism as invented by Lenin much as Watt invented the steam engine. In fact the break with gradualism in the sphere of organisation was itself a gradual and only semi-conscious process, though one marked by many sharp and conscious struggles. Leninism was the product of a sustained and developing revolutionary response to a concrete situation, and to understand that response we must look at the elements in the situation that made it possible.
The first factor which springs to mind as a source of Bolshevism is what Tony Cliff calls ‘the tradition of substitutionism in the Russian revolutionary movement’. [1] This tradition was indeed very strong. In the 18600s and 1870s sometimes tens, occasionally hundreds, of heroic and idealistic intellectuals pitted themselves against the autocracy, alternatively ‘going to the people’ as their educators and enlighteners and ‘acting on behalf of the people’ with daring acts of terrorism. And in so doing these Narodniks gained the undying respect and admiration of Russian revolutionaries including Lenin especially, who refers repeatedly to their ‘devoted determination and vigour’. [2] To strengthen the case various pieces of biographical evidence can be thrown in: the formative influence on Lenin of such basically elitist writers as Chernychevsky and Tkachev [3], and of course the fate of his brother, executed for terrorism.
However, this argument, superficially attractive as it is, will not bear critical examination. It ignores the fact that Lenin cut his theoretical teeth precisely in the struggle against Narodism; that he opposed individual terrorism throughout his life; that he refused to countenance a seizure of power in 1917 until the Bolsheviks had a majority in the Soviets; and that he waged a most vigorous struggle against all forms of ‘putchism’, of attempts at uprisings by minorities, at the third Congress of the Communist International (1921).
It was not terrorism but the situation which produced terrorism that was an important factor in the development of Lenin’s ideas. Lenin could break decisively with the romantic and utopian theories of the terrorists, he could adhere absolutely to the theory of the class struggle as the lever of the social revolution, but he could not break with the reality of the Tsarist police. Under Tsarism political repression remained virtually absolute and so did the ban on all trade-union and strike activity.
In such a situation the social-democratic model of a broad mass party representing the whole of the working class was simply impossible. ‘Only an incorrigible Utopian would have a broad organisation of workers ... under the autocracy.’ [4] In fact as far as combating the Tsarist police was concerned, the smaller the organisation the better. Inextricably linked to the question of size and secrecy was the need for efficiency and vigorous training. Need for efficiency which is hammered home again and again in What is to be done?, and which was almost certainly the main objective factor in determining the success of this work at the time, gives rise to the concept of the professional revolutionary as the basis of the revolutionary organisation. Summing up his views on this aspect of the argument Lenin writes:
in an autocratic state, the more we confine the membership of such an organisation to people who are professionally engaged in revolutionary activity and who have been professionally trained in the art of combating the political police, the more difficult will it be to unearth the organisation. [5]
The eminent practicality of this emphasis on secrecy, training and professionalism in organisation should be clear. But this element of pure practicality or necessity in Lenin’s theory of organisation can easily be exaggerated. If immediate expediency were the sole consideration, then it would be true to say with Leonard Schapiro (and many other commentators) that ‘Lenin’s conceptions had perhaps moved nearer to the conspiratorial ideas of Narodnaya Volya, and away from Marx’s conception of the historic mission of an entire class’. [6] In fact this was not so; the hard core of professional revolutionaries were not seen as an end in themselves but as a means. Lenin stresses that the tighter the core of the party ‘the greater will be the number of people from the working class and from the other social classes who will be able to join the movement and perform active work in it’. [7] Lenin’s perspective was always one of a mass class movement against the autocracy but one led by a vanguard party. ‘We are the party of a class, and therefore almost the entire class (and in times of war, in a period of civil war, the entire class) should act under the leadership of our party.’ [8] Furthermore, if it were merely practical necessity that determined Lenin’s thought, then his ideas would possess only local, temporary significance. Bolshevism would have proved a specifically Russian phenomenon, an exception to the rule, rather than the basis for a vast international movement and tradition. Indeed the conspiratorial elements in Lenin’s conception are historically limited and Lenin recognises this.
Under conditions of political freedom our party will be built entirely on the elective principle. Under the autocracy this is impracticable for the collective thousands of workers that make up the party. [9]
If it was the level of repression that made a broad Western-type party impossible, it was the particular social and political conjuncture in Russia and trends within the revolutionary movement that stimulated Lenin into new theoretical insights and enabled him to take a step forward from the social-democratic model rather than a step backwards to conspiracy. This situation must therefore be examined.
The primary distinction between the tasks of the revolutionary movement in Western Europe and in Russia was that in the West capitalism had been firmly established, whereas in Russia capitalism was still nascent and the bourgeois revolution had not yet been achieved. Thus whereas in the West marxism presented itself straightforwardly as the theory of the overthrow of capitalism by the proletariat, in Russia marxism appeared to many as the theory of the inevitability of the development of capitalism. Since the authorities at first regarded the terrorists as the main danger and the terrorists argued that Russia could side-step capitalism by means of an immediate revolution, marxist criticism of terrorism and emphasis on the inevitability of capitalism was for a period welcomed or at least regarded as very much a lesser evil. This led to what became known as ‘legal marxism’, and marxism became a veritable fashion:
Marxist journals and newspapers were founded, nearly everyone became a marxist, marxists were flattered, marxists were courted, and the book publishers rejoiced at the extraordinary ready sale of marxist literature. [10]
Inevitably in such a situation a coalition of ‘manifestly heterogeneous elements’ [11] occurred. In particular calling themselves marxists were those who regarded capitalism as inevitable and progressive but who also wanted to fight it and overthrow it, and also calling themselves marxists were those who in reality supported capitalism as such and for whom socialism was cloudy rhetoric for the dim and distant future. (The leading representative of the latter trend was Pyotr Struve, originally a collaborator of Lenin and Plekhanov, who was, in 1905, to found the bourgeois-democratic Cadet Party.) This meant that from very early on Lenin felt himself in the position of having to select very rigorously those who really wanted to fight from a large number of people who mouthed radical phrases. This was a major factor in conditioning Lenin’s doctrinal intransigence and especially his insistence on distinguishing between what people said and what they were actually prepared to do. This latter faculty, which was so acutely developed in Lenin and is one of the most striking features of all his writings, was to play an enormous role in the development of Bolshevism as a separate party.
The revolutionary marxist answer to the problem of seeing capitalism as progressive and at the same time maintaining the complete independence of the proletariat for the fight against capitalism lay in the theory of the hegemony of the proletariat in the bourgeois revolution. Originating in Plekhanov (’the Russian revolution will succeed as a workers’ revolution or it will not succeed at all’ [12]), though later abandoned by him, and adopted and refined by Lenin, this theory was to become a hallmark of Bolshevism in the pre-1917 period. The essence of this theory was that the Russian bourgeoisie arrived late on the scene, long after
the bourgeoisie had ceased to be a revolutionary force on a world scale. Consequently the task of leading a revolution against the autocracy would fall to a proletariat which, although small, was developing rapidly in large scale modern industry and could ally itself to the tremendous elemental force of the peasant revolt. [13] In order to accomplish this task the proletariat would have to adopt the overthrow of Tsarism as its first and most important demand and place itself in the vanguard of every struggle for democracy and political freedom.
 
2. The critique of ‘economism’
It was this theory which brought Lenin into conflict with the various trends which he grouped under the term ‘economism’. The main representatives of ‘economism’ at the time were Rabochaya Mysl (The Workers’ Thought), a journal published in St Petersburg from 1897 to 1902, and Rabocheye Dyelo (The Workers’ Task), the organ of the Union of Russian Social Democrats Abroad from 1899 to 1903 – the latter assuming a position which could more strictly be described as semi-economist. The basic contention of the ‘economists’ was that social democracy should concentrate its work not on the political struggle against the autocracy, but in serving and developing the economic struggle of the workers, and it was from the disputes with ‘economism’ that many of the fundamental ideas of Bolshevism emerged. In order to understand and assess those ideas it will therefore be necessary to look at the disputes in some detail – but even before that it is necessary to look at the context in which the disputes occurred and simply to ask why they were so important.
The basic reason was that Lenin saw ‘economism’ as leading inevitably to the abandonment of the hegemony of the proletariat in the coming democratic revolution by instituting a division of labour in which the workers would limit themselves to the trade-union struggle, leaving politics to the bourgeoisie. Indeed it was the open advocacy of such a division in the document known as The Credo, by Y.D. Kuskova of the Union of Russian Social Democrats Abroad, that first spurred Lenin to take up the cudgels against ‘economism’ with his Protest by Russian Social Democrats in August 1899. [14] In The Credo Kuskova had written: ‘For the Russian marxist there is only one course: participation in, i.e. assistance to, the economic struggle of the proletariat; and participation in liberal opposition activity.’ [15]
To Lenin such a course meant betrayal of the revolution, for ‘liberal opposition activity’ (i.e. the bourgeoisie) was completely incapable of consistent revolutionary opposition to the autocracy. He held that any attempt to narrow down the tasks of the proletariat and the social-democratic movement would play into the hands of the bourgeoisie, and regarded any tendency towards ‘economism’ as leading in that direction. In this way the debate over ‘economism’ foreshadowed the central issue for the Russian marxists during the next 17 years – the relative role and tasks of the bourgeoisie and the proletariat in the revolution – with a fundamental continuity existing between the position of early ‘economism’ and late Menshevism that the leading role should go to the bourgeoisie.
From this it can be seen that Lenin was also correct in linking ‘economism’ to the international trend to reformism or ‘revisionism’ in social democracy, which he does right at the beginning of What is to be done? The ‘economists’ shared the de facto split between economics and politics and asserted with Bernstein the importance of ‘the movement’ (immediate demands) as against the ‘ultimate aim’ (socialism or, in this case, the overthrow of Tsarism).
Fierce polemic, for Lenin, meant getting to the very root of the disputed questions and pursuing ruthlessly the logic of his own and his opponents’ arguments; thus these polemics, though rooted in concrete issues, invariably possess a certain universal significance. [16] The product of the struggle against the ‘economists’ was What is to be done? which, quite deservedly, has had an immense influence on marxist theory and practice throughout the world and which, I would argue, has wrongly been regarded as the standard marxist text on the theory of the party. Thus any critical study of the marxist theory of the party must look very seriously at this work.
What is to be done? sums up all Lenin’s arguments against ‘economism’ and his case for a nationwide revolutionary organisation based on a cadre of professional revolutionaries and an all-Russia newspaper. Thus many of the points it makes are of a practical nature of the kind referred to earlier in this essay, but its central theme is the relationship of spontaneity and consciousness in the development of the revolutionary movement. The ‘economists’, holding that ‘politics always obediently follows economies’ [17] and that therefore political consciousness would grow organically from economic struggles, contended that the main task of marxists was to assist the economic struggle, and that Lenin and the Iskraists ‘belittled the spontaneous element’ and ‘overestimated consciousness’. But for Lenin even this method of presenting the problem was completely unsatisfactory. It was not that the spontaneous upsurge of the workers was unimportant (on the contrary it was profoundly important), but that its importance lay precisely in the demands that it made on consciousness, on organisation. The programme of Rabocheye Dyelo stated:
We consider that the most important phenomenon of Russian life, the one that will mainly determine the tasks and the character of the publication activity of the Union, is the mass working-class movement which has arisen in recent years.
And Lenin comments:
That the mass movement is a most important phenomenon is not to be disputed. But the crux of the matter is, how is one to understand the statement that the mass working-class movement will ‘determine the tasks’? It may be interpreted in one of two ways. Either it means bowing to the spontaneity of this movement, i.e. reducing the role of social democracy to mere subservience to the working-class movement as such – or it means that the mass movement places before us new theoretical, political, and organisational tasks, far more complicated than those that might have satisfied us in the period before the rise of the mass movement. [18]
This dialectical conception of the relationship between spontaneity and consciousness, the mass movement and the party, represents a tremendous step forward for marxist theory and is an advance on any previous contribution to this problem (including that of Marx himself and especially that of German Social Democracy). Essentially it is the necessary starting point of a truly revolutionary theory of the party because it is a radical break with fatalism. [19] ‘We revolutionary social democrats, on the contrary, are dissatisfied with this worship of spontaneity, i.e. of that which exists “at the present moment”.’ [My emphasis – JM] [20]
For Lenin the development of the class struggle itself, even its economic form, is a process of moving from ‘spontaneity’ to ‘consciousness’.
Strikes occurred in Russia in the seventies and sixties (and even in the first half of the nineteenth century) and they were accompanied by the ‘spontaneous’ destruction of machinery, etc. Compared with these ‘revolts’, the strikes of the nineties might even be described as ‘conscious’, to such an extent do they mark the progress which the working-class movement made in that period. This shows that the ‘spontaneous element’ in essence, represents nothing more nor less than consciousness in embryonic form. [21]
Lenin therefore sees it as the duty of the revolutionary always to assist the conscious element and work to overcome spontaneity.
But Lenin is not merely arguing for organisation against lack of organisation, for leadership against the ‘tail-ending’ (tailism) of the ‘economists’. What is central to his attack on the ‘economists’ and to his view of the nature of tasks of the party is his rejection of the notion that proletarian class-consciousness can develop gradually on the basis of an accumulation of economic struggles.
As Lukacs writes:
The impossibility of the economic evolution of capitalism into socialism was clearly proved by the Bernstein debates. Nevertheless, its ideological counterpart lived on uncontradicted in the minds of many honest European revolutionaries, and was, moreover, not even recognised as either a problem or a danger. [22]
Lenin’s position on this was extreme and uncompromising.
Working-class consciousness cannot be genuine political consciousness unless the workers are trained to respond to all cases of tyranny, oppression, violence, and abuse, no matter what class is affected – unless they are trained, moreover, to respond from a social-democratic point of view and no other. The consciousness of the working masses cannot be genuine class-consciousness, unless the workers learn, from concrete, and above all from topical, political facts and events to observe every other social class in all the manifestations of its intellectual, ethical and political life; unless they learn to apply in practice the materialist analysis and the materialist estimate of all aspects of the life and activity of all classes, strata and groups of the population. [23]
And therefore:
Class political consciousness can be brought to the workers only from without, that is, only from outside the economic struggle, from outside the sphere of relations between workers and employers. [24]
In practical terms this meant that it was necessary for social democrats not merely ‘to go among the workers’, but to ‘go among all classes of the population; they must dispatch units of their army in all directions’. [25] Workers should be mobilised to take action in support of all victims of the autocracy including such groups as religious minorities and students. The social democrats’ ideal should not be the trade-union secretary, but the tribune of the people ... who is able to take advantage of every event, however small, in order to set forth before all, his socialist convictions and his democratic demands.’ [26] Essential to this strategy was an all-Russia newspaper keeping a vigilant eye on every aspect of political and social life in Russia and able to mount nationwide political exposures. ‘Without a political organ, a political movement deserving that name is inconceivable in the Europe of today.’ [27]
It is perhaps necessary to point out in passing that of course Lenin in no way regarded this diversification of forces as a modification or compromise of the class basis of the party. On the contrary, it was possible only on the basis of a prolonged period of largely economistic agitation in the working class. ‘In the earlier period, indeed, we had astonishingly few forces, and it was perfectly natural and legitimate then to devote ourselves exclusively to activities among the workers and to condemn severely any deviation from this course. The entire task then was to consolidate our position in the working class.’ [28] And in any case the whole purpose of the strategy was to ensure the hegemony of the proletariat in the struggle against the autocracy.
What is specifically and characteristically Leninist about this approach, and what distinguishes it from the methods of social democracy and the Second International, is not that marxists fight for democratic rights and for reforms. That much was common ground and indeed second nature to German Social Democracy. But the social democrats fought for reforms because they were ‘progressive’ and part of the development of capitalism into socialism; in other words, they fought for reforms as reformists. Whereas, for Lenin, the whole process was part of the battle for the class-consciousness of the proletariat, to enable it to grasp the relationships in action of all social classes and groups, and thus to fit itself for taking power. Thus for social democracy a yawning gap developed between the minimum and the maximum programme (between immediate demands and ultimate aim). While, for Lenin, all-sided political agitation was a means of bridging this gap and securing the predominance of the ultimate revolutionary aim.
 
3. Socialism from without?
At this point, we have summed up the main advances made by What is to be done? over the theory of the party to be found in Marx and prevailing in more dogmatic form in Russian ‘economism’ and to a certain extent in European social democracy. But there remains an important aspect of Lenin’s argument we have not dealt with – important not because of its centrality to Lenin’s own theory and practice, but because of its influence on many later followers. We are referring to the thesis that ‘political consciousness’ can only be introduced into the working-class movement ‘from without’, which is inserted to give theoretical justification to the attack on spontaneism. This thesis appears in What is to be done? in two forms. One, which we have cited already, is that:
Class political consciousness can be brought to the workers only from without, that is, only from outside the economic struggle, from outside the sphere of relations between workers and employers.
The other is that:
We have said that there could not have been social-democratic consciousness among the workers. It would have to be brought to them from without. The history of all countries shows that the working class, exclusively by its own effort, is able to develop only trade-union consciousness i.e. the conviction that it is necessary to combine in unions, fight the employers, and strive to compel the government to pass necessary, labour legislation etc. The theory of socialism, however, grew out of the philosophic, historical, and economic theories elaborated by educated representatives of the propertied classes, by intellectuals. By their social status, the founders of modern scientific socialism, Marx and Engels, themselves belonged to the bourgeois intelligentsia. In the very same way, in Russia, the theoretical doctrine of social democracy arose altogether independently of the spontaneous growth of the working-class movement; it arose as a natural and inevitable outcome of the development of thought among the revolutionary socialist intelligentsia. [29]
There is a clear distinction between the two formulations. The first is merely an extreme and slightly clumsy way of saying that workers need to understand the totality of social relations and all forms of oppression, knowledge of which comes from a much wider sphere than (’from without’) the factory. As such, one could quibble with the wording but the content is fairly unexceptionable. In the second formulation, however, ‘from without’ means from outside the working class, specifically from the bourgeois intelligentsia, and moreover it carries with it an attempt at a positive account of the origins and development of the theory of scientific socialism. This raises problems of considerable theoretical significance, especially for the theory of the party, so it is necessary to embark on a fairly detailed critical analysis of Lenin’s conception here.
The first point that must be made is that Lenin was here expressing ideas taken directly from Karl Kautsky, and indeed he uses a quotation from Kautsky to provide himself with theoretical authority.
But socialism and the class struggle arise side by side and not one out of the other; each arises under different conditions. Modern socialist consciousness can arise only on the basis of profound scientific knowledge. Indeed modern economic science is as much a condition for socialist production as, say, modern technology, and the proletariat can create neither the one nor the other, no matter how much it may desire to do so; both arise out of the modern social process. The vehicle of science is not the proletariat but the bourgeois intelligentsia. [30]
This resort to Kautsky, given the latter’s mechanical version of marxism and his subsequent political development, is clearly a danger signal to those of us working with the benefit of hindsight, and a number of latter-day Leninists have been critical of this point. Trotsky comments that Lenin himself ‘subsequently acknowledged the biased nature, and therewith the erroneousness, of his theory’. [31] Lucio Magri in a recent article calls the quotation from Kautsky an ‘enlightenment schema’ [32], and Nigel Harris refers to it as an ‘elitist statement’. [33]
The fundamental problem is that if one accepts literally the Lenin-Kautsky formulation that political consciousness derives from the bourgeois intelligentsia and at the same time that the political struggle must predominate over the economic struggle, then precious little is left of Marx’s fundamental dictum that ‘the emancipation of the working class is the act of the working class itself: on the contrary the role of the working class would be a strictly subordinate one. The truly revolutionary class would be not the working class but the discontented intellectuals, thus implicitly confirming the typical bourgeois picture of radical movements as made up of a malevolent middle-class leadership and an ‘innocent’ manipulated working-class rank-and-file. The division of mental and manual labour inherent in class society, far from being overcome, is carried over into the socialist movement and sanctified in the revolutionary party.
In fact the whole presentation of science, theory and socialist consciousness (which are here equated) is completely un-marxist and has more in common with nineteenth century positivism and idealism. Science is seen as developing in complete isolation from social life, from practice. As far as the natural sciences, philosophy and bourgeois social science are concerned, this appears to be true insofar as the thinker tends to the isolation of the ivory tower, but in reality this is only an illusion, a mystification produced by class society. For this reason Marx refused to recognise philosophy or any other discipline as having its own history independent of the history of men active in society. Where the theory of socialism is concerned, even the relative and illusory autonomy of bourgeois science does not and should not exist if this theory is to be genuinely revolutionary. On the contrary, it must be intimately related to, influenced by and based upon the activity of the working class. Thus Marx writes:
Just as the economists are the scientific representatives of the bourgeoisie, so the socialists and communists are the theorists of the proletariat. As long as the proletariat is not sufficiently developed to constitute itself as a class, as long therefore as the struggle of the proletariat with the bourgeoisie has not acquired a political character, and while the productive forces are not yet sufficiently developed, within bourgeois society itself, to give an indication of the material conditions necessary for the emancipation of the proletariat and the constitution of a new society, these theorists remain Utopians who, in order to remedy the distress of the oppressed classes, improvise systems and pursue a regenerative science. But as history continues, and as the struggle of the proletariat takes shape more clearly, they have no further need to look for a science in their own minds; they have only to observe what is happening before their eyes, and to make themselves its vehicle of expression. [34]
Examination of the history of socialist and marxist thought also clearly refutes the ‘Lenin-Kautsky’ theory of ‘separate development’. The idea of socialism and the socialist revolution itself was not something invented or discovered by Marx; rather it emerged from the struggles of the masses as the extreme left wing
of the bourgeois revolutions in England and France – witness the Levellers and Babeufs Conspiracy of Equals (which Marx referred to as the world’s first communist party). Raya Dunayevskaya in Marxism and Freedom records the impact of the American Civil War and the English workers’ struggle over the working day on the structure of Capital. She writes:
No one is more blind to the greatness of Marx’s contributions than those who praise him to the skies for his genius as if that genius matured outside of the actual struggles of the period in which he lived. As if he gained the impulses from the sheer development of his own thoughts instead of from the living workers changing living reality by their actions. [35]
Indeed it was from the insurgent workers of Paris that Marx learned that the working class cannot simply take over the existing state machine but must smash it.
History also provides numerous examples of workers spontaneously rising to much greater heights than trade unionism and trade-union politics: the Chartists, the 1848 revolution in France, the Paris Commune, the Russian workers in 1905 and February 1917, the 1956 Hungarian Revolution and so on.
But this critique of the way in which Lenin theoretically justified his position at this time does not, as some of Lenin’s hagiographers might maintain, undermine the whole basis of Lenin’s theory of the party. The fact of workers achieving socialist consciousness spontaneously does not entail a return to a social-democratic gradualist view, for this consciousness does not develop gradually, accumulating steadily and inevitably. On the contrary, it takes giant and sudden leaps forward and can suffer equally catastrophic shipwrecks. Nor does the consciousness spread evenly through the class, so the consciousness of the advanced socialist workers must be organised and centralised to increase to the maximum its influence within the ideologically heterogeneous class as a whole. These ideas will be returned to and developed later in this work, especially when dealing with the contribution of Rosa Luxemburg.
 
4. The Bolshevik-Menshevik split
Because of its great theoretical, historical and practical significance, What is to be done? tends to be regarded as the founding document of Bolshevism. In a certain sense this is correct, which is why we have subjected it to such detailed analysis. But it was not What is to be done? which directly occasioned the split of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party into Bolshevik and Menshevik factions. On the contrary, the pamphlet acted as a rallying point in the struggle for the second congress of the RSDLP, bringing together militants on an all-Russian basis and having the apparently united support of the leading intellectuals of Russian marxism – Plekhanov, Martov, Axelrod, Trotsky etc. It was the attempt to put the programme of What is to be done? into practice that produced the split. Those who thought themselves in agreement in theory found themselves in violent disagreement when those theories were translated into practical rules and decisions at the Second Congress in London in 1903.
The history of the development of the split is both complicated and obscure. A blow-by-blow account of the disputes at the congress is available in Lenin’s One Step Forward, Two Steps Back written immediately after the split in 1904. Briefly what happened was this. The formerly united (and dominant) Iskraist tendency within the party divided over the formulation of Paragraph I of the Rules. Martov’s formulation was as follows: ‘A member of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party is one who accepts its programme, supports the Party financially, and renders it regular personal assistance under the direction of one of its organisations.’ Whereas Lenin’s draft read: ‘A member of the Party is one who accepts its programme and who supports the Party both financially and by personal participation in one of the Party organisations.’ [My emphasis – JM] On this question the Iskraists split into two definite factions. Plekhanov supported Lenin, but when it came to the vote Martov, with the aid of anti-centralist ‘economist’ elements still within the party, gained a majority. But with the secession of the Rabocheye Dyelo economists and the Bund at a later session, the majority passed to Lenin’s faction, which enabled him to push through his slate of candidates for the Iskra editorial board. This replaced the old board of six (Plekhanov, Axelrod, Zasulich, Lenin, Martov, Potressov) with a board of three (Lenin, Plekhanov, Martov). Martov and his supporters refused to accept this decision and Martov resigned from Iskra. The terms Bolshevik and Menshevik (meaning ‘majority’ and ‘minority’) referred to the vote on the editorial board, but, because officially the two factions remained parts of the same party, the names stuck and have passed into history.
For the purpose of this study it is necessary to ask two questions. First, what were these disputes, seemingly a hairsplitting wrangle about words, really about? Secondly, what was the impact of the split on the developing Leninist theory of the party? To grasp the real meaning of any dispute in the marxist movement it is always necessary to see it in its context. ‘Truth is concrete’ as Lenin was so fond of saying. Writing in this vein we find Paul Frölich who sums up the situation as follows:
In order to understand these debates, it is necessary to keep in mind the state of the social-democratic movement at that time, with its unstable and anarchical network of circles, and the conditions in which an illegal party organisation had to operate under absolutism. At the same time, it is necessary to understand that deep political antagonisms were coming to a head in the discussions on the statutes, antagonisms which were still only felt rather than clearly expressed in any single argument. Lenin sensed grave dangers ahead and wanted to ward them off by organising the party more tightly. He was aware of the tremendous tasks which the party would face in the approaching revolution, and wanted to forge it into a weapon of iron. And, finally, he recognised that he alone out of the whole Iskra group would be able to lead the party with the necessary confidence and determination. The very impersonal and objective way in which he reached this conclusion explains his obstinacy on this question.
The wording of the two proposals for Paragraph I of the statutes gives hardly an inkling of the antagonism. It is certain that Martov wanted a party with ill-defined boundaries in accordance with the actual state of the movement, and with strong autonomy for the individual groups; a party of agitation which would broadly and loosely embrace everybody who called himself a socialist. Lenin, however, felt it was important to overcome the autonomy and the isolation of the local groups, and thus avoid the dangers inherent in their over-simplified and ossified ideas, not to speak of their backward political development. He wanted a firmly and tightly organised party which, as the vanguard of the class, would be closely connected with it, but at the same time clearly distinct from it. [36]
There was, however, another aspect of the debate which Lenin fastened on. There was a second possible interpretation of Martov’s formulation; ‘that a Party organisation [would be] entitled to regard as a party member anyone who renders it regular personal assistance under its direction’ and ‘that a committee would assign functions and watch over their fulfilment’. Lenin comments:
Such special assignments will never, of course, be made to the mass of the workers, to the thousands of proletarians (of whom Comrade Axelrod and Comrade Martynov spoke) – they will frequently be given precisely to ... professors ... high school students ... and revolutionary youth ... In a word, Comrade Martov’s formula will either remain a dead letter, an empty phrase, or it will be of benefit mainly and almost exclusively to ‘intellectuals who are thoroughly imbued with bourgeois individualism’ and do not wish to join an organisation. In words, Martov’s formulation defends the interests of the broad strata of the proletariat, but in fact it serves the interests of the bourgeois intellectuals, who fight shy of proletarian discipline and organisation. [37]
Raya Dunayevskaya also focuses on this point as the central question in the dispute.
The disciplining by the local was so crucial to Lenin’s conception that it held primacy over verbal adherence to marxist theory, propagandising marxist views, and holding a membership card ... Lenin insisted that the marxist intellectual needed the ideological discipline of the proletarians in the local because otherwise he was resisting not only local discipline hut also resisting being theoretically disciplined by the economic content of the Russian revolution. [38]
It was this softness towards the bourgeois intellectuals which was probably the main cause of Martovite hostility to Lenin (and this would fit very well the pattern of future Bolshevik-Menshevik differences). But to counter this particular deviation Lenin did not have to leave the ground of Kautskyite social-democratic orthodoxy. The organisational views of the Mensheviks could be taken together with those of Bernstein, Jaurès and the general opportunist trend in international social democracy [39], and there was even a lengthy quotation from Kautsky himself to fit the bill. [40] What was crucial for the development of Lenin’s thought – i.e. what enabled him to make a breakthrough into a new marxist approach to organisation – was the question of the distinction between the party of the class and the class itself, which Lenin was forced to clarify by the debate on the conditions of membership.
The stronger our party organisations, consisting of real social-democrats, the less wavering and instability there is within the party, the broader, more varied, richer and more fruitful will be the party’s influence on the elements of the working-class masses surrounding it and guided by it. The party, as the vanguard of the working class, must not be confused, after all, with the entire class. [my emphasis – JM] [41]
It is this last sentence which signifies the break with Marx’s concept of organisation in which the distinction between party and class remains blurred, and, more decisively, with the orthodox social-democratic conception of the party as representing the class. What renders this break permanent rather than temporary, and of universal rather than merely Russian, significance is that Lenin roots it not in practical necessities of secrecy (though these are of course not lost sight of) nor in an erroneous theory of the introduction of consciousness ‘from the outside’ but in the objective situation of the proletariat under capitalism:
Precisely because there are differences in degree of consciousness and degree of activity, a distinction must be made in degree of proximity to the party ... it would be ... ‘tailism’ to think that the entire class, or almost the entire class, can ever rise, under capitalism, to the level of consciousness and activity of its vanguard, of its social-democratic party. [42]
Of great importance in this passage is the charge of ‘tailism’ directed at his opponents. ‘Tailism’ (from the Russian khvost = tail) is Lenin’s figurative and polemical term for the ‘fatalism’ which was to prove the Achilles’ heel of the Second International. Running like a red thread through One Step Forward, Two Steps Back is the contrast between the Bolshevik activist, revolutionary outlook on the world and the ‘tailist’ fatalist complacency of the Mensheviks. Nothing illustrates this better than one of the disputes with Trotsky.
To the category of arguments, which inevitably crop up when attempts are made to justify Martov’s formulation, belongs in particular, Comrade Trotsky’s statement that ‘opportunism is produced by more complex (or: is determined by deeper) causes than one or another clause in the Rules: it is brought about by the relative level of development of bourgeois democracy and the proletariat.’ The point is not that clauses in the Rules may produce opportunism, but that with their help a more or a less trenchant weapon against opportunism can be forged. The deeper its causes, the more trenchant should this weapon be. Therefore, to justify aformulation which opens the door to opportunism on the grounds that opportunism has ‘deep causes’ is tailism of the first water.’ [43]
Trotsky analyses and explains a phenomenon and leaves it at that. Lenin accepts the explanation but wants to use it to do something about it.

Notes
1. Tony Cliff, Trotsky on Substitutionism, in Duncan Hallas et al., Party and Class, London (n.d.), p. 28. By ‘substitutionism’ Cliff means the tendency of individuals or parties to substitute themselves for the action of the masses.
2. Lenin, What Is To Be Done?, Moscow 1969, p. 29.
3. See Leonard Schapiro, The Communist Party of the Soviet Union, London 1970, pp. 2,5.
4. Lenin, What Is To Be Done?, op. cit., p. 117.
5. ibid., p. 121.
6. Leonard Schapiro, op. cit., p. 40.
7. Lenin, What Is To Be Done?, op. cit., p. 121.
8. Lenin, One Step Forward, Two Steps Back, Moscow 1969, p. 58.
9. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 8, Moscow 1962, p. 196.
10. Lenin, What Is To Be Done?, op. cit., p. 17.
11. ibid., p. 11.
12. This was Plekhanov’s statement at the First Congress of the Second International in 1889.
13. The best exposition of this theory and its socio-economic basis in Russian history is to be found in the first chapter of Trotsky’s The History of the Russian Revolution, London 1977.
14. Although economism in fact first arose in 1897. See Lenin, What Is To Be Done?, op. cit., p. 46.
15. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 4, op. cit., p. 174.
16. This does not, however, mean that they can be dragged from their context and applied uncritically in all times and places, thus using the letter of Leninism against the spirit of Leninism as has so often been done.
17. Cited in Lenin, What Is To Be Done?, op. cit., p. 37.
18. Lenin, What Is To Be Done?, op. cit., p. 46.
19. Fatalism carried to its logical conclusion precludes the need for a revolutionary party, or even for any revolutionary activity. The problem with fatalism in the marxist movement, however, is that is has never openly announced itself but has always remained half-developed in such a way as to paralyse revolutionary intervention at crucial moments without exposing its bankruptcy and absurdity.
20. Lenin, What Is To Be Done?, op. cit., p. 23.
21. ibid., p. 131.
22. Georg Lukacs, Lenin, London 1970, p. 24.
23. Lenin, What Is To Be Done?, op. cit., p. 69.
24. ibid. p. 78.
25. ibid., p. 79.
26. ibid., p. 80.
27. ibid., p. 88.
28. ibid., p. 86. For an excellent account and analysis of this period see Tony Cliff, From a Marxist Circle to Agitation, International Socialism, No. 52.
29. Lenin, What Is To Be Done?, op. cit., pp. 31–32.
30. ibid., p. 40.
31. Trotsky, Stalin, London 1968, p. 58.
132. Lucio Magri, Problems of the Marxist Theory of the Revolutionary Party, New Left Review, No. 60, p. 104.
33. Nigel Harris, Beliefs in Society, London 1971, p. 156.
34. Marx, Selected Writings on Sociology and Social Philosophy, in T.B. Bottomore and M. Rubel (eds.), London 1963, pp. 80–81.
35. Raya Dunayevskaya, Marxism and Freedom, London 1972, p. 81.
36. Paul Frölich, Rosa Luxemburg, London 1972, pp. 82–83.
37. Lenin, One Step Forward, Two Steps Back, op. cit., p. 66.
38. Raya Dunayevskaya, op. cit., pp. 180–81.
39. Lenin, One Step Forward, Two Steps Back, op. cit., p. 199.
40. ibid., pp. 121–23.
41. ibid., p. 57.
42. ibid., p. 58.
43. ibid., p. 71.
 



There is something of a vogue for left reformism on the left at the moment. I stress ‘on the left’ because it couldn’t yet be described as a societal phenomenon, except with Syriza in Greece. It doesn’t generally proclaim itself as left reformism preferring to sail under such flags as ‘fresh thinking’, ‘rethinking the left’ and ‘left unity’. Nevertheless the trend is real and perceptible both in Ireland and internationally.
In Ireland the TDs, Clare Daly and Joan Collins, are trying to create a new political formation called United Left and there have just recently been two forums of the left in Dublin devoted to this sort of project: the first, organised by Daly and Collins, featured former Socialist Party member Roger Silverman who argued (a familiar theme this) against the way ‘Leninist/Trotskyist vanguards’ work in favour of a broad anti-capitalist coalition on the model of Marx’s First International; the second, organised by Look Left, was addressed by the American sociologist, Erik Olin Wright, who analysed the left historically, in terms of three tendencies – ‘ruptural’ (revolutionary), ‘intersticial’ (anarchist/utopian) and ‘symbiotic’ (reformist) – and called for them all to work together, although he was fairly dismissive of the revolutionary tendency.
In Britain, in recent months, Owen Jones (author, broadcaster and Left Labour Member), Nick Wrack (former Socialist Party, Socialist Alliance,and SWP member) [1] and Ken Loach (socialist film director, former Respect, etc.) have all issued calls for a new movement/party of the left. Here is Owen Jones:
Britain urgently needs a movement uniting all those desperate for a coherent alternative to the tragedy of austerity, inflicted on this country without any proper mandate.
What is missing in British politics is a broad network that unites progressive opponents of the Coalition. That means those in Labour who want a proper alternative to Tory austerity, Greens, independent lefties, but also those who would not otherwise identify as political, but who are furious and frustrated. [2]
And Ken Loach:
If the unions said we’re going to do what we did a century ago, we’re going to found a party to represent the interests of labour, and we will only support candidates who will support policies of the left then we could start again. But we need a new movement and a new party. And it needs all the people on the left of the Labour party who’ve spent their life complaining about it to get out and start a new one, with the unions. It needs the unions because they have resources. If Unite, Unison, GMB, you know, said we’ve had enough ... But they’re like dogs, the more you kick them the more they creep back to master. And they actually need to wake up and say this is not going to happen, we’re not going to reclaim the Labour party ... The unions have got to cut the ties, start again, with everyone on the left, with all the campaigns, the NHS campaign, the housing campaign, the community services campaigns – everybody. And let’s begin again, and then we could really move. [3]
And Ed Rooksby in Why it’s time to realign the left has attempted a theoretical/strategic articulation of Loach’s call. He writes:
The major difficulty in the traditional revolutionary approach, then, is in its rejection of the very idea of taking power within the political structures of capitalism. So neither the traditional reformist approach nor the traditional revolutionary strategy seems adequate. We need, instead, a strategy that seeks to combine elements of both. In his book The Dialectic of Change the Russian theorist Boris Kagarlitsky seeks to elaborate just such an approach. Revolutionary transformation, he argues, can only emerge organically and dialectically from a process of radical reform set in motion by a socialist government. He calls this approach “revolutionary reformism”. ... It is hard to see how the left in Europe can avoid the problem of taking power in a left government if it is serious about changing society. [4]
Elsewhere in Europe, there are a number of broadly similar political formations – Melenchon’s Front de Gauche in France, the Danish Red-Green Alliance, the Left Bloc in Portugal, the United Left in Spain, Die Linke in Germany and, above all of course, Syriza in Greece.
In a sense, the reason for the emergence of this trend is very straightforward. We have had five years of deep capitalist crisis, the painful effects of which are being felt by working class people more or less everywhere. During this crisis, right wing and mainstream reformism has either openly collaborated with the ruling class in making working people pay (as with the Labour Party in Ireland and PASOK in Greece) or has been completely ineffectual in terms of mounting any resistance (Labour in Britain, the centre-left in Italy etc.). At the same time the revolutionary
left has nowhere succeeded in making a sufficient breakthrough to pose a credible alternative to more than a small minority of workers. In these circumstances a certain turn to left reformism is anything but surprising.  
Reformism and Left Reformism
To understand this phenomenon further, it is necessary to begin with a few remarks about reformism in general. Most of the time under capitalism, the consciousness of most working class people is reformist: they object to many of the effects of capitalism – this cut, this tax, this policy, this government etc. – without rejecting the system as a whole. Alternatively, they dislike the system as a whole but do not believe they, i.e. the mass of working people, have the ability to change it. In either case, they look to someone else to do the job for them.
Corresponding to this reformist consciousness, there are reformist politicians, parties and organisations who step forward with the message that they are the ones who will deliver the desired change or changes on behalf of the masses. A distinction must, of course, be made between workers with reformist consciousness and leaders or organisations engaged in a reformist political project. With the former their ‘reformism’ tends to be relatively unformed and fluid; it can easily be a bridge to action (a campaign, trade union struggle, etc.) which in turn can lead to the development of revolutionary consciousness. With the latter, it is usually more coherent, more set against revolution, and crucially is attached to various institutional and personal privileges (political career, parliamentary seat, trade union office etc.) which give its bearers a certain vested interest in the existing system.
Historically, the main political expression of reformism has been the Labour, social democratic and socialist parties originally associated with the Second (or Socialist) International, founded in 1889 and dominated by German Social Democracy (SPD), and usually closely linked to their respective national trade union bureaucracies. [5] The British Labour Party, the Irish Labour Party, the French Socialist Party, the Swedish Social Democratic Party, the Portuguese Socialist Party, and the Spanish Socialist Workers Party are all examples of this kind of party.
However, these are by no means the only political expressions of reformism. [6]. Next in importance historically are the Communist Parties which started moving towards reformism in the Popular Front period of the mid-1930s and completed the journey in the post-war period and especially with what became known as Eurocommunism. But there are many other forms ranging from various reform campaigns and NGOs, to Green Parties, to some left nationalist parties. Sinn Fein in Ireland and the Scottish National Party both present themselves to the electorate as parties of reform and rest to some extent on reformist consciousness in the working class.
Reformism also, by its nature, covers a wide political spectrum from right to left. On its right flank (and usually confined to its top leaders) there is a wing of reformism which is closely linked to the ruling class and often accepted by it as a recognised ally. These leaders usually take some care to maintain a certain verbal distance between themselves and the main right wing capitalist parties (Tories, Christian Democrats etc) but it is a very thin line and, mostly, just for public consumption. Tony Blair is probably the outstanding recent example of this type but Eamon Gilmore and Pat Rabbitte also belong to this category. On the left flank of reformism there are both leaders and supporters who border on the revolutionary left and are willing, on particular issues and campaigns, to work with revolutionaries. For various historical reasons – primarily the role of republicanism and the Workers Party – the Irish Labour Party barely has a left-wing but in Britain Tony Benn, John McDonnell and Jeremy Corbyn are obvious examples.
There is seldom a clear boundary between right and left reformism with many intermediate stopping points and the journey from left (at the beginning of a political career) to right (as a position in government gets closer or is achieved) is a very familiar one: Eamon Gilmore, Harold Wilson, Lionel Jospin are examples. However, at the risk of being schematic, the distinction between right/moderate reformism and left reformism can be formulated as follows: right/moderate reformism more or less openly accepts and supports the continuation of capitalism, while presenting itself to working people as being able to improve it, and run it better – more in working class interests – than the party or parties of the rich; left reformism is anti-capitalist but suggests that capitalism can be changed or moved in a socialist direction by means of a series of ‘strategic’ reforms. Hence the key role in left reformist thinking of a ‘Left Government’ – to which I shall return.  
Marxism and Left Reformism
Historically, the main current of left reformism grew up alongside and to some extent within the Marxist movement. The parties of the Second International in the period 1889–1914 were broad workers’ parties which contained, nationally and internationally, a right wing, a left wing, and a centre. The right, such as Eduard Bernstein in Germany, Turati in Italy and the Fabians in Britain, were reformists. The left, Lenin and the Bolsheviks and Trotsky in Russia, Luxemburg and Liebknecht in Germany etc., were revolutionary socialists. Between theses two poles was a large centre, led and epitomised by Kautsky in Germany, that often used the language of orthodox Marxism, but in practice always conciliated the right and focused on the gradual organisational and parliamentary accumulation of forces. [7]
At first this was not well understood by almost any of the participants. Marx and Engels themselves had barely written anything about organized reformism because, by and large, the phenomenon and its effects only started to emerge at the end of their lives and took clear shape only after their deaths (though Marx’s Critique of the Gotha Programme in 1875, and his and Engels’ Circular Letter in 1879 show that they were picking up danger signals). Lenin and Luxemburg (and Plekhanov, Trotsky and others) came out clearly against Bernstein’s open revisionism but, while Luxemburg sensed Kautsky’s (and Bebel’s) conservatism, none of the Marxist revolutionaries broke with him or with the rest of the left reformist Social Democrats, until 1914 and their support for the imperialist war.
When Lenin did break from Kautsky after August 1914 he carried out a root and branch critique of the Marxism of the Second International including its philosophy (in his Philosophical Notebooks, Vol. 38 of his Collected Works), it’s economics, especially in Imperialism – the Highest Stage of Capitalism, and its politics in The State and Revolution. >[8] In this last book, Lenin identified and emphasized that the key theoretical and practical distinction between left reformists and revolutionary Marxists on the question of the state was that the former aimed to take over and transform the existing state machine, hoping to use it for socialist or working class purposes whereas the latter, following Marx on the Paris Commune, held that the working class would not be able to use the existing capitalist state but would have to ‘smash’ it and replace it with its own, new workers’ state. On the basis of the experience of the Russian Revolution Lenin argued that this would be a state of workers’ councils or ‘soviets’ (the Russian word for council).
... only workers’ Soviets, and not parliament, can be the instrument whereby the aims of the proletariat will be achieved. And, of course, those who have failed to understand this up to now are inveterate reactionaries, even if they are the most highly educated people, most experienced politicians, most sincere Socialists, most erudite Marxists, and most honest citizens and family men. [9]
This point is of huge theoretical importance because it makes concrete in relation to the process of revolution the fundamental Marxist principle of working class self emancipation. [10] Strategies for the taking over of the existing state are, by their nature, ones in which the pre-eminent active role is played by parliamentary leaders, and other notables, who assume control of government ministries, the police, the armed forces etc., while the role of the masses is to provide support for this process at the top. Strategies for the smashing of the existing state are ones in which the workers themselves actually confront and defeat the state, city by city, town hall by town hall, police station by police station, and themselves create the new state workers’ council by workers council.
Another theoretical implication is for the understanding of nationalisation and state ownership – always emphasised by left reformists. Nationalisation by the capitalist state is not socialism but state capitalism. As Engels said in Anti-Dühring:
The modern state, no matter what its form, is essentially a capitalist machine, the state of the capitalists, the ideal personification of the total national capital. The more it proceeds to the taking over of productive forces, the more does it actually become the national capitalist, the more citizens does it exploit. The workers remain wage-workers – proletarians. The capitalist relation is not done away with. It is rather brought to a head. [11]
But whether the goal is to take over or smash the capitalist state also has huge practical implications for socialists in the day-to-day struggle long before we arrive at a revolutionary situation. For example, it shapes our attitude to the police, the courts, and the armed forces. Our attitude to the police is not based on an assessment of the character of all, or most, individual cops, but on an understanding that this is a capitalist institution which our class will need to defeat and dismantle. Consequently, we do not call for the strengthening of the police or the state generally to deal, for example, with crime or anti-social behaviour.
Most importantly, it has implications for how socialists should organise. If the perspective is to take over the state machine, then the most obvious way to do that is to win a parliamentary majority at a general election – indeed it is the only way to do it short of some kind of revolutionary coup d’etat which has zero chance of succeeding in an advanced capitalist country. But winning a parliamentary majority clearly requires as broad a party as possible that is also compatible with a left programme i.e. it certainly requires a party that contains both reformists (albeit left reformists) and revolutionaries like the parties of the Second International and like Syriza today. This is especially the case given that it is highly unlikely that the majority of working class people will achieve fully revolutionary consciousness other than in and through a revolution.
If, on the other hand, the goal is to smash the state then what is needed is a revolutionary combat party capable of acting in a decisive way to lead the masses in an insurrection. This cannot be done by a party that is fifty-fifty, or some other balance, of reformist and revolutionary since the reformist wing would be able to paralyse the party at the crucial moment and prevent it taking decisive action.
Lenin said, ‘Political questions cannot be mechanically separated from organisational ones and anybody who accepts or rejects the Bolshevik party organisation independently of whether or not we live at a time of proletarian revolution has completely misunderstood it’. [12] With equal truth, we can say that the question of what form party organisation should take cannot be separated from our understanding of the nature of the capitalist state. (It is important to grasp this connection because some people on the left are currently rejecting ‘Leninist’ organisation as if it were simply an organisational question, without considering its relationship to the tasks of socialists in relation to the state.)  
A Government of the Left?
As we have noted, the question of a ‘left government’ is of central importance for the left reformist project. For most left reformists it is seen the principle means of achieving their political goals and as such tends to become the overriding priority to which most day-to-day political activity and campaigning is subordinate. However, pinning down what exactly defines a ‘left government’ is by no means straightforward and left reformists themselves would generally prefer the matter to remain rather fuzzy. It is easier to say what a left government is not.
It is not a typical social democratic or Labour government of the kind which has become extremely familiar in Europe over the last fifty years or so; it is not a Blair-Brown British Labour government, or a François Hollande French socialist government, or PASOK in Greece or Gerhard Schröder SPD government or an Irish Labour government (should such a thing come to pass). It is not, in other words, a pro-free market, pro-US, pro-imperialist business-as-usual government with perhaps a slight inflection towards moderate Keynesianism and the welfare state. Nor, obviously, is it full blown workers’ power with the takeover of banks and major corporations under workers’ control, directly initiating the abolition of capitalism and the transition to socialism. It is somewhere in between.
At a minimum a left government is one that, while operating within a capitalist framework, would nevertheless governs against the capitalist grain; i.e. it would implement a series of reforms to which the capitalist class would be opposed and which would benefit working class people and the oppressed and it would fairly consistently try to defend working class people and attacks on their living standards emanating from the system. It would also be a reasonable minimum expectation of such a government that its foreign policy, if not based on militant anti-imperialism and socialist internationalism, would at least refrain from outright support for and collusion with imperialism and imperialist wars.
At the higher end of the scale, a left government would be one that does the above and seriously attempts to erode capitalist power by, for example, gradually bringing ever greater sections of the economy into public ownership and, crucially, initiating more democratic forms of management and beginning the process of bringing the state apparatuses (police, army etc.) under democratic control. In foreign policy, it would not only shun direct collusion with imperialism but also actively support and build alliances with anti-imperialist liberation movements and anti-war movements internationally. In this way, such a government might prepare the ground for or ‘open the way’ to a thorough socialist transformation of society after, say, a five or ten year period and a fresh mandate from the electorate.
The key question is, of course, is such a government possible? It is not so much whether or not it could be elected – clearly, in certain circumstances it could – Syriza could easily be elected in Greece – but whether or not it would be able to govern in an ‘anti-capitalist’ way in either the weaker or the stronger sense of the term?  
The historical experience
Ireland has never had a left government; however, there exists a considerable international experience on which we can draw and from which we can learn.
One of the administrations most frequently cited as an example of what can be achieved by a left government is the British Labour Government of 1945–51 under Clement Attlee. Left reformists, like Tony Benn, have always pointed to the Attlee government as epitomising the ‘old Labour’ to which they wanted to return and recently the socialist film director, Ken Loach, has released The Spirit of 45 – a film devoted to evoking and celebrating that moment in British history – to coincide with his call for the formation of a new left wing party to resist the current Tory Government’s massive onslaught on the welfare state. What earned this government its reputation on the left was its development of the welfare state, above all the creation of the National Health Service, and its substantial programme of nationalisation.
The 1945 Government did not start the British welfare state from nothing – its origins go back to the Liberal Government of 1906–14 which brought in old age pensions, unemployment and health insurance – but the three acts it introduced in 1946 (the National Health Act, and two National Insurance Acts) and the National Assistance Act of 1948 were reforms of major importance. There is no gainsaying the fact that these measures, and especially the establishment of the NHS – free to all at the point of provision – made for a significant improvement in the lives of British working class people.
In terms of public ownership, 1946 saw the nationalisation of the mines with the formation of the National Coal Board and the nationalisation of the Bank of England. This was followed, in 1947, by the establishment of the Central Electricity Generating Board and in 1948 with the nationalisation of the railways, inland water transport, some road haulage and road passenger transport plus Thomas Cook & Son under the British Transport Commission. In 1949, the UK gas industry was nationalized and 1,062 privately owned and municipal gas companies were merged into twelve area gas boards and, in 1951, the government nationalized the Iron and Steel industry.
To these achievements it should be added that these were years of more or less full employment (unemployment never rose above 3%) and consistently rising living standards (by about 10% per year). Moreover, between August 1945 and December 1951, over a million new homes were completed in England, Scotland, and Wales.
Clearly this is impressive but when one looks at the overall record of the government the picture is less rosy, especially when it is viewed in its wider historical context. First of all it is clear that the Attlee government in no way ‘opened the road’ to socialism in that it was followed by 13 years of Tory rule in which capitalism enjoyed the largest boom in its history, without any wholesale reversal of Labour’s policies. This was possible because the nationalization carried out by the government was state capitalist not socialist nationalization. It was the taking over of a segment of the productive forces by the existing capitalist state with no element of workers’ control or workers’ power involved. As Engels put it:
The modern state, no matter what its form, is essentially a capitalist machine, the state of the capitalists, the ideal personification of the total national capital. The more it proceeds to the taking over of productive forces, the more does it actually become the national capitalist, the more citizens does it exploit. The workers remain wage-workers proletarians. [13]
And as far as the capitalist state was concerned, the government touched not a hair on its head. There was not a hint of abolishing or even reforming the anti-democratic House of Lords or the monarchy – no question of anything but complete ‘loyalty’ to ‘King and Country’. However the government had no qualms about using this state against workers’ taking industrial action.
Striking dockers, gas workers, miners and lorry drivers were denounced, spied upon and prosecuted. Two States of Emergency were proclaimed against them and two more were narrowly averted. Above all, the government used blacklegs against these strikes ... On 18 different occasions between 1945 and 1951, the government sent troops, sometimes 20,000 of them, across picket lines to take over strikers’ jobs. [14]
Also, in terms of its foreign policy, the government was thoroughly reactionary and imperialist. It deployed troops in Greece to crush the Greek resistance, waged a brutal war of counter-insurgency in Malaysia, used British troops to help restore French colonial rule in Vietnam, reinforced British rule and the Orange supremacy in Northern Ireland, backed the formation of Zionist Israel, crushed a general strike in Kenya, and supported the South African annexation of Namibia. It also sided unequivocally with the US in the cold war, manufactured the atom bomb and joined NATO in 1949.
This unusual mixture of reforms that benefited working people with strikebreaking and support for imperialism was the product of an exceptional combination of circumstances. On the one hand the government won a landslide election victory on the basis of a wide radicalization among working people during the war, but because the war had popular support it was a relatively passive radicalization that took the form of voting Labour rather than the form of mass strikes, anti-government demonstrations, anti-war mutinies and so on. On the other hand, the government coincided with a period of full employment (established during the war) and the beginning of the post-war economic boom. This made the ruling class willing and able to make concessions (allow reforms) and to go along with a Keynesian economic policy and a degree of state capitalism (nationalization). Here it is crucial to grasp: a) that the boom and the full employment were not the result of Labour’s economic policy or wisdom, rather it was international capitalist expansion created by the war and maintained after the war by the permanent arms economy; b) that this particular combination of circumstances is highly unlikely to recur, especially in Europe at the present time. There are, however, certain parallels with the Hugo Chavez government in Venezuela. The legacy of Chavez is discussed elsewhere in this journal by Peadar O’Grady so I will make only very brief comments here. Like the Attlee government that of Chavez was able to achieve a number of significant reforms. Under Chavez unemployment fell from 14.5% in 1999 to 7.8% in 2011, the percentage living in poverty fell from 62.1 to 31.9, child malnutrition fell from 4.7% to 2.9%, Social spending rose from 11.3% of GDP to 22.8%, enrollment in secondary education went from 44% to 73.3% and the number of Venezuelans with pensions rose from 500,000 to 2 million. [15] An impressive record. At the same, as with Labour in 1945–51, the apparatus of the capitalist state has been left intact and, after thirteen years in power, there has been no assault on the wealth or economic position of the Venezuelan capitalist class. As Owen Jones, in a pro-Chavez article, has observed, ‘Venezuela’s oligarchs froth at the mouth with their hatred of Chavez, but the truth is his government has barely touched them. The top rate of tax is just 34 per cent, and tax evasion is rampant.’ [16] Nor is this about to change. President Nicolas Maduro, Chavez’s successor, has recently called for ‘more foreign investment and a better relationship with the business community.’ [17] What has made possible this combination of substantial reform without an assault on the power of capitalism was the boom in the Venezuelan economy and massive oil revenues – an average growth in GDP of about 4% in the Chavez years. Here again, there is a parallel with Labour in 1945–51 and the postwar economic boom. Thus what has been achieved in Venezuela is not an ‘opening of the way’ to socialism but a reformed capitalism with better conditions for the workers and without a revolutionary mobilization of the working class from below those gains may well be eroded in the years to come, especially if the economic boom comes to an end.
Unfortunately the outcomes of three other left governments in the 20th century were much worse.
The Spanish Popular Front government took office on 16 February 1936, as a result of its general election victory. This took place on the basis of six years of intense class struggle which include the overthrow of the Spanish monarchy in 1931 and the uprising of the Asturian miners in 1934 (brutally crushed by General Franco with 5,000 deaths). The Popular Front comprised two liberal (bourgeois) Republican parties, the Spanish Socialist Party (a far left Social Democratic party), the Spanish Communist Party, a section of the anarcho-syndicalist CNT and the formerly Trotskyist and avowedly revolutionary Marxist, POUM. In July 1936 the Spanish ruling class reacted by backing a Fascist coup led by Franco. The coup succeeded in about half of Spain, while in the other half it was resisted by mass workers action from below with the workers effectively taking power in Barcelona and elsewhere. The country was thus split in two and the Spanish Civil War began. The Popular Front government played a lamentable role in this titanic struggle. In such circumstances there was no possibility of a gradual programme of progressive reforms. The need to win the win the war – literally a matter of life or death for all on the left – dominated everything. But how to win it – that was the central question. In purely military terms, Franco’s forces, massively armed and assisted by Hitler and Mussolini, inevitably had the advantage. On the side of the Republic, lay the revolutionary enthusiasm and heroism of the masses and the possibility of undermining Franco behind his own lines by revolutionary measures such as land seizures and factory occupations and granting independence to Morocco. [18] In the event, the government did none of these things, indeed it positively opposed. Obviously the bourgeois republican parties would not countenance inroads on capitalist property and the capitalist state. But neither would the Communist Party; its line, and the line of CPs internationally – on orders from Moscow – was that in order to win the war the broadest possible unity was required, including unity with ‘democratic’ capitalist parties and even the British and French governments and that therefore the spontaneous workers’ revolution that had developed in Barcelona and elsewhere had to be first restrained and then liquidated. To enforce this policy GPU agents and methods were imported into Spain with the consequent murder of POUM leader, Andreu Nin, and others. [18] This strategy proved disastrous. Unsurprisingly, no support was forthcoming from Britain or France, while the working class and revolutionary forces were demobilized and demoralized. As a result the fascist victory, which came in 1939, was more or less inevitable .The fascists took the most terrible revenge on their opponents with approximately 200,000 loyalists being executed and Franco maintained his dictatorship until his death in 1975.
Running parallel to the terrible events in Spain was the Popular Front government in France. If its outcome was not as immediately catastrophic it was nonetheless deeply disappointing. The French Popular Front was an alliance between the Communists, the Socialists and the mainstream Radical Party. It took office in May 1936, headed by Socialist leader, Leon Blum, in a landslide victory on the basis of a mass anti-fascist upsurge and a rising tide of strikes.
The French working class responded to the Popular Front election victory with a massive wave of strikes and factory occupations which produced a near revolutionary situation. In June 1936 there were nearly 9,000 occupied workplaces! The reaction of the government of the left and its supporters – the decisive role was played by the Communist Party – was to offer concessions so as to bring the strikes to an end as soon as possible. The concessions were considerable: pay rises of 7 to 15%, a 40 hour week (reduced from 48), two weeks paid holidays, and recognition of collective bargaining. However they fell far short of any structural or strategic change to the system and it is important to remember that these reforms were rung from the government by workers’ action from below not pushed through by the government at the top.
Over the next couple of years the combination of serious inflation and the economic policies of the government rapidly eroded many of the workers’ gains. By mid-1937, the Popular Front government had started to disintegrate, without any substantial working class fight back – both the Socialist and the Communist Parties actively opposed resistance to the ‘People’s’ government, and in November 1938 the Popular Front experiment came to an ignominious end . Within two years the Nazis were in Paris and the French parliament had voted for Vichy and collaboration.
A third example of a Popular Front government is Salvador Allende’s Popular Unity government in Chile 1970–73. Popular Unity resembled the Popular Fronts of the thirties in that its core consisted of an alliance between the CP and the Socialist Party (Allende was from the SP) with liberal Radicals. In office, Allende and Popular Unity pursued policies of limited na
tionalization, social reform and Keynesian economic expansion. They did not, however, challenge the Chilean state apparatus or military, hoping instead to win their support or at least to neutralize them. For a year or so the government’s economic strategy seemed to be working – the economy grew and working class living standards were raised – but, in 1972, Chile went into economic crisis and experienced raging inflation. The Chilean working class responded to this with mass resistance in the form of major strikes and demonstrations and the organization of cordones (industrial coordinating networks) which were embryonic workers’ councils, combined with demands that the pace of change should be speeded up. At the same time, the right increased their mobilization against the movement and the government and began preparations for a coup. Allende temporized, with the Chilean CP proving to be one of the most cautious elements in the UP coalition. 1973 saw two unsuccessful coup attempts but Allende still would not break with the military, or arm the workers. On 11 September the infamous General Pinochet, with the backing of the US, staged a successful coup which claimed the lives of Allende himself and 30,000 Chileans, establishing a brutal [20] military dictatorship which ruled Chile for seventeen years.  
A Balance Sheet
This by no means exhausts the list of ‘left governments’ (others that could be considered include Hungary in 1919, the Sandinistas in Nicaragua, and Evo Morales in Bolivia, and perhaps many more) but enough examples have been presented to draw up a certain balance sheet. The first point that has to be made is that in none of these examples, nor in any other instance, did left reformism succeed in ‘opening the way to socialism’ or initiating any transition to a post-capitalist society. Nor indeed could any of these governments be said to have launched a serious assault, successful or otherwise, on the institutional power of the capitalist class or its state. The most that has been achieved by any of these governments is a series of social reforms which improved the living standards of working class people within capitalism and that was only possible in very favourable economic circumstances, as in post 1945 Britain, Venezuela’s oil boom, and Chile 1970–1. In circumstances of economic crisis – in Europe of the 1930s and Chile in 1972–3 – even these limited reforms were unacceptable to their respective ruling classes which were able to use their economic and political power, especially their power in the state machine, to undermine and destroy the left government.
There is, however, a notable exception to this depressing historical record – the Provisional Government that ruled Russia between February and October 1917. Because of its peculiar fate it not usually thought of in retrospect as a ‘left government’ but it was very much thought of as that at the time. It was brought to power by a great popular revolution from below which overthrew Tsarism and comprised a coalition of Mensheviks, Socialist Revolutionaries (SRs), non-party leftists and bourgeois liberals (the Cadets). The leaders of the Provisional government did not make the revolution but they had all been long standing opponents of Tsarism and, initially, had mass popular support – including, until Lenin’s return from exile in April, from the Bolsheviks. Moreover, the ‘left’ character of the government seemed reinforced when Alexander Kerensky, a member of the Socialist Revolutionaries, succeeded Prince Lvov as Prime Minister in July 1917.
Immediately, on foot of the February insurrection the Provisional Government proclaimed a series of important reforms such as an amnesty for all political prisoners, freedom of speech, of the press and of assembly, abolition of hereditary privileges and local government on the basis of universal suffrage. But these reforms, like the workers gains in France in 1936, were really won by the masses in the revolution, then handed down from above. Thereafter, the Provisional government achieved little, remaining locked into the disastrous World War and unable to implement even its own minimum programme of convening a Constituent Assembly or granting land to the peasants.
What distinguished the Provisional Government from other left governments was neither its achievements nor its lack of them but the fact that, in October 1917, it was overthrown from the left in a socialist revolution. Had this not happened there is little doubt that the Provisional Government would have met the fate of the Chilean or Spanish Popular Fronts. The counter-revolution made an attempt at a coup under the leadership of General Kornilov in August 1917 and it was the Bolsheviks not the government itself that played the key role in defeating it. It is overwhelmingly likely that the Tsarist generals, given time to regroup, would have struck again, perhaps successfully. Trotsky used to say that without the October Revolution fascism would have carried a Russian not an Italian name. But what made October possible was the existence of the Bolsheviks as an independent revolutionary party which had been built in the years running up to the revolution.  
Revolutionaries and left reformism
Marxists are revolutionaries not because they are impatient or prefer revolution to gradual reform but because both theory and experience demonstrate that the road of reform does not work. As Marx put it in The German Ideology, ‘revolution is necessary, therefore, not only because the ruling class cannot be overthrown in any other way, but also because the class overthrowing it can only in a revolution succeed in ridding itself of all the muck of ages and become fitted to found society anew.’ [21]
This does not mean, however, that we can simply adopt a negative attitude to the phenomenon of reformism in general or left reformism in particular. Rather, we have to be both for it and against it, support it and criticize it, work with it and independently of it, at the same time – with different emphases at different points in the struggle.
Marx and Engels supported the formation and development of the German Social Democratic Party (SPD) but criticized the Gotha Programme on which it was founded [22] and warned against early tendencies to reformism in their Circular Letter to SPD leaders. [23] Rosa Luxemburg worked within the SPD until 1915 but polemicized fiercely against the revisionist (reformist) Eduard Bernstein in her 1900 book Social Reform or Revolution [24], opposed Karl Kautsky and the SPD union leaders over the mass strike and denounced the party as a whole as ‘a stinking corpse’ for its support for imperialist war.
The Bolsheviks worked with the Mensheviks in the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (RSDLP) after the split of 1903 but maintained their separate faction until it developed into a fully independent party from 1912 onwards. At the beginning of the Comintern Lenin argued first for breaking from the reformist Second International and the formation of independent revolutionary communist parties and then for supporting the reformist parties against the right in elections and finally for a united front with the reformists in defence of basic working class interests. Trotsky continued this approach in the 1930s, especially in relation to the fight against fascism. In the development of the International Socialist Tendency in Britain in the 1950s and 60s the forerunners of the SWP worked inside the Labour Party to gain an initial audience but then organized separately as soon as an audience for revolutionary politics emerged to the left of Labour. They continued to support Labour (‘without illusions’) against the Tories in elections and also supported the Labour Lefts (Tony Benn etc.) against the Labour Right, When the possibility of developing a left alternative to Labour at the ballot box opened up the SWP worked with left reformists, such as George Galloway, to try to build it, but without giving up its critique of bourgeois democracy or electoralism.
Today, internationally and in Ireland, we need to continue this dialectical approach. Whenever the radicalization of working people expresses itself in a move from the right, or from mainstream reformism, to left reformism, as with Syriza or the Front de Gauche, we welcome and encourage it. But when that left reformism is counter-posed to building revolutionary organisation we criticize it. When workers vote for candidates of the ULA rather than Labour (or Sinn Fein) we are delighted but if we are asked to dissolve our organization or hide our distinctive revolutionary politics we decline.
We work with other working people and other reformist political forces in campaigns in defence of working class interests. We support the left against the right or far left against the moderate left in the trade unions – Jimmy Kelly versus Jack O’Connor, Jerry Hicks versus Len McCluskey – but retain our understanding that the most important division in the unions is between the rank-and-file and the bureaucracy. [25] We would support the formation of a ‘government of the left’ but we would not join it, i.e. we would vote for it or transfer to it as appropriate and our elected representatives would sustain it against the right in the Dail. But we would not assume responsibility for it or be bound by it or vote with it if introduced cuts or other anti-working class measures. And at no point in the whole process should we abandon the Marxist critique of the left reformist perspective or the project of building a revolutionary party.
* * *
Notes
[1] For Nick Wrack’s version see http://wigangreensocialists.wordpress.com/....
[2] http://www.independent.co.uk/....
[3] http://socialistresistance.org/....
[4] http://www.socialistreview.org.uk/....
[5] For a recent analysis of the reformist role of the trade union bureaucracy see John Molyneux, Marxism and trade unionism, Irish Marxist Review 1, http://www.irishmarxistreview.net/....
[6] It should be noted in passing that the idea, sometimes canvassed on the left, that reformism has ceased or is ceasing to be a problem either because capitalism can no longer grant reforms or because the Social Democratic Parties have become pro-capitalist parties, is thoroughly mistaken. Reformism will be with us as long as we have capitalism.
[7] Because Kautsky and his followers stood in the centre of the SPD they, and the phenomenon they represented, became known in the Leninist-Trotskyist tradition as centrists. Centrism refers to political tendencies that vacillate between revolution and reformism but in practice most of the Kautskyites were left reformists.
[8] The State and Revolution was written in 1917 in the midst of the revolution but it is worth noting that its key ideas were already present in his notebooks of 1916. See V.I. Lenin, Marxism on the State, Moscow 1976.
[9] V.I. Lenin, Left Wing Communism, an Infantile Disorder, Peking 1965, p. 80. It should be noted that this is written in a book in which Lenin is arguing in favour of revolutionary participation in parliament.
[10] See James O’Toole, The principle of self emancipation, Irish Marxist Review 2, www.irishmarxistreview.net/....
[11] http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/...
[12] Lenin, quoted in G. Lukacs, Lenin A Study on the Unity in his Thought, London 1970, p. 26.
13. F. Engels, Anti-Dühring, http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/....
[14] Geoff Ellen, Labour and strike-breaking, 1945–51, International Socialism 24, Summer 1984, p. 45.
[15] Figures from Links, International Journal of Socialist Renewal http://links.org.au/....
[16] Owen Jones, Hugo Chavez proves you can lead a progressive, popular government that says no to neo-liberalism, The Independent, Monday 8 October 2012.
[17] http://venezuelanalysis.com/....
[18] Franco launched his coup from Morocco and 80,000 Moroccan troops fought on his side. If the Republic had made Morocco independent this would have hugely weakened the fascists. See Andy Durgan, The Spanish Civil War, New York 2007, p. 33.
[19] ‘Nearly 4,000 anti-fascists are known to have been imprisoned in Catalonia up until the end of the war. Most were CNT members.’ Andy Durgan, as above, p. 99.
[20] It is a bitter irony that Pinochet was promoted to Commander in Chief of the Chilean Army by Allende on 23 August, just two weeks prior to the coup.
[21] K. Marx, The German Ideology, http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/....
[221] K. Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme, http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/....
[23] See http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/....
[24] See http://www.marxists.org/archive/luxemburg/....
[25] See John Molyneux, Marxism and Trade Unionism, as above.
 



Marxists are internationalists not nationalists.
Nationalism is a key element in bourgeois ideology. It is one of the ideological means, arguably in today’s world the main ideological means, by which the capitalist class of all nations secures the compliance and even support of the working class and of the oppressed of all nations.
Like most such ideological phenomena, nationalism is not a fixed ‘thing’ or doctrine but rather a cluster of attitudes and propositions which are sometimes articulated, sometimes simply taken for granted, and frequently assumed to be ‘obvious’ and ‘common sense’. These are some of the principal nationalist assumptions which combine in different proportions and with different emphases at different times in different formulations of nationalism.

A particular nation – ‘our’ nation, whether it is Ireland, America, Britain, Germany or wherever – is somehow ‘best’, superior to other nations, as in ‘America is the greatest country on earth’ or ‘Britannia rules the waves!’ or ‘Deutschland über alles!’.
 
One’s national identity is one’s most important or core identity, taking precedence over other identities such as class, gender, ethnicity, locality, occupation etc.
 
Nations, or the people of a given nation, are held to have certain definite national characteristics which are somehow ‘in their blood’ or their genes and which explain or shape national history rather than being a product of it. For example, the British are ‘moderate’ and given to compromise or Americans are ‘freedom loving’ It should be noted that these characteristics are often positive as applied to one’s own country and negative when applied to other countries, especially ‘enemy’ countries.
 
There is a common ‘national’ interest which unites all members of a given nation, and to which all ‘sectional’ interests (class, gender, ethnicity, locality etc.) should be subordinate: ‘It is in the national interest for workers to exercise wage restraint’ or ‘We all have to make sacrifices in the national interest’.
 
In economic, political or even sporting conflicts with other nations it is a citizen’s duty to support their ‘own’ country. This applies most forcibly in time of war when to behave otherwise is be deemed a ‘traitor’.
 
It is the prime job of the government and the state to represent the national interest and that involves putting the interests of the government’s citizens first, before the interests of ‘foreigners’ as in ‘Why are we giving so much in foreign aid when we have problems at home? We should look after our own first’ or ‘Irish/British/French jobs for Irish/British/French workers’.

Of these six assumptions listed here it is the last three that are most important politically and most pervasive (though all are widespread) and it should be noted that many people and, crucially, many politicians who would reject any claim of ‘superiority’ as crude and arrogant would nonetheless basically accept points 4–6. In particular the notion of a ‘national interest’ is accepted by virtually all ‘mainstream’ politicians and frames almost all current political debate.
One of the main reasons why nationalism is so ubiquitous and so powerful is that it reflects a central material fact about the modern world, namely that economic, social and political life actually is organised on the basis of nation states more or less everywhere across the globe. What the ideology of nationalism conceals is that this ‘fact’ is of recent origin: nationalism has a general tendency to project the history of ‘the nation’ back to time immemorial, so naturalising it and legitimating it. Thus we hear of Ireland in the 10th century or Italy in 12th century as if we speaking of the same kind of entity as Ireland or Italy today when in there was no such thing as an Irish or Italian nation state or national consciousness at this time only Ireland or Italy as a geographical expression (like Scandinavia or South America today). In general, nation states in the modern sense only emerged with and as part of the development of capitalism and the rise of the bourgeoisie from about the 16th century onwards [1] and nationalism was from the outset a specifically bourgeois ideology.
In opposition to this bourgeois ideology Marxist internationalism rejects each of the six assumptions outlined above.

No nation (or ‘race’ or ‘people’ or ‘culture’) is inherently or innately superior to all or any others. Of course it is true that at particular moments in history particular states, or parts of the world are able to establish their economic, political and military dominance [2] but this is historically determined, has nothing to do with innate capacity and is invariably a temporary phenomenon. Thus Rome had a period of dominance (over part of the world) from about 100 BCE to 400 CE , China was in the lead about 1000CE, Britain in the 19th century and the USA in the 20th with China making a bid for leadership in the 21st.
 
Individual’s have multiple ‘identities’ or identifications – nation, gender, ethnicity, locality, family, religion, occupation, class and so on. Which identification predominates in people’s consciousness depends on circumstances and is the outcome of social and political struggle. Bourgeois nationalists fight for nation to predominate, socialists fight for class.
 
‘National characteristics’ do exist but they are a product of history and are absolutely marginal compared to what people of different nationalities have in common. Moreover they are of next to no explanatory use in understanding history. Explanations of Irish resistance (say in 1916 or 1920) or Irish passivity (say in 2011) in terms of the ‘Irish character’ have no value any more than does the notion that the French are ‘always out on the streets’ (if only) or that Latin Americans go in for revolutions. A distinction must be made between any concept of inherent ‘national character’ and national traditions (including social memory) which are historically formed and do a play a certain role in shaping ongoing political struggles. [3]
 
Marxist internationalism rejects the idea of a common national interest. Any nation consists of different classes and the interests of any capitalist class, be it Irish, German or Russian, are fundamentally opposed to the interests of ‘their’ working class whom they systematically exploit. The concept of the ‘national interest’ serves to mask this exploitation and conflict of interests. When workers are asked to make sacrifices ‘in the national interest’ they are really being asked to make sacrifices to increase the bosses’ profits. In a capitalist society the ‘national interest’ always means the interest of the capitalist class.
 
If, according to nationalism, the citizen’s duty is to support their ‘own’ country i.e. their ruling class, the obligation of the socialist and internationalist is to support the working class and the oppressed of their own country and internationally. This applies especially to war and our attitude in and to wars depends on the progressive or reactionary character of the war from the standpoint of the working class.
 
In opposition to the nationalist argument that ‘we’ or ‘our’ government should look after ‘our own’ first – via immigration controls, ‘Irish jobs for Irish workers’ or any kind of discrimination against foreigners – the internationalist position is that ‘our own’ are the working people and oppressed of all countries. Hence Marx and Engels’ slogan from the Communist Manifesto – Workers of the World Unite! – has always been the basic slogan of our whole movement.

If the material foundation of nationalism is the aforementioned fact that in the capitalist era ‘economic, social and political life actually is organised on the basis of nation states’, the foundation of internationalism is the deeper truth that, despite its organisation into competing nations, capitalism is ultimately an international system. Even at its beginning in the sixteenth century, the development of capitalism in Europe depended on a process of ‘primitive capital accumulation’ that was thoroughly global. As Marx described it in Capital:
The discovery of gold and silver in America, the extirpation, enslavement and entombment in mines of the aboriginal population, the beginning of the conquest and looting of the East Indies, the turning of Africa into a warren for the commercial hunting of black-skins, signalised the rosy dawn of the era of capitalist production. These idyllic proceedings are the chief momenta of primitive accumulation. On their heels treads the commercial war of the European nations, with the globe for a theatre. It begins with the revolt of the Netherlands from Spain, assumes giant dimensions in England’s Anti-Jacobin War, and is still going on in the opium wars against China, &c. [4]
With the Industrial Revolution of the late 18th century and the onset of the imperialist era in the late 19th century this internationalisation of capitalist production was greatly intensified. Again, it was predicted and analysed with uncanny accuracy by Marx way back in 1848.
The need of a constantly expanding market for its products chases the bourgeoisie over the entire surface of the globe. It must nestle everywhere, settle everywhere, establish connections everywhere. The bourgeoisie has through its exploitation of the world market given a cosmopolitan character to production and consumption in every country. To the great chagrin of Reactionists, it has drawn from under the feet of industry the national ground on which it stood. All old-established national industries have been destroyed or are daily being destroyed. They are dislodged by new industries, whose introduction becomes a life and death question for all civilised nations, by industries that no longer work up indigenous raw material, but raw material drawn from the remotest zones; industries whose products are consumed, not only at home, but in every quarter of the globe. In place of the old wants, satisfied by the production of the country, we find new wants, requiring for their satisfaction the products of distant lands and climes. In place of the old local and national seclusion and self-sufficiency, we have intercourse in every direction, universal inter-dependence of nations.
It compels all nations, on pain of extinction, to adopt the bourgeois mode of production; it compels them to introduce what it calls civilisation into their midst, i.e., to become bourgeois themselves. In one word, it creates a world after its own image. [5]
The intense globalisation of the last three decades has fulfilled Marx’s prediction virtually to the letter. Moreover the consequence of this international integration is the internationalisation of the phenomenon of crisis and recession to which capitalism is subject as was seen both in the great slump of the 1930s and the recession that began in 2008.
This in turn lends an international character to the struggle against capitalism. Clearly this is an uneven process in which national peculiarities and rhythms remain – for example the level of resistance has obviously been higher in Greece than it has in Ireland over the last few years. Nevertheless the class struggle goes through waves of advance and retreat that are fundamentally international.
Thus there was the ‘age of revolution’ comprising the American Revolution of 1774, the French Revolution of 1789, the Haitian and other slave revolts of 1791 and the ’98 Rebellion in Ireland. Then there was 1848 with its revolutions in France, Germany, Austria, Hungary, parts of Italy, Poland, the campaign of the Chartists in Britain and the foundation of the Fenians in America, followed by a long period of capitalist expansion and political reaction. In the years leading up to the First World War came a period of workers’ industrial revolt known as ‘the Great Unrest’ in Britain which included the rise of syndicalism in France, the Wobblies in America and the Lockout in Dublin. This was interrupted by the outbreak of the War but then the struggle resumed at a higher level with the Easter Rising of 1916, the Russian Revolution of 1917, The German Revolution of 1918–23, the Hungarian and Finnish Revolutions, the Italian ‘biennio rosso’ of 1919–20, the Irish War of Independence and much else.
The failure of this great revolutionary surge was then followed by a long period of international defeat culminating in the victories of fascism and Stalinism. The 1950s and 60s saw a long capitalist boom but as the boom started to falter the struggle revived especially in 1968 and after, with the May Events in France, the black and anti-Vietnam War movement in the US, the international student movement, the British industrial battles of 1972–74, the Irish Civil Rights struggle and the start of ‘the troubles’, the Chilean Popular Unity and so on. The 1980s and 90s – the age of Reagan, Thatcher and neo-liberalism – were generally right-wing but the current crisis has witnessed, since the end of 2010, a wave of revolt from Tunisia and Egypt to Spain and the Occupy Movement.
From the global nature of capitalism Marx and Engels at once realised that socialism could not be achieved in one country. In The Principles of Communism (1847), which was the first draft of the Communist Manifesto, Engels posed the question directly:
Will it be possible for this revolution to take place in one country alone?
And answered
No. By creating the world market, big industry has already brought all the peoples of the Earth, and especially the civilized peoples, into such close relation with one another that none is independent of what happens to the others [6]
Lenin reiterated the point on many occasions. For example in January 1918:
The final victory of socialism in a single country is of course impossible. Our contingent of workers and peasants which is upholding soviet power is one of the contingents of a great world army. [7]
And in November 1920 on the 3rd anniversary of the Revolution:
We knew at that time that our victory would be a lasting one only when our cause had triumphed the world over, and so when we began working for our cause we counted exclusively on the world revolution. We have always known and shall never forget that ours is an international cause, and until the revolution takes place in all lands, including the richest and most highly civilized ones, our victory will be only a half-victory, perhaps still less. [8]
Then the defense of internationalism and the goal of world revolution became the fundamental issue in Trotsky’s struggle against Stalinism with its doctrine of ‘socialism in one country’ and in today’s globalised world the idea of being able to construct socialism in a single country is less plausible than ever.
For all these reasons the development of international solidarity, international socialist organization and the struggle against racism, nationalism and every prejudice which divides the working class is central to socialism.
 
National Oppression and National Liberation
Opposition to nationalism does not however mean that socialists are indifferent to issues of national oppression. On the contrary just as socialists have to be determined opponents of women’s oppression, LGBT oppression, and religious oppression, so they must vigorously oppose all forms of national oppression. This gives rise to an apparent paradox. Historically the most important form of national oppression has been the denial of the right of nations or people to national independence or statehood. This has especially been the case in the numerous empires that have arisen with the development of capitalism. Spain, Portugal, Holland, Belgium, France, Russia, Germany, Austria, Japan, Italy, USA, Turkey etc. and, above all, Britain amassed numerous colonies to whom they denied independence – India, Ireland, Kenya, Algeria, Vietnam, Nigeria, the West Indies, Angola, the Congo, Serbia, Georgia, to name but a few. If socialists, in their opposition to national oppression, support the liberation struggles of such nations or would-be nations are they not thereby supporting nationalism or at the very least compromising with it?
This was the argument made by the great Polish-German revolutionary socialist Rosa Luxemburg at the beginning of the 20th Century, especially in relation to Poland. At this time Poland was a colony of Russia but Luxemburg, who was profoundly internationalist, argued against supporting Polish independence because she was convinced that the Polish nationalists were reactionary and anti-working class and that instead Polish workers should unite with their Russian brothers and sisters in the struggle against the Tsar. (This was at the time of the 1905 Revolution in Russia.) In contrast Lenin argued that it was essential for socialists to support the right of the oppressed nations within the Russian empire – Poland, Georgia, Latvia, Kazakhstan and many others – to self-determination including the right to secede if they wanted it.
Luxemburg thought this was a concession to nationalism and sowed illusions in the possibility of small nations to develop ‘independently’ within global capitalism. Lenin denied he was making any concession to nationalism and argued that support for the right to self-determination of oppressed nations was simply the application of democratic principle to the national question. Moreover he insisted it was precisely an internationalist duty because the international unification of the working class and of all peoples, which was the goal of socialism, could only be a voluntary unification. It could not be imposed by capitalism or imperialism. Lenin maintained that if socialists failed to oppose conquest, colonialism or the denial of the right to self-determination, they would become complicit in national oppression and cease to be internationalists.
Rosa Luxemburg was a great revolutionary socialist and committed internationalist but there is little doubt that history has proved Lenin right on this question. Everywhere it has existed imperialism has generated resistance in the form of national liberation movements which have played a hugely important and generally progressive role over the last 100 years. It is clear that socialists had to support the struggle of India, Ghana, Kenya, Zimbabwe and Ireland for national independence from the British Empire, of Algeria against French imperialism, of Vietnam against American imperialism, of Angola and Mozambique in relation to Portuguese imperialism and so on. Lenin argued that revolts in the colonies and struggles for national liberation would objectively weaken the ruling class in the imperialist countries and thus assist the development of the revolution in those countries. This has been vindicated on a number of occasions: for example the resistance by the Vietnamese in the 1960s had a huge impact in developing resistance within the United States in terms of the black movement, the anti-war movement, and the student revolt – indeed it was a big factor in the revolts of the sixties internationally, including May ’68 in Paris -and then in 1974 it was the national liberation movements in Angola, Guinea-Bissau and Mozambique which weakened the Portuguese fascist regime to the point where it was overthrown by the Portuguese Revolution.
But if anti-imperialism and support for national liberation has become widespread on the socialist left (as opposed to mainstream social democracy and Labourism which has generally been pro-imperialist) [9] this has often brought with it a tendency for Marxists or socialists to merge with nationalism, or become nationalists themselves. This has particularly been the case in what used to be called the Third World but also applies to many western leftists who sympathise with Third World nationalism. Historically the main responsibility for this lay with Stalinism. After 1924 Stalin, in pursuit of socialism in one country, used the Communist International to turn the Communist parties into tools of Russian foreign policy. Instead of leading revolutions their job became to influence powerful allies into becoming ‘friends’ of the Soviet Union and help protect it against foreign intervention. In many cases these allies were nationalists of one kind or another and the nationalism started to rub off on the CPs themselves. Alongside this Stalinism adopted a ‘stages theory’ of revolution in all the underdeveloped countries according to which these countries were only ready for a ‘national democratic’ revolution in alliance with the ‘patriotic bourgeoisie’; only when this was completed was the struggle for socialism to begin. [10] This reinforced the transformation of ‘communists’ or socialists into radical nationalists (as with Ho Chi Minh and the National Liberation Front in Vietnam or Fidel Castro in Cuba or left republicanism in Ireland).
To summarize: Marxists support the right of nations to self-determination and the national liberation struggles of oppressed nations but they do so as internationalists in order to assist the international unification of the working class and not as an end in itself.
 
Rogue Regimes and Terrorists
Put as an abstract question the right to national self-determination is one most of the left and many democrats would readily support. Moreover, to give some concrete examples, few people, if any, on the left would deny the right to independence of India, or Vietnam, or Cuba, or Ireland, or the right to majority rule in South Africa. One reason for this is that the leaderships of these national movements (Gandhi, Ho Chi Minh, Castro, Pearse and Connolly, Mandela) were widely seen as progressive and heroic figures; another is that the ideological tool used to discredit these movements, that they were ‘communist’, lost much of its power. Things can stand very differently where the national regime or movement concerned seems much less attractive or progressive, for example Gaddafy’s regime in Libya or the Taliban’s in Afghanistan.
The imperialists and their hired propagandists know this only two well. If they want to conquer, occupy, colonise or attack a country, for their own predatory reasons, they take care to demonise its ‘regime’ or leadership first. For a long time, outright racism was the main ideological weapon used for these purposes – the natives, you see, were ‘childlike’ or ‘savages’ unfit to rule themselves – then, as noted above, it was ‘the threat of communism’. In recent years these motifs have given way to the concepts of ‘rogue regimes’ and ‘terrorism’, both frequently (though not always) underpinned by Islamophobia. Regime X, so the argument runs is, so atrocious that imperialist intervention/conquest is ‘humanitarian’ and liberatory, for the good of the people on the receiving end of it. This argument is given plausibility by the fact that many of the regimes in question are indeed atrocious (Saddam Hussein, Gaddafy, Assad in Syria, North Korea and so on).
Over the last couple of decades ‘terrorism’ has become an all purpose label designed to justify whatever the US government especially, but many other governments as well, might choose to do. A given country may clearly pose no threat whatsoever to the US, UK or France but they are ‘terrorists’ or ‘sponsor’ or ‘harbour’ terrorism, especially Muslim terrorism, and therefore it is legitimate to bomb or invade it. Thus neither Afghanistan, nor Iran, nor Iraq nor any Arab country has ever invaded or made war on America or any European country in the last several hundred years and are manifestly incapable of doing so. Ah! But they are ‘terrorists’ so ‘we have to fight them over there, so that we don’t have to fight them at home’ as GIs are trained to say.
Socialists must reject both these justifications for imperialism. If a country has a horrific regime, often because that regime is armed and sustained by imperialism, this is for the people of that country to deal with, with the solidarity of working people from other countries. (Of course the capitalist press and politicians always downplay or rule out this possibility of change from below). It in no way negates that country’s right to self-determination. Neither does the bogus issue of terrorism. ‘Terrorism’ as a political strategy can be critiqued from the left or the right. The left critique focuses on its inability to achieve its goals, and on its attempt to substitute the actions of a small ‘heroic’ group for the struggle of the masses. [11] The right wing critique is based on the notion that all political violence except that of the ruling class and its state is criminal, immoral and, they always say, cowardly, whereas the violence of the capitalist state and its armed forces, which is on a vastly greater scale – think of Hiroshima, of Vietnam, of Iraq etc. – is not only legitimate and ‘brave’ but not even recognized as violence and is invariably described a ‘fighting for our country’ or ‘peace keeping’ or ‘ restoring order.’ Moreover, the idea that the existence of terrorism excuses or justifies imperialist intervention inverts reality in that 95% or more of terrorism, including the infamous 9/11, is in fact a response to imperialism and oppression – a misguided response, but a response nonetheless.
 
Some complexities
Marxist support, on the basis of internationalism, for the right to self-determination and for national liberation movements against imperialism has shown itself to be a generally valid position since it first began to be established by Marx in relation to Ireland and Poland in the 19th century, through to its development by Lenin, Trotsky and other Marxists. This does not mean, however, that it is a simple absolute rule or that there are no tricky, complex or intermediate cases. Intermediate and complex cases always arise in life. In the first place it is sometimes debatable whether or not a certain group of people constitute a nation and therefore whether or not a call for national self-determination is appropriate or useful. There are clear cases – France is a nation, Pimlico is not [12] – but what about US Blacks, Jews internationally, Cornwall, Northern Irish Loyalists and so on? In 1913 Stalin in Marxism and the National Question advanced a ‘definition’ of a nation in terms of a combination of certain characteristics.
A nation is a historically constituted, stable community of people, formed on the basis of a common language, territory, economic life, and psychological make-up manifested in a common culture. [13]
This definition, due to its author, was to prove influential in the international communist movement but it is a wrong and mechanical approach. The problem is that nations like all other social and political phenomena are not fixed entities but develop historically and that therefore a ‘people,’ at precisely the moment their right to nationhood and self-determination is in question, are likely to possess some but not all of these characteristics. It is better to make the decisive criterion whether or not the people in question, in their majority, see themselves as a nation or aspire to nationhood (while understanding that this identification will be economically and socially conditioned). In debating the question of self-determination for US Blacks in 1939, Trotsky argued:
As a party we can remain absolutely neutral on this. We cannot say it will be reactionary. It is not reactionary. We cannot tell them to set up a state because that will weaken imperialism and so will be good for us, the white workers. That would be against internationalism itself. We can say, ‘It is for you to decide. If you wish to take a part of the country, it is all right, but we do not wish to make the decision for you. Comrade Johnson used three verbs: ‘support’, ‘advocate’ and ‘inject’ the idea of self-determination. I do not propose for the party to advocate, I do not propose to inject, but only to proclaim our obligation to support the struggle for self-determination if the Negroes themselves want it. It is not a question of our Negro comrades. It is a question of 13 or 14 million Negroes. [14]
Another complexity arises in dealing with nations that do not fit neatly into the division between oppressor nations and oppressed nations. Lenin always insisted that it was necessary to distinguish between the nationalism of oppressor nations which is thoroughly reactionary and that of oppressed nations which has a democratic and progressive element in it. Much historical experience has confirmed this judgement. British, French and German nationalisms point rightwards to UKIP and the BNP, to Le Pen and the Front National, to Hitler and to Neo-Nazism. Irish, Indian and South African nationalism point leftwards to Pearse and Connolly, to Gandhi and the Communist Parties, to Nelson Mandela and Steve Biko. US Black nationalism leads to Malcolm X and to the Black Panthers.
But what of a nation like Scotland? Scotland is not and has not been an oppressed nation like Ireland (or India, Kenya, Algeria, Palestine etc.). A comparison of the historical development of Scotland and Ireland makes this very clear. While Scottish industrialization marched forward in tandem with English industrialization Irish industry industry was held back. While Scottish living standards roughly kept pace with English, Ireland was dramatically impoverished. While the Scottish bourgeoisie became a partner of the English in British imperialism, the Irish bourgeoisie was marginalized and excluded. So what implications does this have for the socialist attitude to Scottish nationalism and Scottish independence? Does it mean that support for national self determination ceases to apply?
No, because socialists have no interest in defending the unity of the British imperialist state and because if the majority of Scots want independence the denial of this right by the British state would be a violation of democracy and could, indeed, transform Scotland into an oppressed nation. It is true that Scotland has been a partner in British imperialism and thus an oppressor but Scottish nationalism and the demand for independence is directed against British nationalism and is a move towards a certain separation from British imperialism. [15] At the same time it is necessary to emphasize that Scottish independence would not in itself solve any of the serious problems facing the Scottish working class and that unity and solidarity between Scottish and other UK workers, which already exists to an extent through the trade unions etc., should be maintained.
The case of Scotland is only one example but it clearly has implications for other nations such as Catalunya and Wales.
A further complexity arises when a nationalist movement, or what presents itself as a nationalist movement, in fact becomes a tool of imperialism (sometimes a rival imperialism). It has generally been accepted in the Marxist tradition that in such cases support should no longer be given to that national movement. Thus, in the First World War, Serbian nationalism (which had developed in opposition to the Ottoman Empire and to Austria-Hungary) became a tool of Russian imperialism and revolutionary socialists who took an internationalist position against the war (including the internationalists in Serbia) ceased to support it. When the Congo under Patrice Lumumba won its independence from Belgium in 1960 there was immediately a breakaway by the region of Katanga, but this was clearly being manipulated by imperialism, especially Belgian imperialism in order to undermine the Congo and retain control of the rich mineral resources in the area.
Matters are not always simple and sometimes lead to controversy on the left. For example in relation to the Korean War (1950–53), Tony Cliff, founder of the International Socialist tradition, argued that this was not a war of national liberation against US imperialism but a proxy war between the Soviet Union and the US, both of which had imperialist aims in the conflict: a view which was denounced by Stalinists and ‘orthodox’ Trotskyists alike [16] but does seem to be borne out by the historical facts. However, when it came to the Vietnam War, the IS view, along with the rest of the left, was that, despite Soviet backing, this was a genuine national liberation struggle meriting full support. In relation to the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan in 1979 there was a debate within the British SWP as to whether the Afghan mujahideen were a genuine movement of national resistance or simply an instrument of US imperialism (which clearly supported them at the time). Subsequent history suggests the former position was correct. [17]
One thing these examples make clear is that it is not simply the provision of military support by an imperialist power that is decisive – the Soviet Union gave military support (for its own cynical and imperialist reasons) to various national movements, while opposing others – but whether the imperialist power has actually taken control of the national movement concerned. [18] Clearly determining if this is the case in any specific instance requires not just abstract principles but also a concrete analysis of the concrete situation. But this is true of the national question as a whole and in making these concrete analyses – we present four in this issue of IMR – it must always be remembered that while there exists in Marxism and in socialism a presumption in favour of the right of nations to self determination this remains a means to the end of international working class unity and, in the final analysis, is subordinate to the interests of the international working class revolution.
* * *
Footnote
1. For an excellent and wide ranging analysis of the development of nations and nationalism (along with much else besides) see Chris Harman, The return of the national question, International Socialism 56.
2. As Marx pointed out these forms of dominance generally tend to go together and are also often accompanied by cultural hegemony.
3. For example the role of the Great French Revolution in the social memory of the French people and the whole European left throughout the 19th century, or the role of the Lockout and the Easter Rising in the the consciousness of the Irish working class today. We should also remember Marx’s comment that “The tradition of all the dead generations weighs like a nightmare on the brain of the living.”
4. Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Chap. 31.
5. Marx and Engels, The Communist Manifesto, Chap. 1.
6. Friedrich Engels, Principles of Communism.
7. Lenin, Collected Works, Moscow 1962, Vol. 26, 
8. As above, Vol. 31, pp. 397–98. And Trotsky, of course, fought a life and death struggle over this question when Stalin in 1924 proposed, for the first time in the history of the Marxist movement, that socialism could be built in a single country.
9. This has been the case ever since ever since most European social democrats supported the imperialist First World War in August 1914.
10. This stages theory was lifted from the Russian Mensheviks, who argued that Russia was only ready for a democratic revolution, and counterposed to Trotsky’s theory of permanent revolution according to which revolutionary socialists should put forward anti-imperialist and democratic demands but fight for working class leadership of the democratic revolution and its transformation into a socialist revolution.
11. For a classic statement of this left critique see Leon Trotsky, Why Marxists Oppose Individual Terrorism.
12. Pimlico is a district in London which was the subject of an Ealing comedy film called Passport to Pimlico (1949) in which the district declared independence (!).
13. J.V. Stalin, Marxism and the National Question.
14. Leon Trotsky, Self-determination for the American Negroes.
15. This should not be exaggerated because an independent capitalist Scotland might very well sign up to European imperialism via the EU.
16. Though interestingly Cliff’s view was shared by Natalia Sedova Trotsky in her Letter of Resignation from the Fourth International.
17. See Jonathan Neale, The Afghan Tragedy, International Socialism 12 (1981).
18. Making just this point Trotsky in In Defence of Marxism gives a striking example. ‘If Hitler tomorrow were forced to send arms to the insurrectionary Indians, must the revolutionary German workers oppose this concrete action by strikes or sabotage? On the contrary they must make sure that the insurrectionists receive the arms as soon as possible ... But this example is purely hypothetical. We used it in order to show that even a fascist government of finance-capital can under certain conditions be forced to support a national revolutionary movement (in order to attempt to strangle it the next day).’ A Petty-Bourgeois Opposition in the Socialist Workers Party.
 



Tracey Emin is the most famous contemporary artist in Britain.
This is the first time a woman has occupied this position and that
is, in itself, worthy of note. Moreover her fame is connected to what
makes her a serious and important artist.
Media treat her as a celebrity because they have picked up on the
fact that she is independently popular, she has a ‘fan base’. Who
are these ‘fans’? Mainly, though not exclusively, they are
younger women. They are part of the new expanded audience for modern
art, but they are not art world insiders. They relate to Emin because
Emin’s work relates to their experiences in a way that no other
artist’s does.
Most of her work is autobiographical. Its main subject matter is
her traumas and triumphs growing up in Margate, and becoming the
person she is today. It is often criticised for being ‘self-centred’.
This criticism completely misses the point so eagerly seized on by
her ‘fans’. The experiences re-presented in Emin’s art are not
just personal experiences, but are common to a wide layer of young
women growing up in this time, in this society. Normally these
experiences remain private, confided perhaps to ‘best friends’
but otherwise hidden from public view and therefore shameful. By
making these experiences into art, Emin actually engages in a process
of ‘democratic sharing’ with her audience. The work is not
didactic and does not preach. It does not seek to impose a specific
response. It simply says, ‘This is what happened to me; this is how
I felt about it,’ and perhaps, ‘This is how I dealt with it.’
If it strikes a chord, as it evidently often does, then so be it.
Emin’s first work to make a public impact, her tent, or Everyone
I Ever Slept With, 1963–95, was a good example of this. The
tent sat on the gallery floor. On the inside Emin had sewn the names
of her bedmates of the previous 30 years. To see or experience the
work the viewer has to crawl into the tent. Thus Emin has created a
‘private’ space, a den with private information about her life
which the public is invited to share. The fact, which she stresses,
that the names included not just lovers but also others she had
shared ‘the intimacy of sleep’ with (such as her twin brothers
and aborted foetuses) is important. It does not negate the sexual
interpretation of the title, but it modifies it, ensuring that the
sexual is not separated from the emotional. What we are offered to
share is not gossip or titillation but feelings, including painful feelings.
Emin’s most famous work, My Bed, is a complex piece,
which has appeared in different forms, but essentially it works on
the same principle. According to the stereotype, women are the
homemakers and responsible for housework. A messed-up house shames a
woman, makes her a ‘slut’, much more than it does a man. The
bedroom and above all the bed itself represent a place of privacy,
intimacy and sex, pain and illness. The stained sheets are a visible
trace of all this and thus taboo: ‘You don’t wash your dirty
linen in public.’ My Bed takes all this as its starting
point and confronts it, knowing that for some of us all the time and
many of us some of the time it is a lie. It is a spectacular coming
out. And out there thousands, perhaps millions, of people say, openly
or privately, ‘Yes! I’ve been there, I know what that’s about!’
That is why My Bed is one of those few works of contemporary
art that captures people’s imagination and stays in the public memory.
Much of the media coverage of My Bed seemed to assume that
she had simply transplanted her actual bed or bedroom into the Tate.
This, as a moment’s thought would have made clear, was nonsense. My
Bed, which had already appeared in Tokyo, was a consciously
constructed work, as much a made work of art as Van Gogh’s painting
of his bedroom. In so far as it was a sufficiently convincing
representation of a disordered bedroom to persuade journalists that
it was the real thing, this is testimony to Emin’s skill. My Bed
is also visually powerful in its own right.
Emin is a skilled practitioner in a range of media. Her drawing is
superb. She is able, with great economy, to achieve very accurate and
telling representations. Her line combines strength and
vulnerability, confidence and pain in exactly the right proportions,
and matching visual form to intellectual/ emotional content is
precisely the key skill of the visual artist.
Three of the themes in Emin’s work – class, sex and art –
are more or less omnipresent and make for its distinctiveness and power.
 
Class: The most immediately striking and unusual thing
about both Emin’s persona and her work is the way in which she
positions herself as a working class artist.
Clearly Emin is not currently working class.
She is probably a millionaire and she functions, as all successful
visual artists do, as boss of her own small business. Her class
background was complex. Until Emin was seven her mother had a hotel
in Margate, but bankruptcy and poverty ensued when she broke up with
Emin’s father, and Emin’s youth, whether or not strictly
proletarian, was plebeian. Nor is she an artist who sees or presents
herself as associated with or representative of the working class movement.
What she does do is present herself as culturally working class.
This is evident in the way in which she conducts herself: in her
accent, of course, but more importantly in what she says and how she
says it. She makes no attempt to engage in ‘intellectual art speak’
but sticks to unaffected everyday language. This is highly unusual in
the art world, the ethos of which is very upper class. The language
used in her many appliquéd blankets, films and monoprint drawings is
the language of the street, including the swear words, the
grammatical errors and the misspellings. But, above all, the
experiences her art deals with are, by and large, the experiences of
working class girls.
The short film Why I Never Became A Dancer is one of her
most important and powerful works. It tells of Emin’s aspiration to
be a dancer and her participation in a dance competition in Margate,
the prize for which meant going to London. Just as she feels things
are going well she finds herself surrounded by a circle of local lads
(many of whom she has had sex with). At first she thinks they are
clapping her, and then she realises that in fact they are chanting in
unison ‘Slag, Slag, Slag’, and she runs from the ballroom in
dismay. The film ends with her dancing, alone and just for herself,
and saying to the camera, ‘Shane, Eddie, Tony, Doug, Richard ...
this one’s for you.’ Of her recent film on teenage suicide, Top
Spot, Amy Lane wrote in Socialist Review, ‘There is
nothing that does not reflect the reality of Britain’s working
class estates. It is a painfully accurate portrayal of modern
adolescent experience’. [1]
There is an element of class prejudice as well as misogyny in the
media and critical hostility to Emin. Middle class critics often miss
the point of her work because the kind of experiences she deals with
are not part of the world they inhabit.
Emin’s consciousness of this relationship with her audience was
evident in her fury at Top Spot being given an 18 certificate
by the censors, preventing it from reaching the very people it was
intended for.
It is often said that Emin is not political. If this were true I
would not find it a problem for, as Trotsky insisted, art cannot
simply be judged on its politics. As it happens it is not true. Emin
does not see herself as an artistic representative of a working class
political movement but she does have a political consciousness and
outlook, and this is clear from many of her public statements and
appearances. She is anti-racist, anti-homophobic, and anti-war. A
colleague, who knows the London art scene, says that in that world
Emin is known as ‘a committed socialist’.
I set this down for the record, but I do not believe that either
her leftish views or her affluent lifestyle constitute major grounds
for the evaluation of her art.
 
Sex: That sex should be a major theme in Emin’s work is
hardly surprising. Sex has been a central theme in European art from
the Renaissance to Picasso and beyond (not to speak of Ancient Greece
and Rome, Japan and so on). But it should be said at the outset,
there is no element of eroticism or titillation here, unlike in
Botticelli, Renoir or Klimt. Nor is it sexual fantasy or dreams, as
we might find in surrealism, or the sex of the brothel featured so
heavily in late 19th century French art. It is real, everyday sex –
as experienced by her, of course, but also by millions of other
people. This, in itself, is remarkable. I do not think there is a
precedent for it in the whole of European visual art.
The history of art develops dialectically with each new
generation, movement or individual artist usually defining themselves
in opposition to the immediately preceding dominant trend. Part of
this process is the discovery of new material, both physically and in
terms of subject matter, to make art out of, which was often
previously thought of as ‘unartistic’ (or vulgar, ugly, etc.).
This is one of the reasons why new art so often meets with the
reaction that it is ‘not art’. Thus, mid 19th century French art
painted ‘the heroism of modern life’ as opposed to the heroes of
classical mythology; and the Futurists and Constructivists
aestheticised the machine and technology, previously anathema to
classicists and romantics alike. Picasso spoke of the difficulty of
finding a new subject and cited Van Gogh’s Boots as an
example. Tracey Emin has found a new subject.
A key feature of Emin’s treatment of sex is her disclosure of an
early teenage phase of promiscuity in Margate. In the voiceover on
Why I Never Became a Dancer she describes it as follows:
‘And then there was sex. It was something you could
just do, and it was for free. Sex was something simple. It didn’t
matter that I was young, 13 or 14. It didn’t matter that they were
men ... 19, 20, 25, 26. It never crossed my mind to ask them what the
attraction was. I knew ... sex was what it was ...’
I suspect that even if it is not a majority experience, such a
phase among working class girls is quite common, driven by a complex
mixture of low self-esteem, the search for love, intimacy, pleasure,
excitement, desire to grow up, ambivalent yearnings for a baby, and
so on. Usually the experience remains hidden, for obvious reasons,
from parents, or school and the authorities. It therefore remains
largely unrecorded and unrepresented. Films and novels have
occasionally visited the territory, but not, until now, the elevated
world of fine art.
Emin’s treatment of this experience appears simple – a plain
rendering of the facts – but it is in fact quite complex and
nuanced. In Dancer she defends herself against the charge of
being a ‘slag’ and records her conviction at the time that she
was ‘better than all those boys’. But in Masculinity she
writes that she ‘developed the ridiculous habit of sleeping with
men much older than me’. She also claims that her promiscuous phase
was very ‘educational’ in an interview for The South Bank
Show. This ‘ambivalence’ towards her sexual experiences runs
throughout her work.
Emin records many bad sexual experiences in her art but she does
not ‘aestheticise’ them. She deals with childhood abuse,
humiliation, abandonment, rape and abortion in the way these things
actually happen to women (never as her own or others’ fantasy
material) and with the severe emotional trauma and pain they caused.
There is no romanticisation of abjection.
This central theme is held in tension with two others. The first
is that her experiences, though often bad, have not proved
insuperable. Yes, they were deeply painful but they were not,
including the rape, ‘unspeakable’ or ‘the worst thing
imaginable’. She does not revel in her suffering, only in her
ability to have overcome it. Why I Never Became A Dancer ends
with a seagull soaring up and away from the shores of Margate.
The second is the retention, despite the traumas of the past, of
an open, affirmative attitude to sex and sexuality:
‘You don’t fuck me over/You gently lift me out of
bed/Lay me on the floor/And make love to me’ [2]
Holding these three elements, each of them a humane and
progressive response, in tension with each other but without allowing
any of them to be compromised, is a very considerable artistic and
emotional achievement.
Emin does not present herself as a feminist artist and is not
generally thought of as one. But, in dealing with sex Emin deals also
with sexism. Why I Never Became A Dancer confronts the –
very crude – sexism rampant among certain teenage boys and young
men. My Bed challenges the sexist attitude that makes a
disordered bedroom much more shameful for a woman than a man. Indeed
there is a sense in which the totality of her art practice and
persona challenge the double standards about sex.
The question of class interacts with the question of sexism here.
Emin is not seen as a ‘feminist’ artist because feminism and,
especially, feminism in the art world has been a largely middle class
phenomenon, focusing mainly on the issues that concern middle class
and professional women: especially how women are represented in the
media, literature, art, etc. The issues Emin deals with – how
teenage girls get ‘slagged off’ and ‘broken into’ – are not
recognised as feminist because they come from a different world. But
the fact is that Emin tackles sexism at the sharp end.
 
Art: I Need Art Like I Need God is the title and
content of one of Emin’s pieces in neon lighting, and ‘art’, in
particular Emin’s relationship to art, is a central theme in her work.
One of the ways ‘art’ features in Emin’s work is through her
references to other artists. Of course many artists do this, but
Emin’s range of reference is broad and impressive (which gives the
lie to another of the myths about her, namely that she is some kind
of ‘primitive’ or ‘naif’).
Most obviously she is indebted to her hero Edvard Munch, and to
Egon Schiele. The use of language in both the monoprints and the
blankets nods to Basquiat; the neon lighting pieces are influenced by
Don Flavin and Bruce Naumann; My Bed recalls Rauschenberg’s
Bed and, more subtly, the bed of Manet’s Olympia; The
Helter Skelter construction references the Tatlin tower; the
blanket work in general builds on the use of sewing and textiles by
feminist artists of the 1970s and 1980s.
Of course if quoting other artists was the main point of these
works it would make them banal, but with Emin’s pieces this is not
the case. Her principal tribute to Munch is Homage to Edvard Munch
and All my Dead Children and is accompanied by her verbal scream
which is truly disturbing and terrible. Her drawings may owe
something to Schiele but are in no way imitations or similar in
content. In the case of the blanket work Emin has transformed the
genre, freeing it of its craft and genteel associations, and making
it into vibrant new form in its own right.
As we know from Marx, in class societies the ruling class
invariably (if not completely) dominates the culture. However the
domination in the field of visual art has been more complete, more
extreme than in other art forms. This is because whereas the poet or
novelist needs only pen and paper, visual art must be embodied in
materials (which are very expensive), stored, and exhibited, either
in museums and galleries or in public places (which of course are
never controlled by the public). And because in the capitalist epoch
the art market has focused on the buying and selling of ‘unique’
and ‘original’ works, in contrast to music and literature, which
centre on either the large-scale selling of mechanical reproductions
– books, CDs, etc. – or live performances to collective audiences.
As a result, from Tutankhamun to Lorenzo de Medici and Henry VIII
to Rockefeller and Saatchi, visual art has been dominated by the very
rich and very powerful. This in turn has meant that the exclusion and
marginalisation of working class people, women and black people has
been even more marked in visual art than in other art forms. There is
no female painter whose standing compares with Jane Austen or George
Eliot and not a single painting by a black artist in the National
Gallery. In this context the work of Tracey Emin is both an example
of limited change that has occurred and a challenge to the present
and the future. [3]
Marx also tells us that art, like religion, philosophy and
politics, is part of the superstructure of society, which arises from
and is conditioned by the economic base. I would add that the
economic base, that is, the forces and relations of production, gives
rise to and shapes a developing ensemble of social relations which
range from how people dress, to family and sexual relations, to how
people look at a king or a beggar and how a king or a beggar looks at
the people, to how we experience the sea, the countryside and the city.
What major art does is express and comment upon these changing
social relations in a visually powerful way. Giotto and Brueghel,
Hals and Rembrandt, Hogarth and Goya, Courbet, Picasso and Warhol all
do this in their differing ways. And so does Emin.
The changing social relations that Emin addresses are those
shaping the relative positions in society of women and men,
especially young working class women and men. The changes in this
sphere in the course the last half century or so have been
spectacular: the huge rise in the number of women (especially married
women) in paid labour, the Equal Pay Act, the Sex Discrimination Act,
the pill, legalised abortion, freer divorce and lip service to
equality all over the place.
In other ways they remain strictly limited: no fundamental change
in the division of labour in the home, no equal pay in reality, women
still hugely underrepresented in top jobs, sexist images all over the
media. Of course the change is not evenly spread across society. In
my judgement the least has been at the very top among those who own
the wealth and control the state. There, bourgeois male power remains
firmly entrenched. The biggest change has been among the professional
middle classes – academics, intellectuals, media people, etc. –
where the success of girls in education and higher education has had
its effect and equal opportunities policies abound.
Many working class women have also benefited from the changes,
from the shift in general attitudes and the increased educational and
job opportunities. But for the majority, especially in the manual as
opposed to white collar working class, where money for child care is
scarce or non-existent and the struggle for survival dominates, the
change has been minimal. Some working class men, in the main the
politically more progressive, have changed their attitudes, but many
have not and the old sexism remains rampant. The problems are
particularly acute among teenagers and young men anxious to establish
their virility, and this is what working class girls and young women
have to cope with.
These are the contradictions which Emin has lived and which her
art expresses and responds to with clarity and passion. Politically
there is an obvious problem in that while Emin’s work ultimately
carries a message of hope, it is hope for an individual not a
collective or social solution, and this can only be possible for a
small minority. Unfortunately we don’t get our art to political
order and given the historical period of Emin’s artistic formation,
the 1980s and early 1990s, it is hardly surprising that collective
working class emancipation through political action was not high on
her agenda. What matters more than the correct politics is whether
the problems addressed are real, whether the art has integrity and
whether it is visually imaginative and powerful. Emin’s work
succeeds on all these counts with the extra factor that it really
speaks to people, and people beyond the normal range of ‘art
lovers’, in a way that is achieved by no other contemporary artist.

Notes
Thanks are due to my students with whom many of these ideas about
Emin have been discussed, in particular to Lucy Sanders, Roxanne
Chappell, Jessica Masterman, Danielle Wright and Kim Heal for their
stimulating presentation on My Bed.
1. Socialist Review, December 2004, p. 34. This short
piece by Amy Lane is the best published article on Emin I have read anywhere.
2. Words appliquéd to Garden of Horror M (1998).
3. It perhaps needs emphasising that while capitalism remains, the
ruling class’s cultural hegemony in general, and its domination of
the art world in particular, can be challenged and partially eroded –
but not abolished.
 



Militarism and Anti-Militarism
Karl Liebknecht
Rivers Press, Cambridge £3.25 (hard cover), £ 1.00 (paperback)
Dover Books, £1.00 (paperback).
IT IS EASY to see why this work, first published in 1907, earned Karl Liebknecht an 18 month prison sentence for high treason. It was a clarion call to international social democracy and especially the international Young Socialist movement to take up and intensify the struggle against capitalist militarism so rampant in the years before the first World War. Every page of this book bears witness to its author’s revolutionary commitment and enthusiasm.
Unfortunately Liebknecht’s theoretical abilities did not match his capacity for revolutionary action. The great weakness of this, his major theoretical work, is the absence of any concrete analysis of the interconnections between militarism, imperialism and the state, ie the absence of precisely the synthesis that Lenin was to make the cornerstone of the Communist International. As a result there is a certain shakiness and lack of clarity in the handling of important questions such as the possibility of wars of national defence and the attitude of social democracy to patriotism. And at times Liebknecht falls into outright errors. For example:
‘In Europe itself there is admittedly something of a tendency for certain causes of war to be eliminated: the probability of war breaking out in Europe is decreasing.’
And,
‘A time may of course come when the division of the world is so far advanced that one may expect the formation of a trust governing all possible colonial possessions by the colony-owning states, that is to say, the elimination of colonial competition between the states.’
Nor is any of this helped by Liebknecht’s rather poor and imprecise style.
Of course these criticisms are not intended to suggest that the book is without value. In addition to its basically sound message on the anti-proletarian nature of capitalist militarism it contains much useful empirical information on the state of the socialist movement at the beginning of the century. Indeed no book by a figure such as Liebknecht could fail to be of interest to students of the movement’s history.
As far as the two editions are concerned, there is little to choose between them. Nuances of translation are unlikely to be of great significance in a work of this kind. The Rivers Press edition has a longer, neo-Stalinist introduction by Philip S. Foner.

