

The recent unification of all the leading unemployed organizations
 into the Workers Alliance of America marks a definite period in the
 evolution of the movement. It is important that the militant workers
 in the field should understand the road that has been travelled, the
 trend which now prevails, and the policy which they must themselves
 adopt for the coming period.
To date the unemployed organizations have accomplished a number of
 important results. Their pressure has helped to keep relief standards
 from being scrapped completely. They have established and asserted
 the right of the unemployed to organize. They have corrected
 innumerable grievances of individuals and families. They have
 contributed some notable pages to the history of labor struggles in
 the United States. They have worked out the tactics, first applied on
 a large scale, in the Toledo Auto-Lite strike, of active
 participation in strikes of employed workers to an extent known in no
 other country. Through their work in connection with concrete needs
 of the unemployed and their educational activities, they have to a
 remarkable degree prevented Fascist or near-Fascist outfits from
 making inroads into the unemployed masses. 
From “Self-Help” to Class Struggle
In the early months of the crisis when under the influence of
 various kinds of liberals and academicians many of the unemployed
 organizations were of the “barter” and “sell-help”
 type, no results were obtained. A system of exchange among those who
 had nothing, still left them with nothing in the end. Conditions
 became worse and worse. It was when the unemployed began to “raise
 hell,” built organizations on a basis (conscious or
 unconscious) of class struggle that some results were obtained. Not
 the least important result was that the unemployed learned the power
 of organization, realized their own strength, developed a fighting
 psychology. When the unemployed marched on Washington or other
 centers in 1932 to 1935 they were usually met by police on the
 outskirts of the city and prevented from entering or else so treated
 within the city limits that serious disturbances ensued. The some six
 hundred delegates at the recent unity convention of the unemployed in
 Washington in which the Workers Alliance of America absorbed the
 former National Unemployment Councils, National Unemployed League and
 a number of lesser organizations, convened in the spacious and
 imposing auditorium of the U.S. Department of Labor and their
 sessions were much more sedate than those of last fall’s A.F.
 of L. convention! Much about the evolution and the present position
 of the unemployed movement is revealed in this contrast. 
The Most Urgent Problem
The fusing of many organizations of relief recipients and project
 workers into a relatively stable national body at this date –
 seven years after the beginning of the Great Depression, and three
 years after the advent of the New Deal administration –
 confirms Harry Hopkins’ recent utterance that “unemployment
 is still the most urgent problem before the nation” and
 suggests that the President’s statement in his Baltimore speech
 to the effect that “no man who is sensitive to human values
 dares to accept the continued existence of a vast permanent army of
 unemployed” is the expression of a pious wish.
Yet the unemployed and their organizations are not the immediate
 and dramatic “menace” which they constituted a couple of
 years ago. Objective factors in the general economic and political
 situation play a part here. The upturn in business, such as it is,
 has eased the tension. Relief payments and project wages are
 pitifully inadequate. Harassed by the inadequacies of appropriations,
 administrators are constantly resorting to schemes to cut down
 payments to the workers. The threat of removal from the rolls hangs
 over the beads of tens of thousands. There remain plenty of
 grievances on which to build and hold together the unemployed
 unions. 
Changed Situation
Nevertheless, the situation is less desperate than in those days
 when prosperity was supposed to be just around the corner,
 unemployment a passing phenomenon, and the only source of relief
 either the overburdened private charities or bankrupt city, county
 and state treasuries. Then too the temper of the masses was more
 inflammable in those months when for the first time the ground was
 slipping out from under their feet, “upstanding Americans”
 were forced to undergo the humiliation of applying for relief, were
 evicted from homes they had built, etc., than it is now when they
 have become in greater or lesser degree adjusted to a new status and
 a lowered standard of living. Another factor in producing a more
 stable situation is the fact that the Roosevelt-Hopkins policy of
 recognizing the “right” of the unemployed to organize but
 insisting that they behave in a “responsible” manner, as
 against the Tory attitude of flatly denying the right to organize, is
 percolating all the way down into the heads of at least a large
 percentage of the local administrators and foremen.
Such conditions tend to develop an organization devoted mainly to
 “collective bargaining” between workers and management
 (in this ease local, state and federal authorities) and lobbying for
 legislation in the interest of the group, rather than to agitation
 and “revolutionary” objectives. The establishment of the
 enlarged Workers’ Alliance of America definitely marked the
 ascendancy of this trend in the unemployed movement. The W.A.A. and
 its units will perform the function of “trade unions for the
 unemployed.”
The chief leaders of the W.A.A., Socialist and Stalinist,
 consciously encourage conservative trends rather than resist the
 tendency to conservatism in the movement. There were interesting
 illustrations of this during the convention. They displayed the
 greatest anxiety that delegations to Congressmen and the W.P.A.
 offices should behave like gentlemen, though they were actually going
 without meals and beds, and the authorities politically insisted
 nothing could be done about it. Foremost among the speakers who
 addressed the convention were liberal representatives and senators
 such as Lundeen, Marcantonio, Amlie and Frazier, some of whom are
 sponsoring social insurance and relief bills, and a personal
 representative of Harry Hopkins who calmly informed the delegates he
 could do nothing for their hungry stomachs and was politely applauded
 at the conclusion of his remarks. The Lasser-Benjamin leadership
 should hung its head in shame, if it is capable of that emotion, for
 permitting tills insulting and degrading performance. Until recently
 no convention of unemployed would have submitted to it. It should
 never be permitted to happen again.
Secretary Frank Morrison of the A.F. of L. represented President
 Green, but there was no speaker from John L. Lewis’ Committee
 for Industrial Organization! It is true that Norman Thomas and Mother
 Bloor also spoke but, doubtless in line with more or less direct
 hints from the officers, they refrained from putting forward the
 Socialist or the Communist parties respectively. All the recognized
 leaders spoke for a Farmer-Labor party to include also liberals and
 progressives, and the incoming National Executive Board is instructed
 to “explore the possibilities” of forming such a party on
 a national scale in 1936. 
Power in United Body
The lowering of the temper of the unemployed organizations in
 recent months has been accompanied, significantly enough, by a
 considerable slump in membership. The W.A.A. grew stronger because of
 the accession of previously existing units, rather than the formation
 of new ones, and thus gained relatively to the Councils and the
 Leagues, but its strongest state organization, for example, the
 Illinois Workers’ Alliance, experienced the same decline in
 membership and activity as was manifested in most other
 organizations.
Setting up of a single national organization of unemployed in
 which Socialists, Trotskyists, Stalinists, etc., participate is in an
 important respect a progressive achievement. It will give
 considerable impetus to the organizing movement in the immediate
 future, though conflict among diverse political tendencies will not
 by any means be entirely eliminated. Until some substantial change
 occurs in the general economic and political situation, possibly
 after the election, the policy of the W.A.A. is likely to reflect the
 general line and temper of the unity convention. This will he the aim
 of the Stalinists under their present undisguised and unrestricted
 opportunism and social-patriotism. 
Only Struggle Effective
What this line means for the unemployed is already plain to
 everybody. A terrific drive to cut down appropriations in order to
 “balance the budget” is under way. Thousands are being
 dropped from projects. Except where vigorous fighting organizations
 exist, all kinds of devices for worsening conditions are resorted to.
 No amount of flirting with the Green-Woll outfit in the A.F. of L. or
 with liberal congressmen, no amount of gentlemanliness in dealing
 with the clever politicians of the Roosevelt machine, no amount of
 polite lobbying by unemployed who have no money to bring into the
 lobbies, no amount of “resoluting” about fine-sounding
 but fake Stalinist farmer-labor or people’s parties, will
 change this situation.
Whatever the unemployed got in the past, they got because they had
 strong organizations which went on the war-path. Building or reviving
 such organizations and carrying them into action is the job of
 revolutionists and militants today. A constant struggle with the
 state, with governmental agencies, is involved in the very nature of
 the unemployed situation and of any unemployed movement worthy of the
 name. 
Link with Union Militants Needed
It follows, also, that the unemployed organizations cannot gain by
 being drawn down to the low level of militancy in many of the unions.
 On the contrary, the working class movement as a whole can gain only
 if the unemployed help to heighten the militancy of the unions.
 Consequently, the tie-up which the unemployed must seek is with the
 industrial as against the craft-unionists in the A.F. of L. who have
 never evinced the slightest interest in the unemployed masses; and
 basically the tie-up must be not with bureaucrats at the top but with
 the militant-progressive forces in the unions – a tie forged
 and constantly made stronger in the daily struggles of employed and
 unemployed alike.
Since it is impossible in an unemployed organization to establish
 a very strict centralized control from the center, nothing prevents
 the fighting spirits in city, county, state organizations from
 getting busy at once with building along these lines; with invading
 such reactionary strongholds as Tampa, Florida; with support of
 militant strikes as the Project Workers Union in Akron stood ready to
 give the Goodyear workers recently; with large-scale local and state
 demonstrations. Thus will the W.A.A. be made into an important
 progressive force in the class-struggle in this country.
 



Several “sit-down” strikes have occurred recently in
 the Akron rubber plants including the Goodyear where a great strike
 came to an end only two months ago. Last Saturday thirty-one
 militants of Plant Two of Goodyear were suddenly rounded up on
 charges of rioting in connection with one of these “sit-downs”.
 What is behind these turbulent developments?
As readers of the New Militant will recall, the
 “settlement” which marked the end of the Goodyear strike
 was by no means fully satisfactory to the workers. For one thing, the
 demand that the Goodyear company union be abolished, or at least that
 the company definitely agree no longer to finance it, was not
 achieved. Thus the workers went back partly as union men, a minority
 as company union men. Now no situation where a real union and a
 company union exists side by side can possibly be a static one. The
 employer immediately resorts to direct or indirect methods to
 undermine the union. The union men, unless they are prepared to lose
 the ground which they have won in their strike struggle, must work to
 win over or eliminate non-union or anti-union workers. The fight is
 invariably transferred from the picket line to the plant. In this
 case the conflict is peculiarly sharp, because the men have
 maintained at top pitch the militancy which they displayed during the
 strike at Goodyear, the other big companies, and the employers in the
 basic industries generally are well aware that if the rubber union
 actually establishes itself, the movement in steel and automobiles
 will receive a tremendous impetus. 
Conditions Still Bad
If there was a particle of ground left for the assertion that the
 “settlement” of March 21st effected even a partial
 adjustment of basic problems, that particle is now removed. Even the
 capitalist press admits this. The Cleveland Press, for
 example, stated the other day: “Impartial observers say that in
 reality conditions in Akron are as bad as ever. They point to the
 frequent sit-down strikes in recent weeks as showing dissatisfaction
 in the ranks of the workers. Thus the use of company union
 pace-setters for speed-up purposes continues. In at least one
 department recently an attempt was made to increase hours without
 first taking a vote as provided in the strike settlement. Attempts to
 lay off union men continue though in each instance the militancy of
 the workers has thwarted them. The general fear of excessive lay-offs
 when the slack season comes, induced by the abolition of the
 thirty-hour week by the companies and the failure to get it restored
 by the strike, continues to dominate the thinking of the men.
Since production in rubber is still at a high level and in view of
 the automobile production level seems likely to continue for some
 weeks, the highly provocative acts of the company against union men
 present on the surface a puzzle. The most likely explanation is this.
 Though the company probably desires uninterrupted production at the
 moment, it cannot afford to appear supine and weak in face of the
 aggressiveness of the union men who in a recent sit-down practically
 took entire control of one of the Goodyear plants. Such a show of
 weakness would be certain to lead the men to begin the general strike
 against the large rubber firms to gain the genuine recognition and
 other demands which they failed to get in the strike settlement. Such
 a strike may also come if the company’s attitude is hard
 boiled. In fact provocative measures carted beyond a certain point
 would certainly precipitate a strike. Thus the company will try to
 pursue a middle course until the main drive for production is over
 and an inventory is piled up when it may institute a lockout or
 answer a strike with a complete shut down for a considerable period.
A shut-down in the fall might be regarded as injurious to the
 Roosevelt election campaign and the big industrialists are trying to
 push Roosevelt still further to the right by such measures. It must
 be borne in mind also that the Supreme Court’s decision on the
 Guffey Case threatening also the National Labor Relations Board,
 etc., is an open invitation to employers to take the offensive
 against the unions.
In the present Akron situation, charged with dynamite as it is,
 timorous and reactionary union officials will seek to curb and
 repress the magnificent militancy of the workers. Nothing could be
 worse. In a hit or miss, undirected use of the “sit-down”
 there is danger. The company might provoke such demonstrations to
 rouse the public prejudice against the workers, etc. But the
 militancy which will not tolerate employer injustice and insolence
 must be organized – not repressed. To company wails that the
 workers are interfering with production, the union can answer that
 corporations which refuse to recognize unions and to set up machinery
 for prompt adjustment of grievances are inviting trouble and ought to
 get it, since the alternative is submission and slavery for the
 workers.
The problem will not be solved, however, by the kind of agreement
 between the union and the employer which apparently “recognizes”
 the union but actually “recognizes” the union officialdom
 as agents for carrying on class collaboration with the employers. Not
 outward forms but the content and essence count in the matter of
 union agreements.
The basic fear of the Akron workers is layoffs, i.e. insecurity.
 The basic demand of the union is for no layoffs, the restoration of
 the normal thirty-hour week and reduction of hours to an even lower
 point in the slack season. That will mean job security. And that will
 lay the basis for confidence among the workers on which militancy can
 be permanently sustained.
The workers of Akron look to the leadership of the Rubber Workers
 Union and of the C.I.O. to advance toward that goal. What is their
 answer?
 



The analysis of the recent strike in the Goodyear Tire and Rubber
 plants in Akron centers about three points: the role and temper of
 the strikers themselves; the role of union officials and in
 particular John L. Lewis’s Committee for Industrial
 Organization; and that of the working-class political parties and
 groups.
In tackling the Goodyear Company, the strikers were pitting their
 forces against the biggest of the tire and rubber companies, which
 had one of the oldest, and until the recent strike most “successful”
 company unions, and which had very important connections with big
 corporations in steel and other industries. Thus Tom Girdler of
 Republic Steel is on the Goodyear board of directors and offered his
 strike-breaking troops to Goodyear. On the other hand; the intensely
 competitive situation existing in the industry was favorable to the
 strikers in that Goodyear could not afford to lose business to other
 companies. From another standpoint it was this very competitive
 situation leading the companies to devise means to cut labor costs
 which brought the combination of wage-cuts, speed-up, increased hours
 and lay-offs by the Goodyear Company against which the workers
 revolted. 
Vigilantes Crushed
The militancy and solidarity of the Goodyear strikers marked the
 high point in the class struggle for 1936 and in some respects for
 the entire recent period in American labor history. Before the
 Goodyear men were assured of support even from their own local and
 international union, they closed down the Goodyear plant and
 militantly and successfully defied an injunction. Immediately
 thereafter the workers in the Firestone and Goodrich plants and in
 most of the other industries in Akron as well as the Project Workers
 Unions were mobilized. They were set to pour out of the plants en
 masse and institute a general strike at any attempt by any agency
 to break the Goodyear picket line by force. When in one of the last
 weeks of the strike, the company inspired the organization of a
 vigilante organization on a large scale and publicly appealed for
 violence against the strikers’ and their leaders, six thousand
 strikers gathered on the picket line openly armed with clubs and
 other weapons and challenged the vigilantes to do their worst. After
 all their loud talk, the so-called “forces of law and order”
 decided that their aim was simply to rally public opinion for an
 early settlement of the strike. The strikers maintained their ranks
 and their spirit to the very end. Whatever was gained, in the strike,
 and that was considerable, was gained because of this. 
Role of C.I.O.
The role of Lewis’s Committee for Industrial Organization in
 the Akron strike, as in other situations in this period, was not a
 simple one and no simple and completely final estimate of it is
 possible. There is, on the one hand, no question that the C.I.O. made
 contributions to the strike. The moral influence of its support
 counted for a good deal. The trained organizers sent into Akron by
 the Committee had an important share in building up the excellent
 strike organization. The fact of C.I.O. endorsement doubtless helped
 in getting financial support from union bodies throughout the
 country, though that given by the C.I.O. and the unions affiliated
 with it was utterly insignificant.
There is, however, much to be said on the other side. The C.I.O.
 came out in support of the strike only after the workers had shut
 down the plant. It made no effort, although repeatedly urged to do so
 by militant strikers, to extend the strike to Goodyear plants in
 other cities, an elementary step. By speech and action C.I.O.
 representatives sought to tone down rather than capitalize to the
 utmost upon the militancy of the Akron workers. They agreed to permit
 tires to be moved out of the plant though the strikers were against
 it and there is every reason to believe that railroad men would not
 have moved any freight cars if a picket line had been maintained
 across the tracks. 
An Agency for Roosevelt
That the C.I.O. is an agency for rallying Roosevelt support from
 among the unions and the workers generally has been openly
 demonstrated since the close of the Akron strike with the
 organization by Lewis, Hillman, Berry etc., of the Non-Partisan Labor
 Committee. The Akron strike furnished an illustration of the
 equivocal role to which this leads in strike situations, It is
 generally understood that the “influence” of Lewis and
 other trade unionists with Roosevelt had an important bearing on
 keeping the militia out of Akron – in an election year in a key
 state. But this means, for one thing, that in “gratitude”
 votes are to be corralled for Roosevelt and for another thing that
 the strikers must be restrained so that the politicians may plausibly
 contend that there is really no need for calling out the militia.
 Obviously, too, it is fantastic to suppose that labor leaders who
 base themselves upon Roosevelt can possibly push employers in the
 basic industries to a settlement that costs them anything. And this
 point is of crucial importance in considering the strike settlements
 which the C.I.O. will support or be “forced” to make in
 situations like Akron.
The McGrady Arbitration
Now the C.I.O. was prepared to accept the McGrady arbitration
 proposed at the beginning of the strike. The effect of accepting it
 would unquestionably have been a betrayal of the strike. The role of-
 the C.I.O. representatives in the March 14 “settlement”
 which was rejected is not wholly clear. That is not the case with
 regard to the March 21 terms, the acceptance of which brought the
 strike to an end.
Admittedly these terms were an improvement on those of the
 previous week. Admittedly also they did not offer the strikers even
 that minimum (of assurance, for example, that Goodyear would no
 longer finance the company union, nor recognize its representatives)
 which they had laid down in a compromise proposal, from which already
 certain important demands had been eliminated, the previous week. It
 is also a matter of public record that the C.I.O. representatives
 suddenly launched the most vigorous, even feverish, public activity
 in order to get the strikers to vote for the acceptance of these
 terms and so wind up the strike. If the C.I.O. opposed acceptance of
 the March 14 terms, it has to explain what induced it to make such
 frantic efforts to put over only slightly improved terms a week
 later. There is not the slightest indication of any important change
 during that interval either in the general objective situation or in
 the temper of the strikers. In the effort to put over the March 21
 terms the C.I.O. representatives who had themselves been the object
 of C. Nelson Sparks’s “red scare” campaign during
 the week put on a “red scare” against the Workers Party,
 Communist Party, “radicals” generally and the present
 writer by name, stooping lower than A.F. of L. reactionaries have
 ever gone in similar situations in which I have been involved by
 saying to reporters that I must be acting for a strike-breaking
 agency which just wanted the strike prolonged so as to make money by
 cracking workers’ heads. It was in such an atmosphere of
 hysteria that the strikers voted to accept the March 21 terms and
 ended the strike, after the more militant elements among them had
 criticized the terms and indicated their preference for continuing
 the fight, but stated their readiness to accept loyally whatever
 decision might be taken by the majority.
Now in the first place any child can see that the terrific effort
 that was required, the barrage that had to be laid down in public and
 private, to put the settlement over disposes completely of the
 argument that either the general run of strikers or the more
 conscious, militant elements were tired or discouraged or for
 whatever reason wanted to get back to work on pretty much any
 terms. 
How the Agreement Carried
Secondly, it disposes of the argument that the terms themselves
 were so clear and so desirable from the strikers’ point of view
 that any criticism or opposition could spring only from dense
 ignorance or actual treason to the union. The Rubber Workers
 officials and the C.I.O. were able to put them over only by taking a
 vote in an atmosphere of hysteria and without giving the strikers a
 minute for real study of the terms. Two large sheets of mimeographed
 material of a very complicated nature were handed them as they came
 to the meeting where the vote had to be taken, and this in spite of
 the fact that the strikers had been told two days before that they
 would be given several days to study the proposals.
One argument that has been presented by defenders of the C.I.O.
 role is that funds were low, money for feeding strikers was running
 out and the strikers were afraid to go on under these circumstances.
 One unwillingly admits the audacity of the cynicism that is implied
 here. It is generally agreed that the C.I.O. with some of the
 mightiest unions in the country attached to it gave a paltry few
 thousand dollars to the strike fund. Let us restrain any indignation
 which the situation might occasion, and simply observe that no group
 which thinks that the employers in the basic industries in this
 country can be licked on the basis of putting a few thousand dollars
 into a strike against Goodyear Tire and Rubber involving fifteen
 thousand workers can expect to be taken seriously. 
Timidity of Local Leaders
Still another argument used by the defenders of the C.I.O. role is
 that the local and national officials of the Rubber Workers Union
 were weak and timid, did not want a vigorous and large-scale
 struggle, would not ask for money which had virtually been put at
 their disposal. If they had only followed the wishes and the lead of
 the C.I.O. much more might have been won. It taxes our credulity to
 pretty near the breaking point to believe this. An organization with
 prestige and money offers a victory and a union to a group of new and
 ambitious union leaders on a silver platter, and the latter decline
 the gift!
But let us assume there is some basis for the argument, then what
 follows? That these weak-kneed leaders and their course must be
 backed up by the kind of red-baiting campaign Germer of the C.I.O.
 along with Burns of the Rubber Workers launched in the closing hours
 of the strike? That the “heat” must be turned on as was
 done, on the militants among the strikers to force them against their
 will to accept this situation? Obviously, if the job of organizing
 the basic industries is to be taken seriously, then in such a crisis
 a (supposedly) genuine and competent leadership must find means of
 rallying the masses as against a false and incompetent leadership. We
 may surmise that John L. Lewis who still maintains arbitrary
 provisional presidencies under his own direct control in most of the
 soft coal districts of the U.M.W. is not likely to see eye to eye
 with the rank and file or insurgents as against officials in such
 situations. But that is another reason for concluding that he cannot
 be relied upon to see the job of organization in the basic industries
 through.
There is but one logical conclusion. Whether in so many words or
 not, Lewis’s real master, i.e., Roosevelt and the interests and
 forces which he represents made it clear: “This thing has gone
 far enough. Goodyear is giving all it will give without a regular
 fight. That we will not stand for. We will not hold back the militia
 any longer. Wind it up at any cost.” And when it was wound up
 the rubber companies, Goodyear included, had the 36- to 40-hour week
 although only a month before a U.S. Department of Labor Committee had
 stated flatly that there was no excuse for the abandonment of the
 30-hour week. Furthermore, the companies laid the basis for recouping
 any losses and fattening profits by an increase in the price of their
 product! 
Parties in the Strike
Finally a word about the role of political parties and groups. The
 local S.P. in Akron is small and attempted no distinctive role. The
 S.P. leaders in Akron were attached to the C.I.O. and played no
 independent part.
The Stalinists had some influence on some of the militant rank and
 filers. When the “red-baiting” started in the closing
 hours of the strike, the Stalinist representatives took to crawling
 on their bellies before the union bureaucrats in the abject manner
 which has become so familiar by now and so easy for them. They
 declared uncritically for the settlement terms before seeing them and
 laid any opposition that was being voiced at the door of “crazy
 Trotskyists.” This, despite the fact that one who reads between
 the lines of the Daily Worker articles following the strike,
 gets even there a confirmation of every criticism we have made in
 this article. In exchange the C.P. received an “apology”
 from Vice President Burns of the Rubber Workers Union for having
 included them among the critics of his course. To date they seem not
 yet to have gotten a similar public vote of confidence from John L.
 Lewis or even from Adolph Germer but perhaps these will also be
 obtained eventually – for a price!
The Workers Party group in Akron has for two years been in close
 touch with the militants among the rubber workers. Through them they
 played a highly creditable part in the strike in line with the
 policies sketched in this article. The Akron strike, like all the
 recent strike struggles, demonstrated the key position of a group of
 progressives and militants including conscious revolutionary
 elements. The better organization of these elements is a crying need.
To summarize: Militants must make every use that can be made of
 the C.I.O. They rightly support any specific correct measure for
 which the C.I.O. may stand, for example industrial as against craft
 unionism. At no time can they simply uncritically identify themselves
 with the C.I.O. or foster the illusion that the C.I.O. as such can be
 trusted to carry through the terrific struggles which we are bound to
 see in the basic industries.
The solidarity and militancy displayed by the Goodyear strikers
 and their fellow-workers in Akron achieved substantial results. They
 tied up the great Goodyear plants. They smashed an injunction. They
 made a farce out of the vigilante movement. They forced Goodyear to
 negotiate with a union committee. They won some concessions in the
 settlement. They laid the foundation of a union, having proved to
 themselves that they could stick together and fight. They are
 carrying their struggle forward now in the plants – well aware
 that the fight has not ended but has just begun in real earnest.
 



President Roosevelt put on another good show when he made his annual address to Congress last week in person at nine o’clock in the evening. No president had ever addressed Congress at that hour in the entire peacetime history of the nation. It took a little parliamentary maneuvering to arrange it and the Republican politicians would have liked to chew our dear President’s ear off for thinking up this bright publicity stunt, for nine o’clock in the evening is a swell spot for a radio broadcast and one was arranged which took in every station in the good old U.S. and quite a few in some of the more benighted lands outside our borders
Under the circumstances we shall not be far wrong, and we shall also for once be in accord with everyone else in the country including the newspapers and the Republican party, if we assert that F.D.R. Was addressing the American people and not Congress and was firing the opening gun in the Presidential election campaign. This only makes it more important of course that the workers should look beneath the lovely, liberal surface of the President’s speech and behind his smiling face and analyze what he was really putting across.
 
A Cheerful Picture
The content of the speech was at many points as clever as the time and manner of its delivery. Not least the opening touch. In 1933 when I came into office, said Roosevelt, everything here in the U.S. was in a mess while abroad everything was quite calm and there was general hope that an era of peaceful settlement of disputes had dawned. Today everything is bright and smiling in the good old U.S. and look what a mess things are in elsewhere, what with war,armament building, etc. Fundamentally that picture holds good neither for 1933 nor for 1936, but on the surface it seems plausible and plenty of people will be fooled by it – enough in all probability to reelect F.D. next fall.
Nearly half, and this the first half of the speech, was devoted to Mr. Roosevelt’s views on the world situation and the relation of the U.S. toward it. This is in itself significant. In the same breath almost he says that this country is neutral, that it stands apart from embroilment in the quarrels of other nations and he must also say that “the people of the Americas must take cognizance of ... a situation which has in it many of the elements that lead to the tragedy of a general war.” In other words, Roosevelt gives warning that war is coming, that we will not and cannot stand aloof, we shall be embroiled.
 
Creating War Psychology
The President in all this first section of his speech tried to create a psychology which will prepare the American masses to take part in the next war and in the meantime permit American capitalists through his administration to continue their huge war preparations without interference. How is this done?
In the first place, he builds up the picture of the U.S. as a righteous, noble, peace-loving, irreproachable nation. We have “democracy,” not autocracy. We want to reduce armaments (sliding over the fact that we are increasing them) while others are building armaments. If a fight breaks out anywhere, we virtuously stay out of it and hope that this good example will persuade others to stop fighting. We as the big nation in the western hemisphere follow the policy of “the good neighbor” and just see the result compared to the frightful mess in Europe, Asia and Africa. Never “in four and a half centuries” has there existed “a greater spirit of mutual understanding, of common helpfulness, and of devotion to the ideals of self-government than exists today in the twenty-one American republics and their neighbor, the Dominion of Canada ... There is neither war, nor rumor of war, nor desire for war.”
 
False Pictures
The picture, again, is false to the core. It is only a few months since there was actual war in the Chaco. American capitalism is so completely dominant in the economic sense over both northern and southern continents, European nations so utterly unable to challenge it, that it can masquerade as the benevolent good rich neighbor in the same way as some individual steel, coal or textile magnate plays“the good neighbor” to his wage-slaves at the foot of the hill. Indirectly, but it may well be intentionally, Mr. Roosevelt when he draws his picture of the twenty-two “democratic” nations of the two Americas, arms all linked together and dancing the dance of brotherliness, is telling other nations that twenty-one of them are essentially satellites of the U.S., that the U.S. is not going to tolerate any other suitors, and that if any nation from the more barbaric continents steps on Uncle Sam’s toes it may have to fight the other American nations too.
But the picture of noble, peaceful Uncle Sam and his neighbors, as Mr. Roosevelt paints it, is plausible and touching and subtly insinuates into many minds the idea that if ever such a country as this should be involved in a war, it would be“purely defensive” or unselfishly on behalf of some great ideal – perhaps the missionary ideal of carrying to other lands the blessings of American peace and neighborliness. And of course when such a country now drills troops, builds military planes and war vessels, it is for the same noble, irreproachable ends! Only some nasty-minded Bolshevik could think otherwise.
 
The Certainty of War
Once again we note the tenseness of international relations today, the certainty of war and of our involvement in it, involuntarily coming to the surface. In the very act of picturing the peace-loving U.S. Roosevelt conjures up the enemy whom we are to fight in the approaching war.
“The temper and the purposes of the rulers of many of the great populations in Europe and in Asia have not pointed the way either to peace or to goodwill among men.”
The “twin spirits of autocracy and aggression” rule these nations. Roosevelt is not satisfied to charge the rulers of these autocratic and aggressive nations (obviously Japan, Germany, Italy, etc. are intended) with crimes. More openly than is customary in this stage of war preparation he tries [to] prepare the American masses to hate and therefore to fight the peoples of other lands.
“It is idle,” he says,“to preach that the masses of the people who constitute those nations which are dominated by the twin spirits of autocracy and aggression are out of sympathy with their rulers ... They follow blindly and fervently the lead of those who seek autocratic power.”
After more of this kind, he becomes positively truculent, challenging these wicked nations to knock the chip off his shoulder: “I recognize that these words which I have chosen with deliberation will not prove popular in any nation that chooses to fit this shoe to its foot” – the implication, if they don’t like it, to hell with them.
Let American workers, farmers and intellectuals make no mistake about it. Primarily, Roosevelt’s speech was an expression of American imperialism flinging defiance at its foes, seeking to engender a war spirit in the American masses.
 
“Good” and “Bad” Capitalist Powers
The Roosevelt speech gave support to the two rationalizations by means of which the imperialists – and, it cannot too often be pointed out, the Stalinist and social democratic misleaders of the working class – made use in duping the masses into participation in imperialist war. One is the idea to which we have already alluded, namely, that there are two kinds of big nations : the good, non-aggressive, “democratic” ones and the bad, aggressive, autocratic, Fascist ones. The fact that all alike are capitalist-imperialist nations, engaged in daily deathly competition with each other, which some day shifts into open, military conflict, this is pushed into the background. So is the fact that in the Fascist countries the masses are told that the “democratic” countries are pious hypocrites who have plundered and slugged their neighbors and now won’t let them get up and rehabilitate themselves. Thus as in 1914 the masses are to be duped, hypnotized by looking at an illusion so that they don’t realize the truth until they perish in agony in No Man’s Land.
And the other fairy tale is that of the small nations who “if left to themselves, would be content with their boundaries” and whose rulers “deep in their hearts follow these peaceful and reasonable aspirations of their peoples.” Poor little Belgium, noble, democratic King Albert, all over again!
After Roosevelt has thus foretold war, aroused the war psychology and indicated at whom the guns we are making are pointed (mainly Japan, of course) it is not hard to discern the real meaning of our “neutrality” policy over which pacifists, including socialists and Stalinists, wax so enthusiastic. There is no “moral” consistency about it certainly, for it proposes to withhold munitions equally from the “good” neighbors and the “bad” in case they are involved in war and to keep up “normal” trade if possible with both in other forms of merchandise which might be used for war purposes. For the present, while the preliminary skirmishes take place, we can hold aloof under this “neutrality” policy, go about our business of consolidating our economic power especially on the American continents, building our naval and military machine, letting other countries deplete their resources and energies. Even after the outbreak of large-scale conflict the U.S. may still for a time pursue the same superficially virtuous course, as in 1914–17, but in due time, unless the American workers under the leadership of the revolutionary internationalist party decree otherwise, when it has exhausted possibilities of gain from a “peaceful” policy will plunge again into war.
It is when we thus see clearly that the first half of Roosevelt’s speech for American capitalist imperialists, a pledge that the administration will look tirelessly after the national (capitalist) ‘defences,’ that we can see through the sham and demagogy of the last half which has been ecstatically hailed by liberal and all good Democrats as a fighting speech against autocratic and reactionary capitalism.
 
New Deal Served Capitalism
The New Deal, as Roosevelt points out in this very speech, holding it to be to his credit, saved capitalism and the capitalists. Business is on the upgrade. Stock quotations and profits are mounting. Relief funds are being drastically cut. Strikes were kept in bounds by Hugh Johnson and his successors. The basic industries are still unorganized. There are eleven million or more unemployed. But the capitalists are feeling chesty, now that profits are being made again temporarily. They want to takeaway from the workers even those concessions, mainly illusory, which Roosevelt realized had to be given to save the system. So there is to be a sham battle to divert the masses’ attention from the truth. Some Republican hack will run against Roosevelt, champion of the forgotten man.
Unwittingly he made it clear – and this is for us the most important point in the second half of the speech – that regardless of who is elected President, which old party is in power, the old age of individualism, of laissez faire is gone. Government will more and more throw off any pretense of being merely an agency to keep peace between individuals in the land or some higher essence “above the battle” of economic forces. More and more openly the economic system will function directly through government agencies. Government will “interfere” in every phase of life, including the labor movement.
“Our resplendent economic autocracy,” orates Mr. Roosevelt, “does not want to return to that individualism of which they prate ... They realize that in thirty-four months we have built up new instruments of public power.”
Of course, says Mr. Roosevelt, in my hands, “in the hands of a people’s government this power is wholesome and proper.” But Mr. Roosevelt used it to save these very capitalists whom he pretends to fight. “The new instruments, of public power” designed to save capitalism, point inexorably to – Fascism.
From that and from the war to which Mr. Roosevelt also pointed, the toiling masses of this and of all lands cannot be saved by pacifism or reform, but only by taking power into their own hands by revolutionary action, smashing the capitalist state and building a workers’ state and an ordered economic life.
 



Developments are taking place in the needle trades unions which are in themselves important and are also in considerable measure typical of what is taking place or will in industry generally.
When we seek to understand trends in the union movement, we have first of all to examine industrial conditions and in particular the developments in the industry in which a given union operates. What, then, is taking place in the garment industry today? For reasons which space does not permit us to go into, but among which the National Recovery Act was not the only or even the most important one, the garment industry experienced a decided upturn in 1933–4. Cut-throat competition had in the closing days of the Hoover era resulted in such chaos that even the employers, at least important sections of them, were prepared to accept government “regulation” and to deal with unions in return for an opportunity to put prices up and maintain them at some level. Something like “prosperity” obtained for a couple of years.
 
The Changing Situation
Gradually, however, the scene has been shifting. In the general economy of the country the basis for genuine and lasting prosperity has not been laid. There is a huge army of unemployed. The wage level remains far below that of 1929. The market remains a restricted one for every industry. The upturn which has occurred, however, causes employers to be impatient of the slight restraints to which they were subjected in the early days of the Roosevelt administration. The N.R.A. is declared unconstitutional. Even in the garment industry where the nightmare of 1930–2 is not yet entirely forgotten and N.R.A. conditions are in considerable measure “voluntarily” maintained, competition becomes ever more severe.
The urge to break all bonds – move “out of town” in order to escape union wage rates, the policy of playing off an unlimited number of shoestring contractors against each other, etc. – becomes ever stronger. For the most part it does not yet take the form of direct and open cutting of wage rates or of a fight against the unions, but of resistance against any further concessions as to wages, hours and conditions and a steady pressure on union representatives in the shops to relax standards while formally the contract is maintained. The time when the employers will resort to the more extreme methods is probably not far distant, however.
 
Union Gains
The unions in the garment industry made huge gains in 1933–4.They were instrumental in lowering hours and raising wages from the depression level. The internal controversies which had rent the unions subsided, as they have a habit of doing in a period of growth and success. Even the Old Guard and the top bureaucracy were able to put up a plausible appearance of efficiency and progressivism. Were they not making demands on the employers and getting results? Witness, in another industry, John L. Lewis even before he openly launched his crusade for industrial unionism. (We are not speaking of the essential role played by Hillman, Dubinsky, et al. under the New Deal on which the New Militant has frequently stated its position.)
There was an immense amount of organizing, administrative and educational work to be done and the officials turned to young workers and intellectuals, Socialist party members, Lovestonites in the needle trades, etc. to assist; and the fact that these more politicalized workers could give militant talks to the workers and a militant collaboration to the union was an additional recommendation in the eyes of the officials. We were supposed to behaving a “revolution” under Roosevelt in 1933. On their part militants and progressives who did not hold a clear-cut and complete Marxist position (in more than name) found it fairly easy to keep their consciences quiet while not differentiating themselves from the top bureaucrats. There were workers to be enrolled, strikes to he organized. One could agitate for a labor party. Discussion over deeper implications of union policy would have to wait. Figures such as Zimmerman of Local 22, I.L.G.W.U. and others less prominent, became the administration in some of the local unions.
 
Test Yet to Come
We have pointed out that in the garment industry this is a transition period. The real test of the unions in the industry, and of the various elements in the unions has therefore not yet come. It will, when the employers go still further with abrogating the contract, in fact even if not in name, and presently demand substantial “concessions” in the contract itself and seek to wipe out the unions if they offer real opposition. Such a testing period these unions passed through after the war and post-war expansion, with what disastrous results for the workers is too well known. In such a period a well-organized progressive or left wing with a nucleus of revolutionary Marxists under the guidance and discipline of a revolutionary party, is needed.
Such a progressive movement does not exist in the needle trades today. We are as a matter of fact witnessing the disintegration of the old left wing forces and only the early beginnings of a new genuine left wing adapted to the needs of the coming period. The Stalinists and those under their influence are no longer a left-wing force, but rather an extremely conservative one. In not a few instances in the needle trades unions they ally themselves openly with the S.P. old guardists or even more reactionary elements. It is not necessary to dwell on the details. The dissipation of the left movement in the unions as a result of the insane policies pursued by the Stalinists over a period of years is, however, a factor that cannot be too strongly emphasized. The fact that it is possible for the Stalinists still to masquerade as “the real revolutionists” makes the situation more difficult. They will not fully expose themselves until the crisis in the industry and the unions is much further advanced than it is today.
 
A Hot-House Plant
The same holds true of the Lovestoneites, for example. The so-called progressive movement under their leadership by no means constitutes a dependable left-wing fighting force. It is a hot-house plant fostered by the union administration. It is not a rank and file movement born out of and hardened by the struggle over issues. For the present the Lovestoneite union officials can still obscure and evade the issues. But when the conditions in the trade worsen and employers demand real and open concessions from the unions, and the Hillmans and Dubinskys are prepared as ever to help the employers “save the industry,” then they will be unable to equivocate successfully, to work hand in glove with the top bureaucrats and at the same time pose as “progressives” and “Bolsheviks.” And when we observe that already Lovestoneite officials such as Zimmerman find it necessary to go out of their way to seek to combat the still weak forces of the Workers Party in the needle trades, we get an inkling of the course they will then take.
The fact that this is such a transition period as we have sketched accounts for the utterly confused picture presented by the various“groups” and “clubs” in the needle trades unions and the maneuvers in which they are engaging. It largely accounts also for the extent to which the members in these unions are impressed by the Stalinist proposals for unifying groups, even though this often takes the form of unification with out-and-out right-wing machine “clubs” and even on occasion the proposal that “there ought to be no groups in the union at all” which in practice always means that there be no organized force opposed to the union “machine!” The members sense that something is wrong; they feel vaguely that danger threatens. But the issues are not yet sharply defined. It must be, they feel, that there are “too many groups”; let us have“unity.”
No one can lay down a set of simple rules which can be applied in every specific case in this confused situation. There are, however, a few guiding ideas for the activity of the genuine progressives in this period.
 
Guiding Ideas for Progressives

It must be frankly recognized that this is a transition period. Confusion, inability to make rapid headway, and so on, must not induce discouragement or impatience.
 
The desire of the workers for unity cannot of course be met with a negative, head-on attack. Progressives themselves must, however, not fall into the notion that the real left wing is going to be built by an attempt to fuse heterogeneous elements on any or no program. So far as possible they must wean the workers away from illusions and sentimentality about “unity in the abstract.
 
As a general thing unity with Stalinist “rank and file” groups is not a progressive step. What is progressive is to expose the role the Stalinists are playing – their capitulation to the S.P. old guard, the union right wingers, their reactionary proposals of “no groups in the union”, etc. United action for specific ends to test out the genuineness of unity proposals may be resorted to. If in a given local union merger with such a group is the only way to break up the old situation and toward developing a genuine left wing, progressives must take the step in awareness of its meaning, must not regard merger as the end, as good in itself, and they must so far as possible disabuse the membership of illusions.
 
Finally, a genuine left-progressive movement is built upon issues. The issues will emerge ever more sharply. Then the various tendencies and elements in the unions will appear in their true colors. Since a new left wing must be built on the basis of a program, those advanced workers who constitute the nucleus of that left wing must already begin to differentiate themselves in the eyes of the members from others, to become the exponents of issues as they arise, to show themselves as militant and responsible leaders in the shops, so that as the conflict deepens the members may know to whom to turn.

 



THE WORKERS Party of the US did not emerge suddenly from nowhere. It was born of the merger of the Communist League of America and the American Workers Party, itself the outgrowth of the Conference for Progressive Labor Action. Each organization took pride in its past. It did not disown that past in coming into the merger. Rather did each organization by its participation in the merger bear witness to its appreciation of the history of the other.
Before launching on the main theme of this article, two observations on the significance of the merger may be made. In the first place, a number have asked the question, Why is it that precisely the group which has been most concerned about theory, and on the other hand, the group which has been most “activist” have got together? Without entering now into a discussion as to the exactness of the description here employed, it may be pointed out that at one point in the evolution of the movement, the elaboration of theory may be the prime need, and at another the application of theory in action. However, there cannot be, and never is, a divorce between sound theory and sound practise. A group which devotes itself to the discussion of theory in the Marxian sense does not do it for the sake of agreeable mental exercize, as an alternative perhaps to working cross-word puzzles. It is concerned with theory because it needs to know how to act and will not act on a merely opportunistic basis. Elaboration of theory leads, therefore, to practical work in the labor scene. On the other hand, a group which seeks to act in a responsible and not an adventurist spirit in the revolutionary movement, which is concerned about ultimate and not merely about immediate aims, may indeed scorn Talmudic theologizing and debates which lead simply to more debates; but it cannot be indifferent to theory. It can render a service which the trade union bureaucrats, for example, cannot render, not merely because its members may individually be more honest or self-sacrificing, but chiefly because it has a clear conception of the economic and political system, the role of the working class, etc., and therefore can thread its way through the complex maze of events. That is to say, it must fall back on theory. If it does not find theoretical questions answered by any existing political party it must hammer out theory for itself and build a new party. Thus the fusion of the CLA and the AWP was not accidental. Moreover, the fusion will bear fruit which neither group by itself could have produced.
Another question which has been raised is, Why is it that the most “internationalist” and the most “nationalist” group got together? The first comment on that question is naturally that one cannot believe everything he reads in the papers, especially in the Daily Worker. Seriously, the point of the revolutionary internationalism of the CLA has been that it is a fatal error to make the laying of the foundations of the socialist economy in the Soviet Union and the so-called “defense of the Soviet Union” the almost exclusive concern of the revolutionary movement; that the defense of the Soviet Union itself today depends upon the growth and victory of revolutionary parties in capitalist countries and that energy must be concentrated on that task. When the AWP has insisted that the revolutionary movement must be built in the United States it has done this, not with any notion that a revolutionary movement could be national in character, but precisely because it was so deeply concerned that the working class of the United States should do its part in the world revolutionary movement. It inveighed sometimes against sentimentality and romanticism about labor internationalism because it was so deeply concerned about building the international revolutionary movement realistically and so avoiding a repetition of the tragic debacle which overtook the movement in 1914 with the outbreak of the war and again in 1932 under the onslaught of Fascism in Germany and elsewhere. Again, therefore, the merger is the correct and natural outcome of the history of the two groups.
The merger also signifies that we are not slaves to the past. Our faces are set to the future. We go to meet the test of action.
Objective conditions vary in different countries; the working class is at different stages in its evolution. Consequently the crucial issue before the revolutionary party is not the same in different countries or at different periods. The trade union issue is the master issue in the United States today. By the manner in which it meets that issue the Workers party will justify or stultify itself in the initial period of its existence.
Reactionary employer interests and the “liberal” Roosevelt administration are well aware of the fact that it is over the right of workers to organize and bargain collectively, in the organizing campaigns and strike struggles of the past two years, that capitalism and the working class are locking horns today in the US. By might and main, by direct and brutal or indirect and subtle means, they seek to prevent organization, to build company unions, to postpone the issue over Section 7a of NRA to prevent strikes, to break them, and where unions are formed to confuse the membership and corrupt the leaders so that the unions may not become or remain genuine instruments of struggle.
Without in most cases thinking the problem through, with wrong or incomplete theory perhaps, if they have any at all, the masses of the workers also sense the significance of the conflict. And this includes not a few white-collar, professional and technical workers, who until recently hardly thought of themselves as “workers” at all. They are fighting for bread and butter of course. What else should starving men and women fight for? But they sense the need for power in order to get bread; they know that power comes from organization; they fight magnificently and starve in order to get recognition of their union. In the room in which Okey Odell, the Ohio onion strike leader, lay recovering from his wounds last August, surrounded by armed union members determined to fight it out with any vigilantes who might try to seize him again, a special guard stood before the federal union charter these onion workers had received from the AF of L pledged to die before they would permit it to be taken away!
In certain more sophisticated quarters of the labor movement, there are those who do not see what is plain to the capitalists and politicians on the one hand and the working masses on the other. The avowed social democrats and the unavowed ones, including, some of those who regard themselves as devotees of the “American approach”, think of course that the class struggle is fought primarily and mainly at the polls. One of them recently remarked that Upton Sinclair in his EPIC campaign for governor of California had carried the class struggle in that state to the highest point it had ever reached, and did not even mention the marine workers’ strike that raged up and down the Pacific coast last summer, and the general strike in the San Francisco area! No, not Upton on his soap-box but Tom Mooney in jail is still the symbol of the class struggle in California.
At the other extreme are cloctrinaries and Leftists to whom the unions, especially those in the AF of L, are company unions, Fascist unions, “bulwarks of capitalism”, etc. Until recently at least the CP held to this estimate and proceeded to do its utmost to divide the working class by building its own sectarian, paper “industrial” unions: Others holding this estimate stand in holy aloofness from the present struggles of the workers and their ill-advised attempts to organize, perhaps condescending to lift up their voices to preach the one true doctrine to deaf ears. Those with syndicalist leanings may participate actively and courageously in strike struggles, but they will have nothing to do with the unions which conduct or grow out of these strikes. Some day, they feel blissfully certain, objective conditions will compel the workers to rise spontaneously, to turn their backs suddenly upon the past and its misguided struggles, and to put over the revolution.
To reject these attitudes does not mean that we accept the present leadership of the AF of L, its structure, its policies, its attitude toward employers and government. For the Marxist that is even more impossible than it was at an earlier period. The unions cannot in the period of capitalist decline fulfill the functions, achieve the gains for the workers, that were possible when capitalism was still able to give substantial concessions at least to large sections of the population. The class-collaboration philosophy becomes more dangerous as the capitalist crisis deepens, will prove fatal if it prevails as that crisis reaches its climax.
The struggle of the unions against the employing class and the government is genuine and has a progressive character, therefore, only in the degree that within the unions the struggle against the bureaucracy and its policies goes on. This intra-union struggle can be effectively waged by the rank and file, the progressive and Left elements, only if they are organized. Who shall lead and inspire in this struggle and the organization for it, if not the politically developed, the theoretically trained workers? In other words, the revolutionary party? Correctly, therefore, the Workers Party of the US places in the forefront of its Program of Action for the next six months the organization of the Left-progressive wing in the unions.
Neither the socialist party as a whole nor any section of it worth mentioning has a clear conception of the crucial nature of this task. In effect, therefore, they all strengthen the hands of the trade union bureaucrats and, so far as they have influence, commit the movement to a non-militant and reformist attitude. The Right wing has of course always served the union officialdom in exchange for votes and jobs as “labor lawyers”, etc. At the Detroit convention they fought bitterly against even a mild censure of the AF of L leaders. Today they are openly seeking an alliance with the unions under their present leadership in a Labor party – to the Right of where the SP has supposedly stood.
Meanwhile the adolescent and unrealistic character of the leadership of the various shades of “Militants” is clearly illustrated by the fact that they engage in most violent shadow-boxing with the Right wing over the “united front” with the CP (or that poor relation of the CP, Lovestone, of whom the RPC is in turn a poor relation) and over what they are going to do, or think they are going to do, when war or the revolution comes – but back down before the Right wing on the trade union issue, the test of the revolutionary realist today. The Militants do not concentrate on building the Left-progressive wing in the unions. They concentrate on getting posts in the unions which, in the absence of a Left-progressive wing under the leadership of revolutionary forces, can only result in the Militants becoming assimilated to the trade union bureaucracy, as has happened often enough in previous years. It is inconceivable that the workers, the miners, e.g., or the steel workers, who know the union situation from the inside and whose very livelihood in many instances depends literally upon the outcome of the struggle against the union bureaucracy, can long follow such leadership, can postpone joining the Workers party and thus assisting most effectively in building the Left wing in the unions.
The unions are instruments of struggle, agencies of collective bargaining, etc. within the capitalist system. By themselves, they are not revolutionary instruments. In fact, left to themselves they become “pure and simple”, degenerate into rackets, fail even as collective bargaining agencies. What transformations, revolutionary changes, new formations, may occur in the economic organizations, and the economic struggle, as on the one hand the economic crisis deepen? and on the other hand the revolutionary party gains the confidence and leadership of the masses, is subject matter for analysis in future issues of this magazine. Even among those who may differ on these matters, there can be agreement – there must be if disaster is not to overcome the American working class-that today: in the US the main sector of the class struggle is the movement of workers of all categories into unions, the fight for recognition of the right to organize, the strike struggles, the fights against the trade union bureaucrats. In the shops, mines, stores, offices; in union halls; on the picket lines; on the streets of Toledo, Minneapolis, Milwaukee, San Francisco, the steel and textile and automobile and mining towns, that struggle rages and will rage in the months ahead. Build the unions; organize the workers; develop their militancy: broaden, deepen, intensify, politicalize the day-today struggles; fight the bureaucrats; build the Left-progressive wing – this is the program of revolutionists today, the program of the Workers party.
The so-called communist party has clearly demonstrated how such a program should NOT be carried out. Abandoning the conception of party democracy and workers democracy completely, the CP has espoused a mystical, absolutist, utterly un-Marxian conception of a party which can do no wrong, which stands outside and above the working class. (From this to an absolute ruler over the party itself is only a step.) This leads to a fatal lack of faith in, actual contempt for, the working class. It finds expression in the theory of social-Fascism (working class organizations that do not accept our domination are Fascist); in united-front-from-below manoeuvres (these stupid asses will not see through our clever scheme to crush them); in using strong-arm methods to break up the meetings of other labor groups; in “capturing” unions and other mass organizations by political trickery or main force; in manipulating union machinery so as to put party members in office; in calling strikes and telling the workers what the strike is about after they get out on the sidewalk. At this very moment we are seeing another ludicrous and yet tragic illustration of what this attitude leads to. Members of independent building trades unions fostered by the CP are in open revolt against the party which, after years of building separate sectarian, often paper, unions all along the line, has suddenly realized the futility of that course and now proceeds quite as mechanically and dictatorially to try to liquidate every independent union it can lay its hands on, regardless of the circumstances which gave it birth, its mass base or the will of the membership!
The Workers Party will not utter its own doom in advance by using such methods in its trade union work. It will rely upon the correctness of its analysis and program, the persuasiveness of its propaganda, above all upon the activity, devotion and militancy of its members in the unions to win the confidence first of the progressives and then of the broad masses in the unions.
No fact stands out more clearly from a survey of the present scene than the need of a revolutionary party with a sound trade union program. The masses are in motion. They continue to press into the unions. One strike struggle follows upon the heels of the other. Yet for lack of effective organization of the Left-progressive wing, itself the result of the disastrous policies of the CP and SP, many strikes are prevented, no strike has gained results proportionate to the spirit displayed by the workers, the issue of unionization in the traditional anti-union strongholds in the basic industries is still unresolved, the old AF of L machine continues in the saddle. The fact that the workers continue to organize in the AF of L does not mean that they have a naive confidence in the present leadership. On the contrary, textile, steel, automobile, marine workers, to mention but a few instances, know that this leadership cannot be trusted. They are ready to welcome a new leadership which will display vigor and a sense of reality. Wherever the idea of building an organization of Left-progressives has been broached, it has met with an instant response. In fact, the movement is already under way independently in many sections of the country.
No organization except the Workers Party is in a position to take advantage of the opportunity and to give leadership to the movement. The CP is in this field hopelessly discredited and at sea. The SP, apart from all other considerations, is so torn with conflict and confusion that it cannot devote attention to this crying need of the workers. In Toledo and Minneapolis the forces that by merging have constituted the Workers party have already demonstrated their ability and gained the attention of the masses.
Thus with confidence and determination we address ourselves to the task of building the Left-progressive wing in the unions – building the Workers Party of the US – building the new, the Fourth, International!
 



Two kinds of complaints about the New Militant come into the national office. Some comrades write to this effect:
“The New Militant does not carry enough news about strikes and organizing campaigns. There are too few articles analyzing these practical class struggle activities and illustrating effective tactics which can be used in similar situations. We also need articles in simple language presenting the Marxist point of view on the Roosevelt program and contrasting it with our revolutionary solution of the problems confronting the American workers.”
Such comrades go on to say that both in the new unions and in the old, young militant workers are coining to the front who will constitute an important part of the developing revolutionary movement, although they still know very little about Marxist theory. Unless the New Militant contains plenty of material directly tied in with the experiences of these workers and adapted to their stage of development, it cannot be sold and is not read.
Other comrades write:
“The New Militant does not contain enough theoretical material. Many important international developments occur and there is no comment or analysis, sometimes not even a passing reference to them. There is too little news and interpretation of events in the rival parties, no criticism .of the false positions they are taking.”
These comrades point out that the revolutionary party cannot be built simply out of new and as yet unpolitical elements, that we have to win to the W.P. the advanced workers who are already members or under the influence of other parties and that this can be done only if we are constantly demonstrating in our organ the superiority of our party’s theoretical position. They argue likewise that unless we impart a solid education to our own members and give them directives and long range perspectives in their work they cannot carry on their practical work effectively either.
Interestingly enough, similar complaints come from sympathizers of the party. Some of them are interested in the W.P. primarily because they believe that it is based upon a correct Marxian program, because they have been convinced by our analysis of developments in the Soviet Union and in the international revolutionary movement. They look to us to provide them, regularly with full information on these subjects. Other sympathizers have been attracted by the practical effectiveness of the party in great struggles such as have occurred in Toledo and Minneapolis and in the development of imposing mass organizations such ias the National Unemployed League. They desire to get information about these matters and feel that they can “sell” the New Militant to their friends mainly on this basis.
Unlike some complaints, these complaints all have a substantial basis. A propaganda group might conceivably go along with a four page paper, reaching its readers once a week and confining itself to some particular phase of revolutionary theory or activity. A party, which in the nature of the case assumes responsibility for theoretical education of the advanced workers and also for leadership in the daily struggles of the working class, simply cannot begin to meet its obligations with a four-page paper reaching its readers only once a week.
As a matter of fact, we should aim at a daily paper at the earliest possible moment. That in a country as large as the United States and in such a period as this there should be only one general working class daily, and that a Stalinist one, is nothing short of tragic. A daily paper issued by the Workers Party of the U.S., raising aloft the banner of the Fourth International, and presenting a truthful report of national and international events and an analysis of them based upon an uncompromising revolutionary internationalism, would have a national, and in fact, international significance.
The first step toward die {achievement of this goal is to carry out the proposal of the Political Committee to increase the weekly New Militant from four to eight pages by Anti-War Day, August 1. All the various types of readers of the New Militant will thus receive more of the material for which they have been asking. New readers can be enrolled by the hundreds, possibly even thousands. An immense stimulus can be given to all the organization activities of the party itself and of the mass organizations in which it exerts influence.
Funds for the small amount of additional machinery needed in the print shop and to guarantee the steady issuance of the enlarged weekly for a period must be in hand before the change is inaugurated. To proceed in any other way would be to act irresponsibly. (Hence the financial campaign for the eight-page New Militant which has been inaugurated in recent issues and about which the branches of the party liave been informed. Unquestionably the members and friends of the party, the workers who have seen the party in operation in many a struggle, can by united efforts make the realization of this new forward step possible. We call upon the party members and branches to carry out swiftly and enthusiastically the directions which have been sent them. We call upon all our sympathizers and friends to send in their contributions, large or small, without a moment’s delay.
No more appropriate day could be found to carry the banner of revolutionary internationalism a long step forward than Anti-War Day, August 1.
 



(Ed. Note: This is the concluding article of the series of four by comrade Muste.)

IV.
Having pointed out the falseness or inadequacy of some of the means which have been proposed for overthrowing capitalism in the U.S., we must now state positively how the Workers Party believes the job can and must be done.
Fundamentally, as we have already pointed out, the W.P. way is the way of Marx and Lenin. We do not believe that we have a newfangled contraption with a U.S. 1935 patent for achieving the workers’ revolution.
The central position among the forces which must be depended upon to overthrow capitalism belongs to the working class, especially the workers in the basic industries. As the capitalist system declines and presently falls to pieces, presents the masses with growing hunger and insecurity, the threat or actuality of fascism and war, the fight of the workers for direct and simple things, about wages and hours, for the right to exist, necessarily becomes more intense. It has to be fought on a broader front. From a fight in a single-plant, it develops into a fight against a gigantic corporation, against all the corporations in an industry, against industry, the economic system, as a whole. The government, moreover, takes sides more and more openly against the workers, so in order to exist they wage the fight against the government too, that is, the entire governmental system, the State, which supports capitalism. In the course of these struggles the Workers (or Workers, Farmers, Soldiers) Committees or Councils (Soviets) are compelled to take on broader functions. Under the leadership of the revolutionary party, they presently overthrow the capitalist state and become the basic organs of the Workers State.
 
Allies of the Workers
By workers we mean the working class. It includes the miners, transportation, factory workers. It includes also the clerical workers, agricultural workers, many technicians and professionals who are also wage earners. These have to organize in their economic organizations, just as the factory workers. They will more and more engage in the same kind of struggles as the latter.
The workers must have the support of other oppressed and exploited sections of the population – the farmers, small business people, the persecuted Negro race, colonial peoples who also suffer under the yoke of American capitalism. A lot of people hold that the middle class cannot be gotten to support the workers in revolutionary action. We must not make the mistake of underestimating the problem. Farmers, for example, do in certain cases oppose the Unemployed Leagues because if relief rates or wages on public works are kept up, it is harder to get farm labor to work for a pittance. Small business people often line up with Big Business interests. This is true. It is the job of revolutionists to carry on skillful propaganda work among these and similar elements. But this is not an impossible task. These groups also suffer, and ever more intensely, under capitalism. Their leaders are as intelligent as are the workers’ leaders and some at least can be won to the revolutionary position. There have been many cases in the U.S. as well as other countries, where these groups have given substantial support to workers in strike struggles. We do not have to accept it as foreordained that they are going to line up with Fascism. It has been shown in Russia, Germany and other countries that they were willing in the war and post-war crisis to support or at least tolerate revolutionary workers’ leadership. It was only where socialist and communist party leadership had become bankrupt and these middle class elements sensed that the workers’ movement under this leadership had “shot its bolt” and offered no courageous and clear way out, that they rallied behind the fascist banner.
Here in the U.S. there is unquestionably among the masses resentment against restraint and regimentation. What fascism, the triumph of capitalist reaction, means in practice in Europe has been seen by the workers and farmers of this country. It would be absurd to assume that they are now immune to fascist propaganda; but it is certain that the European object lesson has made an impression. The country today is not fascist in psychology. In strikes, organizing campaigns, etc., popular sentiment is with the revolting groups nearly everywhere. (Of course there are exceptions.) The revolutionary Marxian knows better than to get panicky, lose his head completely and insist that the following, real or apparent, of a Long or Coughlin means that fascism is going to sweep the country next week and that only by some tour de force, some colossal exhibition of American salesmanship, some clever building up of a rival personality, can we stem the tide and achieve the workers’ revolution. We face indeed a hard fight; but the outcome is not yet decided.
Since the country as a whole has not passed through a feudal experience, as well as for other reasons, the American masses do not, as has frequently been pointed out, regard themselves as a class apart, they are slow in achieving class consciousness. This tends to make labor organization work more difficult. It keeps workers voting for republican and democratic tickets, etc. But this also means that at any rate large sections of the American working population do not have any feeling of inferiority. They are not habituated to oppression and servility. It is a fresh, very vigorous working class, capable of bold and defiant action, easily fooled as yet but nevertheless rapidly becoming more hard-boiled and convinced that “the whole thing is a racket.” It is, furthermore, a working class which has never suffered a major disaster. It has not lost confidence in itself. All this is to be kept in mind and used by revolutionists working in the American scene.
Nor is it merely that in the case of the American working class there is no feudal tradition to reckon with. The popular concept is that the United States was meant to be different from “the old countries.” It was “a nation conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal” – a nation in which there were not to be rich and poor, oppressors and oppressed, exploiters and exploited: in which not merely a privileged few but all the people should have plenty, security and opportunity for self-expression. This aspiration or “dream” has had a real influence on the thinking and the emotions of the masses of this country. It is not an aspiration which they need to dismiss. It is not only permissible for revolutionists to make use of this factor in American psychology: they would be plain fools if they did not do so.
If, however, we are not to slip into sentimentalism about “the American dream,” which would at best accomplish nothing and at worst serve to fan the fires of nationalism, we must point out how the rising capitalist class developed the concepts and slogans of “liberty, equality, fraternity,” in its own interest: how after luring the workers and farmers to back them in their fight against British merchants by means of such slogans, American merchants promptly turned around and wrote a constitution based upon Hamilton’s idea that “the people is a beast” rather than on conceptions of freedom and equality for the masses, and so on. We must point out that in the pre-industrial era the conception of plenty, security, etc. for large masses was to a great extent an unrealizable dream, that in the Machine-Age the dream can be realized, but only in a socialist economy in which private ownership in the means of production is relegated to the museum of history along with the ox-cart, an economy in which furthermore artificial national boundaries are wiped out and the international brotherhood of labor realized.
The “revolutionary tradition” of American history can also be utilized – not the romantic idea that Americans are inveterate crusaders prepared to shed their blood for ideals; but the fact that the history of the nation is one of constant and severe class-struggle, that the capitalist class did not hesitate to fight for its class interests whenever the situation required as in 1776 and 1861, that the working class today must be prepared to use all means to carry forward the evolutionary process and establish a higher economy and finer culture than capitalism could achieve.
While the growing impoverishment and insecurity under capitalism in its decline, as we have already pointed out, play a decisive role in bringing the masses to the point of revolutionary action, it is also true that the American standard of living has been comparatively high, that the American worker does not usually feel himself a member of “a poor, oppressed class,” and that the appeal to him must be based in a considerable degree on his outraged sense of justice over the things he might so easily have in this highly mechanized economy with its fabulous natural resources, and instead of which he is given a five to fifty dollars a month “security wage!” In other words, those who insist that revolutionary propaganda in this nation must paint the picture of what might be, must show concretely what the machine age could do for the masses if the fetters of capitalism were struck off the Machine, are entirely correct. In this connection, it may be observed that the many varieties of Technocrats are indeed vulnerable in their economics and romantic in their conception of the problem of political power – how we are going to get a chance to put a new economic system into effect – but as engineers pointing to the capacity of our productive mechanism they have made a contribution. And the lesson of the furore created among many sections of the population by their propagandizing of the vision of Plenty must not be lost sight of.
Very complex technical problems are involved in the problem of taking political power and likewise in the job of keeping the machinery of production and distribution going after power has been taken, in a highly industrialized nation. The capitalist story is that “after the revolution” chaos, distress and so on are inevitable because unskilled and inexperienced workers will be running the trains and power stations, making plans for bridges and ships, etc. The story is of course, absurd. It fails to take account of the great competence of the masses of the workers themselves.
Who has constructed this country’s vast productive plant anyway? Furthermore, this capitalist tale makes no mention of the fact that technicians and scientists aie constantly thwarted under capitalism. They are given scanty funds unless immediate profit is in sight from their work. Countless inventions and discoveries go unused because it would not “pay” the private capitalists who own them to put them to use. The revolutionary party will make it clear that it is well aware of the delicate nature of the technical tasks which the workers must carry out, and that so far from standing for inefficiency and anarchy, it is precisely the socialist economy under workers’ control which alone will give full scope to science and will effectively plan for human welfare.
Elsewhere the conception of a Leninist, i.e., a disciplined, revolutionary party (not reformist or not parliamentary) which the Workers Party holds, the role of such a party in the mass organizations today, and in the revolutionary crisis itself, has been set forth.
The Party, standing upon the principles already discussed in this series, must be created of course by the American workers. No one else can do the job for them. The Party must so root itself in and address itself to, the conditions under which the American working class lives that they will feel the Party to be their party – concerned about their problems, able to talk their language, intimately acquainted with their experiences, to be trusted in action, more and more to be looked to for guidance.
We heartily agree, furthermore, with the contention that the Party must know how to popularize its message and even more to dramatize the daily struggles of the workers and the revolutionary struggle as a whole. An emotional loyalty to the revolutionary movement must be developed. A movement which does not care or know how to march and sing and fling its banners to the breeze, is already dead.
This involves the use of symbols. The hold of capitalist, unscientific, nationalistic symbols upon the workers must, however, be broken, not confirmed. The revolutionary movement must, therefore, have its own. They must be such as to bring forward the idea and strengthen the emotion of class – the working class against the capitalist – and consequently the idea of labor internationalism against middle class nationalism. To break the hold of false ideas, is difficult enough at best. We should be foolish Indeed to make the task still more difficult by using symbols which might confuse the workers, which do not clearly and uncompromisingly suggest loyalty to class, oyalty to the world-wide brotherhood of labor, and not to any lesser cause!
The events of each new day, both in the U.S. and abroad, make clear the need in this country of such a revolutionary party as the W.P. More than in any previous period in modern revolutionary history the responsibility for leadership rests upon the American working class and its vanguard. If it is essential that this party have an international outlook and constitute a part of an international revolutionary force, it is equally true that such a party in the U.S., the very stronghold of capitalism and imperialism, will play a mighty role in the freeing of the workers in the Latin American nations, in Europe, throughout the world.
Therefore, for an effective American revolutionary party!
For the Workers Party of the United States, committed with its sister parties and groups to the building of the new revolutionary Fourth International!
 



IN OUR DISCUSSION in the last issue of trade union developments in the United States we drew the following conclusions. The trend of the workers is still, with rare exceptions, into the American Federation of Labor. In the main, therefore, militants and revolutionists must work in the A.F. of L. unions or simply be isolated from the masses. The A.F. of L. leadership will not, however, carry organizing campaigns in the basic industries to effective conclusions. Still less can it be counted on to carry out effectively the large-scale militant strike actions without which no union which is more than a puppet in government hands will be established. Every organizing campaign and strike becomes therefore a battle ground, not merely between the workers and the employers, but heads up in an ever sharpening struggle between the present union leadership and the rising progressive trade union forces.
All of these contentions were illustrated and borne out in a very clearcut, and often dramatic fashion, in the recent Chevrolet General Motors strike in Toledo and other automobile towns. It will be useful to dwell upon certain features of this strike because of the lessons for the future which they present.
In the first place, the strikers were members of an A.F. of L. federal automobile workers’ union. The whole movement was one of A.F. of L. workers. The independent Mechanics Educational Society of America might have become involved if the strike had spread. It is to the credit of the Detroit district organization of the MESA that it announced its readiness to strike with A.F. of L. members if the struggle spread to Detroit and Flint. Despite the fact that the A.F. of L. leadership, as will be brought out presently, played the role of sabotage and betrayal more flagrantly and openly, if that is possible, than in the past, and that the strikers are well aware of this fact, no movement out of the A.F. of L. and for independent unionism has developed. Especially at the focal point in Toledo the workers are more determined than ever to build their local A.F. of L. union, to carry on the battle against bureaucracy in the A.F. of L., and to press for the early establishment of an international union under an A.F. of L. charter.
Let us note, in the second place, the lengths to which the A.F. of L. leadership went in sabotaging the strike and in betrayal of the workers’ interest. President Green had the strike votes of the federal auto unions in his pocket. Nevertheless he did not call any strike or make any strike preparations. This in spite of the fact that the A.F. of L. leaders unquestionably believed that a not too big and carefully controlled disturbance in automobiles was desirable in order to impress the Roosevelt administration with the necessity of granting legislative concessions to them rather than permitting “wild men” and “reds” from getting control of the workers. These bureaucrats live in deadly fear of any mass movement getting under way. Francis Dillon, chief A.F. of L. representative on the scene, was also the chief agent in preventing the strike from spreading or assuming militant form. He coaxed and bulldozed the Flint union workers into staying at work when they were eager to strike. He did not hesitate to violate the most elementary principle of even conservative unionism by specifically condoning the manufacture of scab transmissions by the Flint workers. He insinuated that the Toledo strikers were yellow and unworthy of support. His henchmen beat up a Toledo union militant in the union hall in Flint where he was present for the purpose of informing Flint workers about developments in Toledo.
In the meeting of strikers at which the compromise settlement offered by the General Motors Corporation was voted on, this representative of the supposedly democratic trade union movement, who had that very morning issued a pompous statement against “dictatorship of all kinds, Fascist or communist,” told the strikers, their strike committee and their union executive, before the vote on the company offer was taken, that the A.F. of L. would withdraw their charter unless the vote was for acceptance! Here is the representative of the union clubbing the workers into accepting the proposals, not of the union, but of the employers and the government. Fascist unions in the corporative state will play just that role. Many of these A.F. of L. leaders are thus prepared to go much further in subservience to the government than the present stage of development requires of them, so utterly devoid are they of any shred of dignity or sense of shame.
In this connection the role of a local official such as Schwake is most significant. Put into office some months ago by progressives in the union in revolt against a reactionary business agent and probably personally honest and well-intentioned, he nevertheless lined up at critical moments with the top officials against the rank and file strike committee and the workers. It was in fact his speech following Dillon’s, not Dillon’s speech as such, which turned the tide for acceptance of the company proposals. It must be borne in mind that this type, utterly devoid of background and a theoretical position, will always play this role, and that militants in strike situations must skillfully but nevertheless steadily undermine the confidence of the rank and file in such elements.
When the obstacles we have just cited are considered, together with the fact that the strike was against one of the major automobile corporations directly linked to the Dupont and Morgan dynasties, the strike was a remarkable achievement and furnishes new evidence of the energies and the militancy of the present generation of American industrial workers. Typical is the fact that not much more than a year ago the rank and file leader of the strike, Jimmy Roland, was still in a company union and had no knowledge of or experience in the labor movement. Typical also that a couple of weeks before the strike, the union had only a handful of members in the Toledo Chevrolet plant and that still fewer had any previous union experience. But also typical is the swiftness and completeness with which these workers tied up the key transmission plant of a giant corporation; their obvious militancy which prevented the company from making any effort to open the plant, an effort which would unquestionably have meant bloodshed; the extension of the strike to include 30,000 workers in about a week, and so on.
The most impressive features of the strike can, however, be understood only in the light of the contribution made to the labor movement in Toledo during the past year by the revolutionary cadre of Workers Party members and the militant unionists and unemployed leaguers under their influence. The fact that leadership in the automobile workers’ struggle since the spring of 1934 has so obviously been in Toledo and not in Detroit, Flint, Cleveland or some other automobile center is to be ascribed chiefly to the presence in Toledo of these elements whose program is the trade union line of the WP, who have exhibited an unusual combination of sound theory and sound practise, and have carried out the program with singular persistence, ingenuity and a devotion that has stopped at nothing. Wherever party cadres will get into the mass work with the same revolutionary devotion, the same willingness to learn, and the same sticking to the job day in and day out, similar results can be obtained.
The struggle between the trade union bureaucracy and the young rank and file leadership was carried several steps further in the General Motors strike than it has been in rubber, or steel, or elsewhere in automobiles. The strike was called despite the bureaucrats. It was extended in spite of them. It attained a high degree of efficiency. Several attempts to bring it to a premature conclusion were thwarted. The company was forced to negotiate with the rank and file committee. Decided gains for the workers were achieved. Most significant of all, there is no discouragement, no slump in union leadership or spirit, among leaders or rank and file following the acceptance of the compromise settlement and their experience with the sabotage and betrayal of the top union officials. Instead there is a firm determination to organize the militants so that the next time they may carry the struggle still another stage forward and administer a complete defeat to the trade union bureaucracy. This is the most encouraging development which has taken place in the movement for organizing the union progressives, and once again there is no reasonable explanation except that here a revolutionary cadre has been at work more devotedly and for a longer period on the basis of a sounder program.
That the progressives were not yet organized and trained as they should be was of course demonstrated by the fact that in the final analysis Dillon outmanoeuvred them. How serious that is becomes clear, for one thing, when we analyze what the position would have been if the compromise offer of the General Motors Company had been rejected by the strikers in defiance of Dillon’s “orders”.
If President Green had not executed the threat to withdraw the charter of the Toledo local and had continued the policy pursued up to that time, in other words, had not openly disowned the strike and attempted to forbid the unions generally to support it, the progressive forces would have been confronted by a colossal but, in my opinion, a not impossible task. The ranks in Toledo, Norwood, Cleveland, Atlanta, etc., would probably have been held firm. The conference of strike committees which Roland called and Dillon cancelled, would have been held. The strike would have been spread to Flint and other centers. The progressives would have had a much freer hand and would have enjoyed the confidence of the masses after the defeat of Dillon. Substantial funds could have been raised throughout the country. Unquestionably, on the other hand, General Motors would have put up a terrific fight. Quite likely pitched battles would have occurred in Flint or in Muncie, Ind., if the corporation had made an attempt to open a new transmission plant there. A “red” scare would have been started against the progressives and the Workers Party; the preparations had in fact already been made. The federal government would of course have thrown its forces against the strike. As I have said, there is no denying that for the progressives, whose organization except in Toledo had to be improvised, this would have been a tremendous task. But General Motors was in a tight fix and a victory was possible.
But it is far from certain that Green would have taken this course. Had the strike gone ahead and achieved substantial results, this would have meant building up the prestige of the militants not only in automobiles but in other unions, to such a degree as to shake the present class-collaboration leadership of the A.F. of L. to its foundations. Furthermore, it would have demonstrated to the employers and the Roosevelt administration that this leadership could no longer control the masses and so was of no use to them. It is, therefore, entirely possible that Green would have backed up Dillon.
Then the strike would have become an “outlaw” strike. It would have been much more difficult to get support in the unions generally. The “red” scare” would have known no bounds. The corporation and the government would have treated the strike as a “revolution”. Leaders would have been jailed. There is no use pretending that the progressives had adequate numbers or experience or machinery to deal with such a problem. There would have been a thrilling struggle. It is just barely possible that the forces would have grown swiftly under the emergency and so would have hammered out a victory. Quite possibly an orderly retreat would have been the utmost that could have been achieved. A serious defeat might have been the outcome.
It behooves the militants to lose no time in extending and strengthening their organization in all important industries and the revolutionary party swiftly to train its cadres in the unions. One of these days the battle will be carried a step further than it was in Toledo. Some day Dillon will make his threat and this time the militants will be wiser and harder. They will laugh at his threat and vote down his and the employers’ proposal. Then the A.F. of L. leadership will have to decide whether it will keep these “wild men” in the A.F. of L. or will drive them out. If it bows to the storm, fails to carry through its bluff, keeps the strikers in the A.F. of L., that will be the end of the old leadership; there will be a vastly changed A.F. of L. under a class struggle leadership. If, on the other hand, in the crisis that we envisage the old leadership decided to stand its ground against well-organized and well-prepared militant forces, decided to kick the latter out of the A.F. of L., that will still mean the end of the old leadership, for they will be left with the name and the shell of the A.F. of L., as Powderly, for example, was left with the name and the shell of the Knights of Labor. But the workers will be elsewhere – in that “independent federation of labor” which will then represent not an incurable Leftists’ dream or adventure, but the major forces of the working class, the will of the working class.
The present writer’s opinion happens to be that when the decisive moment arrives, it is the latter variant that is likely to occur; but at this moment speculation on that point is – speculation and no more. The lesson of Toledo, of the sell-out of the Akron rubber workers in April, of the recent flare-up in steel in Canton, is that no time must be lost in welding the militants in the A.F. of L. into a fighting force. And, we may ask, what else is the lesson of the Roosevelt $19 per month wage for project workers, the Supreme Court decision on the unconstitutionally of the NRA, the employer drive to break down such slight defenses of labor standards, as have existed and to intensify the effort to achieve capitalist recovery, i.e., step up profits, at whatever cost to the masses? There will be no unions worth the name unless the militants build and maintain them. Without fighting unions the workers will presently be made the object of an attack which will make 1929–35 seem like “the good old times”.
 



Part 1

Part 2
 



Doubt and discredit are being thrown upon the entire Marxist-Leninist philosophy and upon the revolutionary movement of the working class by the policies of the present Stalin-dominated regime in the Soviet Union. When in connection with the signing of a pact between the S.U. and the imperialist French government, it is officially stated that “M. Stalin understands and fully approves the national defense policy of France in keeping her armed forces at the level required for security” and when Maurice Thorez, leader of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of France flatly declares: “Now I answer a question that has been put to me: In case of such a war launched by Hitler against the U.S.S.R., would you apply your slogan: ‘transformation of the imperialist war into the civil war?’ (against French imperialism, that is). Well, no! because in such a war it is not an imperialist war that is involved, a war between two imperialist gangs, it is a war against the Soviet Union” – then the enemies of the working class utter the taunt: “There goes your boast that the Workers’ State brings a new force into diplomacy, into relations between states, your claim that the working class revolution will put an end to imperialist wars.”
Liberals of all shades who had come to have a measure of sympathy for the revolutionary movement as perhaps the one practical instrument for the realization of their ideals are alienated; many of them go back to faith in phantoms like humanitarianism and religion to usher in the reign of peace. Reactionary and conservative trade unionists and Social Democrats who were on the defensive when the Soviet regime and the Communist International were making a clear-cut revolutionary attack on capitalism, imperialism and war, take fresh courage and obtain a fresh opportunity to confuse the workers and to strengthen their hold upon them. Into the hearts of many of the advanced workers strikes an icy blast of disillusionment and cynicism.
 
Stalin Sows Illusions
That social patriotism fastening itself upon the Second International should betray the workers and lead them to a ghastly slaughter, before they realized what was happening, that is understandable. From such an experience the working class can profit and therefore recover. But if now the International of Lenin succumbs to social-patriotism, calls upon the worker under whatever specious plea to defend the (imperialist) “fatherland,” doubt may well arise as to whether there is any way to save the revolutionary movement from corruption and defeat. “If the salt has lost its savor, wherewith shall it be salted?”
The revolutionary internationalists of the Workers Party in the United States and the parties and groups in other countries which have likewise raised the banner of the Fourth International, have the answer to this problem; and they alone in the working class movement today have an answer. It is not, however, with this phase of the degeneration of the Soviet regime and the Third International that we are primarily concerned here; but rather with a problem closely related to it.
The present regime in the Soviet Union is employing repression and terrorism on a large scale and of a brutal character, not only against those who are the enemies of the Workers’ State or those who can with some measure of plausibility be regarded as such, but also against revolutionists who are political opponents of Stalin and his henchmen. It is not necessary here to produce detailed evidence of the fact. The Soviet press itself caries daily reports of severe measures taken against old Bolsheviks, including recently those who have never had any connection with the Trotskyist opposition, for example, as well as against relatives of the men who have never participated in any political activity at all, as witness the case of Trotsky’s son, a chemist who was permitted to go on with his work for many years after his father’s exile, to which Nathalie Trotsky has recently called public attention.
When organizations such as ours protest against such repressive acts, we are met, and with increasing frequency in recent months, with the argument that protests from us come with poor grace and can hardly expect to get serious attention. We are told that we also believe in the proletarian dictatorship, that we justified acts of terrorism in the period when Lenin and Trotsky were the dominant figures in the Soviet Union, that in our opinion the workers, when they take power in the United States, should take whatever measures may be necessary against those who would desire to re-establish capitalism, and so on. The acts against which we protest are bound to occur under “dictatorships,” we are told, regardless of “the kind of dictatorship” which may exist. Only “democracy” such as we have in the United States provides any insurance against them.
 
Liberals Find a Moral
Thus the most liberal daily in New York, the N.Y. Post, in its editorial columns of June 24, 1935, reasons:
“The appeal of Mrs. Nathalie Trotsky in Saturday’s Post is recommended to the attention of parlor pinks and Communist ‘sympathizers’. It illustrates the evil effects sure to flow from dictatorship, no matter what its alibi – whether on the plea of ‘halting Communism’ as in Germany or the plea of ‘establishing Socialism’ as in Soviet Russia ... Communism and Fascism are new labels, but the founders of this country knew them under other forms. It was to break the power of a Tory King and to prevent the recurrence of similar despotism in this country that the founders of this country set up the safeguards of the American Constitution, the world’s oldest and still the world’s best ... Communists oppose the Hitler dictatorship but they condone the Soviet dictatorship. Trotsky opposes the dictatorship of Stalin but he would like to substitute for it the dictatorship of Trotsky. The case of Trotsky’s son demonstrates what happens under any kind of a dictatorship – whether Left or Right ... the use of suppression necessitates ever more suppression until rising resentment, deprived of peaceful vent, overthrows the regime. That applies to Russia under Communism as it applies to Germany, Austria and Italy under Fascism. Democracy will yet survive them all.”
In one of the closing chapters of Russia’s Iron Age, the much discussed book by the brilliant foreign correspondent, William Henry Chamberlin, long regarded as one of the most devoted and effective journalistic friends of the Soviet Union,” there is a very moving presentation of the same point of view!
“One among many points of faith common to apologists of Communism and of Fascism is an overweening contempt for civil liberties, which are represented as unnecessary and inconvenient barnacles on the ship of progress. The longer I have lived in the Soviet Union, where civil liberties – freedom of speech, press, assembly, and election – are most conspicuously lacking, the more I have become convinced that they are of vital and tremendous importance, and that their existence or absence is as good a test as any of the quality of a nation’s civilization. The Communist (or the Fascist; their trend of thought in this question is strikingly similar) talks of civil liberties as of the outworn fetish of a handful of disgruntled intellectuals who are unable to rise to the necessary vision of the high and noble character and purpose of the Communist (or Fascist) state. But my own observation in Russia has led me to believe that a great deal more is at stake then the freedom of thought of the educated classes, although it seems rather obvious that culture becomes impoverished when the historian must alter his record of the past, the author must give a prescribed coloring to his characters, and free research in any field can be cut off by the will of an all-powerful state.”
 
In the Ukraine
“It was during my trip through the famine regions of Ukraine and the North Caucasus that I became utterly and definitely convinced that democracy, with all its faults, weaknesses and imperfections, is enormously superior to dictatorship as a method of government, simply from the standpoint of the common man. Is there any recorded case in history where famine – not poverty or hardship or destitution, but stark famine, with a toll of millions of lives – has occurred in a democratically governed country? Is it conceivable that the famine of 1932-33 could have taken place if civil liberties had prevailed in the Soviet Union, if newspapers had been free to report the facts, if speakers could have appealed for relief, if the government in power had been obliged to submit its policy of letting vast numbers of the peasants starve to death to the verdict of a free election? The countless graves of the humble and obscure famine victims, the peasants of Ukraina and the North Caucasus, of the Volga and Central Asia, are to me the final grim, unanswerable refutation of the specious Communist contention that freedom of speech and press and political agitation is only humbug by which the bourgeoisie tries to delude the masses.”
For good measure, and in order to emphasize the frequency with which the same tune is heard in these days, we may quote from the leading article in the June issue of Harper’s Magazine by Johan J. Smertenko: “John Howard Lawson finds Alabama in the grip of a fascist ‘terror’ because he and a lawyer of the International Labor Defense were placed momentarily under ‘illegal arrest’ and six Communists, also freed after trial, ‘are in daily and hourly danger of whipping, torture, and possible death.’ But he is unmoved by the thousands, slaving in the timber camps of the Arctic region because they will not forswear their religion, who pray for death as a release from their torture.
“Elmer Rice and Paul Sifton cry out dramatically against the soulless industrial system of America and glory in the industrialization of the mujik. The bread-lines of disorganized capitalism stir Edmund Wilson to eloquent rage, but the bread lines of bureaucratic communism are accepted as a necessary expedient in technological development. The peripatetic John Strachey deplores from some thirty lyceums and a half-dozen periodicals that ‘freedom of speech is abused by capitalists in this country,’ whereas in Russia it is merely ‘incomplete,’ since the inviolate censorship and ruthless suppression are exercised only against ‘the remnant of capitalists who wish to see the return of their system.’ (Among the capitalists are the dead or exiled authors: Andreyev, Artzibashev, Bunin, Korolenko, Kuprin, Merejkowski, Tolstoy, and, of course, Trotsky.)
“Thus too Walter Duranty, whose complacent dispatches in the Times contrasted the Nazi blood-purge with Lenin’s treatment of the ‘opposition,’ has been eloquently silent about the oubliette imprisonment and summary executions of the Trotsky-Zinoviev-Kamenev faction. And Waldo Frank, whose burning protests against Kentucky violence almost scorched the pages of the liberal weeklies, does indeed ‘speak in a monstrous little voice’ of these official murders: ‘I realize that the peoples of Russia have their own background and that, it is utopian to expect them, because of their heroic prosecution of a great social cause, to behave in every instance according to our own rules and ideals ... In so far as it (Russia) appears, even to contradict justice at home, it is harming the cause of justice abroad. From the standpoint of this high strategy, if from no other, I deplore the recent executions.”
 
Answer of Workers Party
Whether or not they are personally disturbed by such questions, revolutionists in the U.S. will have to meet them. If the reactionaries and liberals between them, making use of Stalinist policies and actions, can make the American workers believe that, as over against capitalism, Communism means repression, regimentation, less freedom, personal dictatorship, etc., a formidable barrier against revolutionary progress will have been erected. We of the Workers Party have to defend the assertions of our Declaration of Principles: that the policies of “socialization of the means of production and exchange” which the Workers’ State will pursue “injures only the small handful of financiers, landlords and industrialists whose private control of the resources of the country is the source of hunger, unemployment and insecurity for the great bulk of the people,” that every willing worker can be assured of “a well-paid job,” security against unemployment, and insurance against industrial risks, old age, and sickness;” that there “will be no need for the Workers’ State to impose arbitrary and repressive measures upon small individual proprietors and farmers;” that the Workers’ State while functioning as a dictatorship of the working class against its enemies will assure and continually extend “far more genuine and substantial democratic rights to the masses than ever accorded to them under capitalism.”
(Continued in next issue)
 



(Continued from last issue)
First of all we may observe that while it is true that we do not have a Fascist regime in the U.S. and that it can only be misleading and silly to talk as if we did have, those who in these days are so vociferously proclaiming the joys of life under American democracy as contrasted with the repressions and horrors under “dictatorship whether Fascist or Communist,” are unquestionably unrealistic and sentimental in their view of the United States. We know that the ordinary worker and farmer does not have this sense of perfect liberty and profound happiness. Millions of them are free – free to spend their youthful powers in a few years on the chain-gang in the production line in a mass-production factory; free to eke out an existence “in the midst of plenty” by means of a public works job at the Rooseveltian “security wage” of four to twelve dollars per week; free to organize, strike, picket, vote the ticket of their choice and so on, provided they do not mind being kicked out of a job, seeing their families suffer privation, getting dubbed over the head, thrown into jail, possibly shot in the back. Consider that the economic crisis has not reached any such proportions here as in many other countries, that there is here no such daily and hourly peril of invading armies as many nations have to face, that at the moment there is no force which can remotely threaten the continuance of the existing government. Then recall that every edition of every paper brings fresh stories of clubbing, gassing, jailing, shooting, murdering of men and women trying to assert the right to organize and bargain collectively in conservative trade unions. Then ask to what extent civil liberties are a reality, and not merely a traditions or a myth in “democratic” United States. Consider the economic, political and social disabilities under which millions of Negroes labor. Consider the plight of the Jews and of “foreigners” in a nation where economic tension is as yet a far distance from the breaking point.
 
Freedom and Fascism
It is, furthermore, a fallacy to suppose that we can retain the measure of freedom we now possess, if only we can maintain our economic system based on free enterprise and our political democracy against both Fascism and Communism. It is precisely the attempt to maintain the capitalist system which leads under modern conditions with fatal precision to the resort to Fascism. Capitalism itself, the present ruling class, will – unless the workers and their allies prevent – in the effort to maintain itself destroy every vestige, every pretense of democracy and civil rights, will appeal to the basest racial and national prejudices, will establish an open and brutal dictatorship. Why? Simply because the time when capitalism can maintain profits and at the same time make concessions to the workers, better the standard of living, is past. Now it maintains itself only by taking away even such concessions as it once gave. It must drive the standard of living even lower. But obviously if the masses have any freedom at all, any means for protest and self-expression, any workers or farmers union, party, press, – then no matter how peaceful, legal, respectable, meek they may be, they will at some point offer resistance. They will try to fight for mere existence. But this threatens the existence of capitalism. Therefore it wipes out “democracy”, smashes every trade union, farmers’ organization and political party, degrades the intellectuals, and hounds and destroys minority groups. It is not by maintaining capitalism that we can maintain democracy and escape dictatorship.
Those who declaim against “red terror” and present imposing lists of its victims and catalogues of its social and psychological effects need also to be reminded over and over again not only of the numerous instances of “white terror” and the abominable excesses of Fascism, but of that most colossal and obscene terror of all – war. War which in its modern form is the natural and inevitable by-product of capitalist-imperialist rivalries, which kills millions of its victims, itself abrogates all civil liberties and makes the individual the puppet of an absolutist state if indeed it does not deprive him of his reason altogether.
This is, however, only the negative side of the case. If we could indeed offer the workers, farmers and the professional and technical groups only a choice of terrors in the future, they could hardly be blamed for emulating Hamlet and clinging desperately to those ills they have under so-called democracy rather than flying to evils which they have not yet experienced. The revolutionary internationalist does offer a positive alternative to the masses – an enhancement of well-being and of freedom.
The Workers’ State
The Workers’ State is a dictatorship. As Marxists we believe that and we do not attempt to conceal it. But it is important to understand the sense in which the term is here used, and Marxists have not always been too careful and accurate on this point. So long as there are classes, every government is in essence a dictatorship – of the ruling class over whatever other classes there may be. Whether at a given moment, however, this rule expesses itself as an open and avowed dictatorship, resorts to open and extensive terrorism, etc., depends upon whether this is necessary to the ruling class. The facts are clearly suggested in that sentence of our Declaration of Principles which says: “The political forms of capitalist society (monarchy, democracy, military dictatorship, fascism) are only the means by which the actual dictatorship of the controlling minority expresses itself.”
The political expression of the proletarian dictatorship is the Soviet or Workers’ State. Workers of all categories – industrial, agricultural, technical, clerical, professional – will be organized on a functional basis into Workers Councils. Through the Councils functioning in a democratic manner, under the control of their membership, the workers will have a much more direct and simple way of sharing in the determination of the policies which affect their well-being than they have under the farcical electoral system which exists in the U.S. today. Furthermore, in a country with the resources and the technical equipment of the U.S. an immediate improvement of the standard of living and relief from insecurity could be provided if the capitalist brakes upon production were released, and this too would have the psychological effect of liberation on the masses now haunted by the spectre of insecurity and enslaved to fear.
 
Dealing with Enemies
It is true that parasites will be disfranchised in the Workers’ State and that repressive measures will be used against those who conspire to overthrow the new regime and bring back the horrors of capitalism, unemployment, war – that is to say, those who want to abolish the dictatorship of the majority over the minority and bring back the dictatorship of the minority over the majority under which we now live. The extent and the character of these repressive measures, and the length of time during which they may be enforced, will depend primarily, as has been repeatedly demonstrated in revolutionary periods, upon the extent to which the new regime may be threatened with destruction from outside and upon the counter-revolutionary movements within. Life was not altogether peaceful and comfortable in the U.S. during and for some time after the Revolutionary War, nor in France during and after the Great French Revolution. It took four years of Civil War in these United States to smash the slave-holding aristocracy of the South, even after a president and congress representing a new class had been elected by parliamentary methods, and there was a considerable interruption of normal activities. It is thus that social change of a fundamental character is effected. The fact is not usually regarded as an argument for setting the clock back – if that could be done. And, in view of all that has been said, we are not among those who raise pious protests or shed crocodile tears when the Soviet Union takes whatever measures may be necessary against the class enemies, internal or external, of the Workers’ State, What causes us to protest and shudder – what constitutes indeed a tragic menace to the well-being of the masses in the modern world, to the entire future of humanity – is not the proletarian dictatorship, nor the mistakes and excesses which it may have committed, nor the dominant role of the revolutionary party in the Workers’ State. So long as classes exist, government will be in essence dictatorship. Human beings are nowhere infallible. Without a disciplined, devoted, heroic party of the vanguard elements the accomplishment of the modern revolutionary task is inconceivable.
The crime of the Stalin regime is that it has abandoned and destroyed the organization principle on which the revolutionary party must be built and thus has corrupted the party and transformed the proletarian dictatorship into a caricature of workers’ democracy. No greater crime than this can be committed for it means the corruption of those instrumentalities by which alone the masses can be liberated and a higher stage in human development achieved.
Democratic Centralism
Democratic centralism is the organization principle of the Leninist party. Precisely because there must be the severest discipline in action and because the Party takes upon itself the role of leadership of the workers in the greatest crises, its own inner life must be free, democratic, vigorous. The clearest, straightest Marxian thinking is required; but that involves the right of criticism; and that cannot exist where there is repression.
A healthy revolutionary party which is based on democratic centralism will seek to establish its leadership over the mass organizations of the workers whether before, during or after the revolution, not by cheap political trickery, not by forced and mechanical processes, not by clever yet futile attempts to “capture” organizations, but by what may be rightly characterized as democratic methods. It gains influence in the unions e.g. by the correctness of the policies which its members set forth, by the persuasiveness with which they argue for them, by their devotion to the day to day work of the organization, by the sacrificial and heroic role they are prepared to play in strikes and similar crises. It is in substantially the same manner that a revolutionary party with a democratic inner regime gains and maintains its influence over the mass organizations, the Soviets or Workers Councils, once the workers and their allies have taken power.
Now a vanguard party of this character is constantly subject to check by the mass organizations. It must essentially and most of the time actually serve their needs or it will be rejected. On the other hand, it can afford, indeed it will ordinarily encourage a democratic life in, will seek to educate, the mass organizations because it is well aware that in the long run it is precisely as they are enlightened that the masses will follow them. Exploiters of the masses such as the capitalists today, will do all in their power to keep them ignorant and confused. A Leninist revolutionary party will do just the opposite. Thus our Declaration of Principles can assure the masses in the U.S. that the workers’ state does not mean repression, the curtailment of democratic rights for them but, while it functions as a dictatorship against enemies who may want to restore capitalism, will assure and continually extend far more democratic rights to the masses than ever accorded to them under capitalism.
 
Bureaucratic Regime
By the same token, it is when bureaucracy gets the upper hand in the revolutionary party itself, when a reign of repression is established there, that corruption enters into the whole of the proletarian dictatorship: it becomes a caricature of the workers’ democracy. This is the crime which the present Stalin regime has perpetrated. Party democracy was crushed. The utterly un-Marxian conception of an absolutist party, a mystical something, standing above the working class, which could do no wrong, which needed no checks upon itself whatever, arose. In the final analysis this can only end in a personal dictatorship. That is what exists in the Third International and its parties today. But such a party, resting now upon an insecure and artificial basis, serving essentially not the working class but a bureaucracy, will crush out democracy also in the Soviets, the unions, etc.
The Stalin regime has been forced to an ever more vicious suppression of party democracy and workers’ democracy, because its basic aim of building Socialism in one country is anti-Marxian and wrong. It had to attempt to crush all opposition among revolutionists both inside and outside the Soviet Union, because if the opposition had had any means of expression the emasculation of the Communist Parties thru-out the world which was the inevitable result of this policy would not have been tolerated. On this, however, space does not permit us to dwell here.
We of the Workers Party who raised and raise no protest against necessary repressive acts of the Workers’ State against its class enemies, within and without, do raise our voices with all our might against the terrorism now being exercised’ in an intensified degree against revolutionists, against those who are for the Workers’ State in the Soviet Union but who are political opponents of of Stalin and his henchmen. We protest against these persecutions because this policy corrupts the revolutionary party itself and so undermines the Workers’ State, which has been the beacon light of inspiration to the workers of the entire world. It, further, more, casts discredit upon and corrupts the entire revolutionary movement throughout the world.
From our Leninist point of view we can also criticize, not the principle of repressive measures against class enemies, but the manner in which the principle is applied in the Soviet Union under the Stalin regime. A bureaucracy resting on an insecure foundation, maintaining itself more and more, therefore, on a basis of fear and physical force, cannot carry out such measures as the collectivization of agriculture, for example, and numerous other policies in a sound manner. It falls into entirely unnecessary excesses which give both the workers and their enemies a false conception of what the proletarian dictatorship really means.
 
Our Position
We of the Workers Party thus have the answer, as neither the hypocritical reactionary defenders of “American constitutional liberties,” nor the liberals of various shades, nor the social-democrats, nor the Stalinists have, to the question of freedom in the modern world. The alternatives before the workers and farmers and before those artists and professionals who are concerned about freedom to create and express are not limited to Fascism and the corrupt version of the proletarian dictatorship which Stalin offers, and the sham democracy which obtains in some countries today under capitalism, but which cannot be maintained if capitalism remains. There is the other alternative of an uncorrupted and genuine workers’ democracy under the leadership of a revolutionary party organized under the principle of democratic centralism and based upon revolutionary internationalism.
The road to genuine democracy is not away from, but back to Marxism and Leninism; not away from but back to revolutionary internationalism; not away from but through the proletarian dictatorship, i.e. workers’ democracy. This is the road to which the masses oppressed in varying degrees under Fascism and capitalist “democracy” are directed by the parties of the Fourth International.
In pursuing this course we are also the sole effective champions of humanity, of any idealism worthy of the name in the modern world, and of world peace. For a social order in which human dignity can be maintained and not constantly trampled in the mire, in which the creative energies of mankind can express themselves and not be endlessly suppressed and thwarted, is possible only if capitalism is destroyed, and this deliverance can come only as the result of victory of the workers in a revolutionary struggle.
 



The chief accomplishment of the convention of the Third partyites just held in Chicago with Professor Paul Douglas of the University of Chicago as chairman and Alfred Bingham of Common Sense magazine as secretary, are [sic] to furnish some fresh evidence that Roosevelt has as yet little cause to worry over the outcome of the 1936 election and to give the Daily Worker another job of trying to make it clear that “this is not the kind of a labor party we are for.”
The two hundred and fifty representatives of Farmer-Labor groups and the Farmer-Labor Political Federation, League for Independent Political Action and People’s Political Alliance of Chicago, the last three all manned by the same group of liberals, who met in Chicago described’ themselves, as “native American radicals,” and “the direct descendants of the populist tradition.” They aim at a new social order based on “production for use.” They wish to “unite all the groups who want a change to come through the ballot box, which excludes Communists”. A delegate from Idaho, with the eagerness for quick and big results at the polls which characterizes the “native American radicals” argued eloquently for the exclusion of “all members of the Communist Party and also those who do not believe in the democratic process of government” (did he mean to imply that the C.P. with the new turn does believe in the democratic process?) on the ground that each Communist included in the new organization would cost ten thousand votes and “ruin the new movement.”
While not all the delegates supported these mathematical speculations, Plank Eight in the Platform for a Third Party drawn up by the group which, by the way, now calls itself the American Commonwealth Political Federation (in addition possibly to its other names) begins the declaration: “We reaffirm our faith in the democratic form of government.” This is a frank statement. It might seem that it would take some courage to make such a statement in these days. At any rate, it is well to have so unequivocally on record these people who often speak of themselves as the “true revolutionists,” who know how really to “stop fascism” in the U.S. and who regard Marxism as hopelessly discredited and dead. Congressmen such as Lundeen and Marcantonio, who have been C.P. pets recently, are among them. And it is said that the younger, “very radical” ones, among them receive advice and counsel from the Reverend Doctor Harry F. Ward, master mind of the League Against War and Fascism.
Despite their radical talk on their playing at revolution, this outfit consists of liberals, nothing more. In such a period as the present it cannot persuade any considerable number that it has more to offer than Roosevelt. If the crisis is again intensified, the chances are that Douglas and Co. will be swept aside like chips on a raging forest, as the genuinely revolutionary forces and those of reaction come to grips. If by chance and in combination with certain labor and farmer organizations, they were to succeed in forming a sizeable party some day, it could only serve to create illusions among the masses about salvation by “democratic process” which bitter experience would dispel and thus to postpone the unification of all the oppressed elements of society under the leadership of the. revolutionary Marxist party.
As we have suggested, the Daily Worker will have to get busy again, uttering disclaimers that these “radicals” are building the “right kind of Labor Party” and furnishing another detailed explanation of just what is a labor party which is not reformist and not revolutionary and so forth and so on.
 
Big Guns Very Absent
As things now stand, the Roosevelt strategy has taken the wind out of the sails of such movements as this at least so far as making a considerable showing in the 1936 election is concerned. Certain incidents of the Chicago conference itself bear this out. The LaFollettes were conspicuous by their absence. Young Bob, predestined to become the presidential candidate of these Third partyites when they make a bid for a real showing, does not see enough anti-Roosevelt, liberal-labor votes in sight yet. He is pursuing the “canny” course of building up a reputation as a “determined but constructive” radical and “friend of labor.” He tries to get Roosevelt to go farther but votes for Roosevelt measures, when he has made his attempt to get more and failed. Governor Olson, the Minnesota Farmer-Laborite, another big man in the estimation of the Chicago dabblers in politics, sent word that he was ready to support any movement standing for “production for use,” but also had other engagements and could not be present in person. Senator Nye came and made a speech as a sort of friend of the movement, but made it clear that the liberal forces must not be divided in 1936 and that in the forthcoming election it’s Roosevelt so far as he is concerned. Marcantonio, the New York Congressman who succeeded LaGuardia in Washington, and who was one of the signers, of the call for the conference, withdrew from the movement as did the Knickerbocker Democrats when a decision looking toward running a presidential ticket in 1936 was made. Upton Sinclair also made it clear that he is still for capturing the Democratic party for Socialism and Epic.
 
Conservative As Any
Nobody outside an insane asylum any longer believes that Roosevelt is going to put an end to the capitalist system and usher in the cooperative commonwealth. The Republican case against him is accordingly weak and no Republican of importance has yet shown any eagerness for the job of standard bearer in 1936. A little excitement has been stirred up about a tax program which asks a few more dollars from big incomes, about federal control of business invading states’ rights, about a big spending program, about Roosevelt’s hint that the Constitution might have to be amended to allow Congress to enact social legislation – but Roosevelt, the red revolutionist, does not register any more even with the Dr. Wirts.
On the other hand, unless new elements enter the picture, the liberals and the trade unions will be found on the Roosevelt bandwagon in 1936. Many jobs are dependent on the money appropriated for public works which Roosevelt has for disbursement. Liberals and union officials are subject to subtle influence from this source, being only human like the garden variety of local politicians and citizens.
Long, Coughlin and Townsend can declaim that the Roosevelt unemployment insurance and old age measures do not go far enough and that approriations for public works are too small. They can argue that the tax program which the incomparable publicity artist pulled out of his sleeve a few weeks ago just when Congressmen were all set to flee the heat of Washington, does not “soak-the-rich” enough. The fact of the matter is that the program of taxing big incomes, big corporations and big inheritance does not “soak” the rich at all. It represents a feeble start toward imposing income and inheritance taxes which the ruling classes in European countries have long since had to accept as a price for keeping the capitalist system on its feet. But when all the advantages on Roosevelt’s side are taken into account, what chance have any of these “extremists” of persuading the electorate that any candidate that may advance has a chance against Roosevelt or could accomplish anything more than Roosevelt will?
As for the trade unions, Roosevelt has “given” the A.F. of L. the Wagner Bill, the Magna Charta of Labor, as William Green does not tire of proclaiming. As the New Militant has pointed out, the employers will contest the constitutionality of the act, they will construct the National Labor Board, etc. In the end, the unions will realize that the Wagner Bill will do no more for them than the other Magna Charta, Section 7a. For the present, however, in spite of all the talk about a labor party and the fond hopes of the C.P. and all the varieties of the socialists, the union leaders, and that still means the unions, will stick to friend Roosevelt. They will not run any chances of a Republican slipping into office by putting up a Labor Party candidate against him.
Even if disillusionment with the Wagner Bill should come more swiftly than in the case of the labor sections of the NRA, Roosevelt has protected his position. His “impromptu” speech to the press a few days after the Supreme Court knocked the NRA into a cocked hat, will be recalled. The Supreme Court has acted on the philosophy of “the horse and buggy age.” Some time in the next few years the Constitution might have to be amended if the Supreme Court persisted in such interpretations. Nothing more along this line has emanated from the White House since this “trial balloon” was sent up. If the measures, already taken suffice to retain liberal and labor support until the elections then talk about an amendment can rest and timid souls will be reassured that after all Roosevelt will do nothing rash, even though in his genial way he sometimes “says the most radical things.” Should the pressure of industrialists and financiers, by means of an early adverse Supreme Court decision, or otherwise, emasculate the Wagner Act, however, and labor and other elements develop a belligerent attack, then the slogan of a constitutional amendment can be brought forward for the presidential campaign and as a basis for urging the unions not to “spoil their own case by resorting to direct action.”
On the part of many rank-and-filers the call for independent political action, for a labor party, etc., represents a radicalization, a consciousness that labor must pass beyond “pure and simple trade unionism.” The so-called progressive trade union leaders, however, aided and abetted by the C.P., S.P., and other political groups, are practicing tail-endism in this matter. Instead of educating the masses in the need for a revolutionary political solution of this problem and rallying them around the banner of a revolutionary Marxist party, they divert thought and energy into the channel of a labor party, a program which can produce no immediate gains for labor in this period and which, insofar as it succeeds, hinders the development of an effective revolutionary party which alone can effectively guide the daily struggles now and provide clear leadership and a bulwark against fascism when the crisis again becomes intensified. For us there is no more urgent political task than that of developing an offensive against the labor party propaganda. And “offensive” is here used advisedly. Negative criticism of the labor party idea is certain to appear to the rank and file as carping against him when he has become aroused to the necessity of “doing something.” His enthusiasm must be aroused for the positive alternative of the revolutionary party, for the real as against the fake solution of his problems.
 

  WORKERS’ education in the United States, as far as the AF of L and its unions are concerned, was virtually non-xistent up to 1918. A local of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union, a few small enterprises of the Women’s Trade Union League, constituted the only exceptions. But during 1918 to 1921 scores of local labor colleges were founded; the ILGWU and some other internationals, several state federations of labor founded educational departments; Brookwood Labor College was founded, and the Workers Education Bureau, calculated to coordinate activities of these new enterprises, was set up. Workers’ education was a subject for discussion in the AF of L conventions. All of these enterprises were launched, however, not by the “regulars” in the unions but by the progressives of that period such as Maurer, then president of the Pennsylvania Federation of Labor, Fitzpatrick of the Chicago Federation of Labor, Brophy of the United Mine Workers, Fannia Cohn of the ILGWU and Lefkowitz of the newly born Teachers Union. They stood for industrial unionism, aggressive organizing work, militant strike activity and independent political action (some were socialists, some for a labor party), as well as for workers’ education. It was natural that the conservative craft unionists, lacking in class-consciousness, concerned about the immediate economic issue between the boss and the worker, and not interested in the broader social or political issues, should believe that our “great public school system” did and could give American citizens everything they needed in the way of education. The locomotive engineers had a larger percentage of children in high schools and colleges than any other occupational group. They and their fellows in the unions shared the vague, warm American faith, before the war universally and still widely held, that “education” can solve all problems. They thought of the public school system as a people’s, not a class institution. They were not themselves aware of any class needs which it could not be expected readily to fill. As soon as elements developed in the trade union movement who sought to deal with the needs of the growing numbers of unskilled and semi-skilled workers, who, therefore, encountered more open resistance from the state, who were confronted with social issues which could not be disposed of in a wage conference between an individual employer and his workers, and who, therefore, tried to develop independent political action in the interest of labor, they also quickly sensed that the school boards dominated by Republican and Democratic politicians were not going to provide workers with the kind of knowledge of emerging social issues which they needed. Thus they turned enthusiastically to workers’ education. That a dawning class-consciousness motivated this concern for workers’ education is illustrated by the discussion of adult education versus workers’ education which frequently occurred in this period. The liberals of the time, who were eager to do something toward bringing about that new world which the masses had been told would result from their participation in the war, stated in effect: “Yes, our public school system no longer meets the needs of the workers and the trade unionists. The trouble is simply that we have assumed that ‘education’ ends when a youth emerges from high school or college. But the fact is that education must be a continuous process through the entire life time. Especially in a rapidly changing world such as ours education must be thus continuous. What we learned about the atoms or about the poor in college twenty-five years ago has become outmoded. We adults must go to school again, therefore. But this does not apply to workers only but to all of us.” Some among the workers’ education movement agreed in substance with that position and stated that it was necessary for the unions to set up classes for the time being simply because the public schools and the colleges had been slow in meeting the new needs; but they must be made aware of the new task as quickly as possible. These elements turned to the Extension Departments of the universities to take over the infant workers’ education movement and were profuse in their “gratitude” when swanky Bryn Mawr College rented its grounds for a few weeks in the summer to a summer school for women workers in industry. There were, however, others in the post-war workers’ education movement who had somewhat deeper glimpses of the problem. One of them put it to an audience of workers: “You have to have unions to protect your interest against the boss; and the boss-controlled company union, therefore, won’t do. You also have to vote as you strike; a boss-controlled political party won’t do. But if all the ideas you get in your head are boss ideas you will be at his mercy anyway. You have to have your own schools, therefore, under your own control, to teach you how to cope with the boss and make a new world.” Yet these progressives were not entirely clear about their position, nor aware of all its implications, as was presently demonstrated. The officialdom of the AF of L did not contribute to the development of the early workers’ education enterprises to which we have referred. At first they were disposed to regard them as a frill or fad like so many others “produced by the war”. When the movement experienced a mushroom growth they began to regard it as a danger and after the manner of bureaucracies took steps to gain control. Led by Matthew Woll, the AF of L Executive Council first entered into a “partnership” with the Workers Education Bureau which gave the AF of L a minority representation on the Bureau’s Executive, and the Bureau in turn got a mild benediction from the AF of L, which to some extent facilitated the approach of the workers’ educationalists to the unions. But this inevitably constituted an unstable equilibrium. Where the conservative AF of L officials got control of local labor colleges, for example, they soon died off. The officials demanded that the classes teach nothing not approved by them, which meant the exclusion of all subjects that really interested the students; or else the moral and financial support of the union was withdrawn from the classes or even active persecution of the students resorted to. Naturally the enterprises which escaped the blighting touch of the officialdom were those which had a more clear-cut progressive or radical outlook, or acquired it in the course of the conflict with the bureaucracy. These elements accordingly gained increasing influence in the Workers Education Bureau. When a convention of the Bureau clearly revealed this trend to the AF of L executives, they took more direct and aggressive measures to acquire control. Delegates were brought to the next convention from international unions which had never had the slightest interest in the movement, the constitution of the Bureau was amended, the progressives were kicked out. Brookwood Labor College, which had been the leading force among the progressives in the movement, was condemned as “communistic, atheistic and anti-AF of L”, and unions were urged not to give it money or to send students. When the AF of L attack on Brookwood came there was a difference of opinion in its Board of Directors as to the way to meet the attack. One extreme was for replying to the AF of L Executive: “Yes, we are really your enemies. We stand on a philosophy of class-struggle, you are class-collaborationists. But we represent the real interest of the workers and therefore we insist you have no right to isolate us from the trade union movement.” The other extreme in the Board was for saying: “We are simply educators. We present the facts to our students and the various philosophies in the labor movement, and then they judge for themselves. The result is that some are working as conservative trade unionists, others as communists.” The main line of the reply was actually a compromise. It went like this: “Yes. there are differing philosophies in the labor movement. You represent one, we another. But you claim that the trade union movement is democratic. You have no right to kick us out, therefore, unless you ran prove we are traitors. Furthermore, we are educators. You fight the open-shoppers, etc. and insist on ‘academic freedom’ in the public schools and colleges. You cannot now turn about and deny us ‘freedom of teaching’ within the trade union movement.” The AF of L, then experiencing its extreme swing to the right under the Coolidge-Hoover boom, naturally rode rough-shod over all the protests. Brookwood in the period from 1928 to 1933 survived in part on the momentum of its past, but fundamentally because it found support in, and, on the other hand, gave inspiration to, the few progressive, militant elements left in the labor movement – apart of course from those which were in the wilderness with the Stalinists during the Third Period. Outside of this there was no labor movement in that period which could make any use of workers’ education. The crisis of 1933 at Brookwood was again centered upon the question as to which tendency in the labor movement – reformist or revolutionary – the institution would serve. The crisis in the capitalist world and in the labor movement (advent of Fascism, etc.) forced the issue. Under cover of the formula that the school was allied with “the more progressive” forces in the labor movement but was “non-partisan in its teaching”, the trade union majority of the Board swung the school into the orbit of the social-democracy, where it now revolves. It is not without significance that the Stalinists helped them do it. This recital of certain major developments in the workers’ education movement, especially as related to the trade unions, has more than historical interest. It sheds important light on developments now under way. During the past two years there has been a substantial revival in workers’ education activity among the unions. As in the period of the war and the years immediately following, this revival followed upon the influx of large numbers of new members, especially the unskilled and semi-skilled, into the unions. It is furthermore supported by the same tendency in the labor movement, though in the main the individuals are of course new, namely by those who stand for industrial unionism, aggressive organizing work, who, since they deal with the masses and not the skilled aristocracy, have to concern themselves with larger social issues and thus support or are inclined to support independent political action. At the moment there is, however, an interesting variant The federal administration itself in connection with its unemployment program is carrying on an extensive series of workers’ educational enterprises. These classes have in the main been “freer” than those conducted by the unions themselves. Radical students and teachers are not interfered with; no restrictions are enforced in connection with reference material; all points of view are presented and discussed, etc. Mr. Hearst has given some attention to the question but so far apparently without throwing the administration into a panic. This development must be considered in connection with the policy of the Roosevelt administration toward unionism itself. As has frequently been pointed out in The New International, the administration did not organize workers wholesale into the AF of L as certain liberals and the AF of L officials themselves expected in 1933. Indeed, by means of its labor boards, proportional representation clauses in automobile codes, etc., it has very definitely interfered with organization in the basic industries. It did not demonstrate any grave concern when thugs, police and militia were called out in strikes against workers who believed that they were simply asserting the right to organize which had been “given” them in the NRA. Yet the administration has been astute enough to recognize, as some employers whose interests it serves have not, that workers cannot be dealt with in the same way as in an earlier period of economic development. Labor organization of a kind must be “encouraged” or a worse alternative accepted. There is no question that it has taken steps which have helped temporarily to create a psychology which has brought workers into unions and that it has been willing to play the game and to grant concessions to the officials of certain unions. The workers’ education enterprises which the administration is sponsoring serve essentially the same purpose. They gear in with the so-called progressive movement in the AF of L. They help to canalize the movement for organization and the demand for political and economic education which goes with it on the part of awakening elements in the working class into relatively safe channels. The government can even afford to give somewhat more leeway to “radicalism” in these enterprises than trade union officials because its interests cannot be so directly and substantially affected by the handful of radicals who may gain influence in such enterprises as the interests of a trade union official are threatened by any radicals who may gain genuine influence in his organization. Besides, the administration is in a position at any moment to put an end to all these educational enterprises by withholding funds. History will repeat itself in this entire field. Already there are signs of this. When an upturn occurs in the trade union movement and with it in the field of workers’ education, the movement has at first an aspect of spontaneity and idealism, classes spring up rapidly, funds are available, idealistic young men and women believe that they are going to be “free” to teach the “truth” and the whole truth as is not the case in public schools and colleges. They believe that they will be given the opportunity to develop a new revolutionary spirit in the unions with union funds and the support of union officials. But presently it is again demonstrated that educational enterprises and institutions in the labor movement, as everywhere else, are the tools or instruments of the social forces and interests which create them, finance them and utilize their output. In the main they must serve the ends of these interests or the official ban is pronounced. Educational enterprises do not for any length of time remain immune from the struggle of interests for power which is the dominant feature of social life under a class system. As a matter of fact, the underlying clash of tendencies and interests will come to the surface more quickly and sharply than was the case in the decade and a half beginning in 1918. The reason is, of course, that the general pace of economic development is speeded up in this period of capitalist decline and, with this, crises emerge more quickly in all classes and fields, including the working class and the labor movement. Revolutionists can effectively utilize many of these workers’ educational enterprises – we do not of course imagine that it is possible to give all workers at all times the full revolutionary program – but only if they have a clear conception of the character of such enterprises and cherish no illusions as to their possibilities and stability. For the revolutionary party, its own educational work is the chief concern. Except for brief periods, before the war in the SP and after the war in the CP, the movement in the United States has never done any serious theoretical work in the application of Marxism to the problems of imperialism in general and American imperialism in particular. Hence there has not been a central school with intellectual prestige providing guidance and analysis for the leadership of the party and thus in turn for the membership. Other phases of our educational work cannot of course wait upon the establishment of such a central institution for research and teaching. But this need should have the most serious attention of the Workers Party in this period when it is urgently necessary to indoctrinate the advanced workers and intellectuals with the theory of revolutionary internationalism and when much fundamental work in the application of the theory to the problems of imperialism and the impending war is required.   






From A. J. Muste, national secretory of the Workers Party, comes further word of the tour he and James P. Cannon, editor of the New Militant, are making to present the program of the W.P. to the workers of the country. Reports indicate that Comrades Muste and Cannon’s tour is a march of triumph.





MADISON, Wis. – The University of Wisconsin is becoming more conservative. Phil LaFollette, of the new Progressive Party, is trying his hand at doing something for the masses with a reformist program. He has an alibi, however, since the Progressives do not control the legislature and so the moral may not be so obvious to the masses as it should be.
An old Brookwood graduate, though not a W.P. sympathizer, got up a meeting here at short notice. They planned to have it in a house but had to transfer to a hall because over fifty wanted to come. If the Chicago District got established, it ought to have little trouble in forming a branch here.
Here our first taste of northwestern cold begins. The train is due at 1 A.M. It crawls in about 3. We are due in Minneapolis at 8 A.M. and get there 5 hours late. Over 30 degrees below zero and a cutting wind. What a reception!
* * *
MINNEAPOLIS, Minn. – Those of us who have heard former C.L.A, comrades go into ecstasies over the Minneapolis strikes, Drivers Local 574 and the Minneapolis militants generally, have sometimes said to ourselves: “They may be good in Minneapolis, but they can’t be that good.” There must have been many, too, who have had a fleeting doubt as to whether Toledo and Minneapolis could live up to their reputations, whether the magnificent battles of 1934 had been a “flash in the pan” or were being followed up in a persistent and militant fashion.
Having now spent five days in Minneapolis, maybe I’ll be accused of “putting it on thick”. I must sing the praises of the movement here. Nothing is clearer than that both here and in Toledo our forces are stronger today, have a firmer hold in the unions, and are working harder than they were a year ago.
We tried to have a conference of the trade union members of our branch the other night and had to wait until nearly eleven because a class in Labor Dramatics, a conference of Bakery Workers and an organization committee meeting of Northern States Power employees were on, and our comrades and the 574 boys were taking leading parts in each. While waiting around, we had a session with a group of progressives from the railroad unions. The Northern States Power employees have a charter from the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers under which they are building an industrial union of utility workers, including the office force. It looks like the next big achievement for Minneapolis.
A regular and a special meeting of the party branch, a party mass meeting well attended in spite of 30 below zero weather, a rousing banquet at which sympathizers contributed a substantial sum to the Party Foundation Fund, a meeting of several hundred students and faculty members of the University of Minnesota, a forum in St. Paul and another in Minneapolis, a meeting of the Northwest Unity Conference, the organization of militant unionists in these parts – these items contributed a part of the speaking schedule here! But as suggested above, the weather was cold and bracing, so we have survived.
In fact – we had better make it public lest the comrades conclude that Comrade Cannon and I have gone plutocratic or that the party has come into a fortune – we look like new men. Some of the trade unionists here clubbed together and fitted the two of us out with brand new suits, union label and all!
At the Branch E.C. meeting Sunday morning twelve new members were enrolled. It is expected that a party office will be opened soon.
Our stay here ended as might have been expected in this region where one strike follows on the heels of another. Eight or ten of the comrades were in my room at midnight for a last chat. The telephone rang. Miles Dunne was wanted. Fargo, N.D., was calling. Miles has organized the drivers there. They are on strike for union recognition. The call was from a newspaper man in Fargo and conveyed the news that a few hours before the police force, which has sworn in 300 special deputies in that town of about 25,000 inhabitants, had appeared at union headquarters with warrants for Miles Dunne and two local leaders. The union men refused to open the doors and give up their leaders. So the police shot tear gas bombs through the windows, rounded up 94 strikers and threw them into jail. They did not arrest any of the women and children of whom a considerable number were in the hall. The warrants against Miles Dunne and the other leaders charge rioting and inciting to riot. Thus our gathering was transformed into a council of war. Strike and defense plans were mapped out.
The Workers Party, Local 574 and the other unions in Minneapolis, the organized farmers around Fargo, will get those drivers out of jail and call the bluff of the Fargo reactionaries who think that terrorism can stop the militant labor movement of the northwest. The Non-Partisan Labor Defense may be called upon to help.
 







The tour is over! Comrade Muste reports herein on the final meetings and his impression of the whole tour. Comrade Cannon, during the tour, was called to California and is now in Sacramento.





DAVENPORT and MUSCATINE, Ia. – It, is when one meets a small branch such as the one at Davenport that, one sees most clearly, perhaps, how thorough training in revolutionary theory can hold a group together in the face of the greatest obstacles and discouragement. If other branches made a showing in proportion to their membership in mass meetings, Chicago and Minneapolis would get out a thousand and New York five thousand.
At the Davenport meeting we had our first open encounter with sin American Legion anti-Bolshevik propagandist, a gentleman who sought to pin “the destruction of the home” and “bloody revolution” on us and who did not consider it pertinent when we pointed out that capitalism had robbed the workers of their homes, had murdered millions in the World War, in White Guard and Fascist pogroms, etc.
At Muscatine the workers in an unemployed union seemed not a bit shocked when told that under the new Roosevelt bill project workers would get only eleven dollars per week. After the meeting I learned they were getting only five or six dollars and figured that eleven would represent a hundred percent increase in the wage standard. To this has the proud American working class been reduced!
* * *
Crowded Hours in St. Louis
ST. LOUIS, Mo. – The standard, not to say classic, Stalinist mimeographed leaflet distributed at our public meeting gives “the new line” of the C.P. on us, at least, for that day: the workers are warned to beware of “ultra-revolutionary parties” such as the W.P.
A conference with workers who want to discuss the details of the W.P. program, one with a group of progressive trade unionists, two meetings with middle class sympathizers, a business meeting of the branch, and a public mass meeting are crowded into 36 hours here.
Workers in St. Louis want to be organized, but the Federal Auto locals and others have lost membership. There is no one to give direction. A young officer in one of the new locals tells his experiences:
“An A.F. of L. representative was sent in to our Local. He made a speech. I thought it was a good one. Then I got home and my wife asked me what he had told us to do. I thought and thought, and then I woke up and realized he hadn’t told us a thing to do.”
St. Louis Branch W.P. has added some members and has some good prospects on the list.
* * *
ILLINOIS MINE FIELDS. – Shacks, dirt, poverty. Here one realizes again that Columbia has indeed fallen low. In one mining town P.M.A. members on strike over two years still believe in the Pearcy-Keck-Picek machine in the P.M.A. which supplies them with about fifty cents worth of relief a month, and regard Allard, Pat Ansbury and Jack Battuello as union-wreckers! But that will not last much longer. All the indications here confirm the reports which have been received in the National Office recently to the effect that the prestige of the militants in the P.M.A. is rising rapidly.
Meetings in Gillespie, Pana, Bullpitt which takes in Tovey and Kincaid also, and Springfield. The Gillespie meeting was held in the S.P. hall. Here for the first time on the trip the C.P. turned out in force. They should have spared their pains, for their record in the Illinois mine fields has thoroughly discredited them. In both Gillespie and Springfield the most serious and active workers turned out to our meeting, asked numerous questions and urged the Workers Party to send an organizer to Illinois. That call must be heeded.
* * *
“Best Political Meeting Yet”
COLUMBUS, Ohio. – The best political meeting yet held in Columbus from the standpoint both of numbers and of the level of questions and discussion. Dick Harrington was on hand. For months he posed as a non-partisan in the unemployed organizations and came to the N.U.L. convention at Columbus last summer supposedly as the representative of numerous unemployed bodies in several states of the Pacific Northwest. He has found it possible to leave the unemployed in that great area to their fate these many months and to busy himself in a vain effort to disrupt Unemployed Leagues in Ohio and turn them into Councils. He was given the floor and indicated that he was going to demolish “Trotskyism”. After one sentence he was off on a typical demagogic appeal for “united front in the struggle for bread” which netted him exactly nothing except applause from half a dozen “stooges” he has brought with him. And even these all gathered after the meeting around Sam Pollock of Toledo who happened to be present and listened for nearly an hour to his exposition of what a “united front” is and is not!
The mass meeting was followed by a three hour meeting of the Branch devoted to a serious discussion of how a revolutionary party functions in mass organizations.
 
An Old American Custom
CHARLESTON, W.Va. – Here the revolutionary party holds its meeting in the Court of Common Pleas of Kanawha County! This is because the Unemployed Leagues have established the custom of holding workers’ mass meetings in public buildings. This was done on two grounds. First, the workers have a right to the use of buildings built and maintained by taxation; second, this differentiates the Leagues clearly from Ku Klux Klan and similar outfits which operate secretly and enables the Leagues to undermine their influence as organizations which do not operate in the open and consequently cannot lie for the interest of the masses. Despite winter weather and almost impassable roads party and mass work goes forward.
* * *
Pittsburgh – the Last Stop
PlTTSBURGH, Pa. – Last stop. Several hundred attended our mass meeting in Carnegie North Side Library. Rumors before the meeting that the police would break it up proved unfounded, though a few hung around the doors. A wave of repression and terrorism is sweeping Allegheny County, reflecting the nervousness of the authorities over the unrest among the unemployed, in the steel mills, etc. When committees protest to the mayor, a Single Taxer, he fretfully answers: “There isn’t anything I can do about it. Why, the police stopped one of my meetings once in North Side Park.”
 



TOLEDO, April 30. – As this editorial is written on the eve of May Day in Toledo, the picketers march up and down on the line at the Chevrolet plant where not even a telephone operator is permitted to work. Every few minutes the telephone in our headquarters rings and a new and exciting report comes in from the rapidly extending battle-front: Norwood General Motors Plant Out One Hundred Per Cent. All Cleveland General Motors Plants Shut Down For Lack Of Transmissions. Flint Balks Plan To Take Toledo Work There. Will Take Strike Vote Tonight. The Mechanics Education Society Of America (independent union) Will Not Work On Scab Material.
Not since the Haymarket year of 1886 has there been a May Day as significant for the American labor movement as this May Day of 1935, marked by a strike which already involves 15,000 automobile workers, by the prospect of a general strike against at least one great automobile corporation, by the beginning of the show-down fight over the recognition of unionism in the basic industries of the U.S.
How does it happen that the workers of Toledo again act decisively and take their place in the vanguard of labor’s battle? How explain the differences between the constant postponement of action in Detroit and in the steel centers, the “sell-out “ of the strike of rubber workers in Akron before it got under way, and on the other hand the brilliant achievement of the Toledo workers in shutting down the key plant of General Motors and within one week bringing out over ten thousand G.M. workers in other centers with them? Such things do not come by accident.
On May Day 1934 the Auto-Lite strike in Toledo was dead on its feet because the officers of an infant Federal union passively submitted to an injunction and the leadership of the A.F. of L. could and would teach them no other course. By militant defiance of that injunction the Lucas County Unemployed League and the branch of the Workers Party of the U.S. cooperating with activists in the union revived the strike and paved the way for that night in May when ten thousand workers of Toledo stormed the Auto-Lite plant, drove the sheriff’s deputies to cover, fought the militia. Thus a partial victory was wrung from defeat. In the succeeding months that victory was made complete, the union got a signed agreement with the firm, and the company union was smashed.
The comrades of the W.P. did not go to sleep after that great effort or become arm-chair philosophers trying to live on the glory of the fight that was past. Patiently they gathered a few progressives in the unions around them. Tirelessly they threw themselves into every struggle that occurred. Eagerly they read and talked with more experienced comrades in order to deepen their knowledge both of the theory and the practical tactics of the revolutionary movement. Steadily their conviction of the fundamental role of the revolutionary party grew.
Thus the tradition of militancy was built up in the Automobile Workers Union in Toledo and to a large extent in other unions. As Oliver Myers, business agent of the Electrical Workers Union in Toledo, stated at the recent A.F. of L. conference in Washington which was passing resolutions as usual and letting it go at that: “We don’t do things like this in Toledo. We strike the damned job. We don’t come down to Washington, we go on the picket line. “
Distrust of trade union officials who try to make the workers believe that their hope lies in “cooperation “ with the bosses, and government agencies such as the Automobile Labor Board, was built up at least among the more progressive workers. Local union officials like Ramsey who played a questionable role in the Auto-Lite strike were undermined.
Week after week demonstrated that a revolutionary party such as the W.P. with a sound trade union policy is a tower of strength to the workers. Not one strike was lost in Toledo this past year. The Auto Workers Federal Union 18384 alone gained thousands of members, signed contracts with every important automobile parts plant in Toledo, and substantially improved conditions.
That is the background of the strike that broke the apathy and peace of the automobile situation last Tuesday and made it impossible for Wm. S. Knudsen himself to get into the Chevrolet plant until strike chairman, Jimmy Roland, granted permission.
To the crucial struggle which has now begun the Workers Party pledges anew its fullest support. (As I write these words, a union member comes into the room to report that the strike meeting tonight cheered and cheered again when the telegram of Morris Lewitt, N.Y. District Organizer of the W.P., pledging support and telling about the picketing of General Motors offices in New York by the W.P., was read.) Well do we know that if this strike attains its objective and brings General Motors to its knees a great step will have been taken toward that day when the giant American working-class rises in its might to smash capitalism.
The Strike Committee has outlined a sound policy:

No going back to work except on the basis of a signed contract giving genuine union recognition.
 
Direct negotiations between strike committee and management – no turning over of authority to negotiate to government boards or union officials in Washington.
 
Extension of the strike to every General Motors plant in the country.
 
Establishment of machinery to coordinate the strike and settlement activity on a national scale.

We call upon our Party throughout the land, upon the unions, the unemployed leagues, all working-class organizations, to provide genuine, constant and enthusiastic support to the strike. Respond to every call from the union for help! Assist in manning the picket lines! Call upon any General Motors plants still working to come out on strike! Picket the salesrooms and offices of General Motors! Refuse to buy any General Motors products, automobiles, Frigidaires, etc.!

For a victorious strike!
 
For decisive defeat of the anti-labor policy of the automobile barons!
 
For a fighting national union of automobile workers!
 
Workers in steel, textiles, rubber, automobiles, mining, every great industry, hear the call of Toledo!
 
Make the Chevrolet strike the signal for a general series of assaults upon the Roosevelt starvation policy and entrenched American capitalism!

 



RECENT weeks witnessed some amazing manoeuvres in the trade union field. The chief actors were the American Federation of Labor officials and the Roosevelt administration. The chief victims to date are the workers in the basic industries. There will be other rounds in the battle. These the workers will win.
The beginning of 1935 found the workers in what may be described as a state of suspense. A period had come to an end. They needed to adjust themselves to new conditions before entering fresh struggles. Employers were on the aggressive. The Federal administration was turning to the Right and abandoning any appearance of “friendliness” to labor. The AF of L leaders had sabotaged the struggles of 1934 in steel, automobiles and rubber, but no alternative leadership was in sight.
But “beware the Ides of March”. Fundamental causes of unrest had not been removed. The relief rolls were growing bigger. Prices were going up. Work was mercilessly speeded. Anti-labor sentiments coming from higher-ups in Washington created bitterness among trade union leaders and rank and file alike. June and the expiration of NRA were approaching, with the employers seemingly intent on wiping out even such meager protection as section 7a had seemed to afford. The automobile code had been reversed and the Automobile Labor Board was holding “collective bargaining” elections against labor’s protest and chiefly in plants which were notorious company union strongholds.
Toward the end of March the electricity thus generated seemed about to discharge itself. The bituminous coal agreement was bout to expire. The United Mine Workers of America demanded a thirty-hour week and a six dollars per day minimum wage. John L. Lewis, the UMW of A head, of whom it has been said that he can strut sitting down, threatened a complete shut-down of the industry on April 1 if the demands were not granted.
A strike in coal would affect the “captive mines” of the US Steel Corporation, would presently tie up steel, automobiles and rubber plants. The progressives in the Amalgamated Association of Iron, Steel and Tin Workers announced that the steel workers would walk out with the miners. In Akron the rubber workers who had several times been on the verge of striking but were “dissuaded” by the AF of L leaders, grew restive again and strike polls were started in their Federal locals. A spark, so it seemed, and the strike conflagration of 1935 would burst forth.
But the hour for the decisive battle in the basic industries has not yet struck. There is still room for trade union bureaucrats and capitalist politicians to manoeuvre. The workers still have lessons to learn.
On March 31, John L. Lewis announced that the UMW of A had agreed to a truce with the coal operators until June 16, the date when the present National Recovery Act expires. At about the same time spokesmen for Roosevelt, away on a cruise off the balmy coast of Florida in Vincent Astor’s yacht, let it be known that in some way – a little vague to be sure – the administration would support Senator Wagner’s bill to “outlaw company unions”. Also, Senator Harrison pulled out of his pocket a bill which had evidently reposed there since the President’s departure from Washington, providing for a renewal of NRA for two years. The number and scope of the codes is to be greatly reduced, but section 7a is to be retained.
How stands the balance sheet after these swift manoeuvres?

The threat of big strikes in the big industries was used by Roosevelt to club the employers into accepting a modified NRA and to prevent them from trying to abrogate every vestige of such protection as had been given to collaborationist trade unionism as a “balance” to the vast impetus given to monopoly and to employer organizations under the New Deal. They have had to moderate for the moment their truculency toward both Roosevelt and the unions. They have, however, gained much. By June 16 the slack season in coal will be well under way, the peak of production in steel, autos, etc. will be past, unless an entirely unforeseen business spurt develops. The threat of strike in the heavy industries has been put off, perhaps for many months. As for a renewed section 7a or even the Wagnerian “outlawing” of company unions, the employers doubtless believe they can find ways to evade serious consequences from them, especially with Roosevelt and the AF of L leaders to be counted on to check the workers’ militancy. Such of the restraints under the codes as they disliked will be eliminated.
 
The great performer himself, Franklin Delano, retains his footing on the tight rope and bows graciously in all directions. He is still performing his role of keeping capitalism going, preventing the class conflict from breaking out nakedly, that is, saving the employing class from a gigantic assault by labor. The “friendship” with the AF of L leaders which seemed to have been irremediably ruptured is renewed. The act in which “tough” John L. Lewis denounces suave Donald Richberg, Roosevelt’s spokesman, as a traitor to labor is followed by an act in which John and Don have their pictures taken together.
 
On the side of labor, the dominant figure in the recent events, in addition to Lewis, was Sidney Hillman, president of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America and most active of trade union bureaucrats in the NRA. The Hillman-Lewis strategy is now clear. Since it will exercize a preponderant influence in the next period it is very essential to understand it.

They would like to see industrial unions built in the basic industries. They are astute enough to see that the day when the AF of L can exist as a force on the ever narrowing base of craft unions of the skilled, is finally gone. They know that unless “safe” leaders do something about unionism in heavy industry, the radicals will gain the leadership. They believe that unions can be built only with government support. Another way of putting it would be that they understand that unions based on workers’ struggles would have no place for them.
They hold, therefore, that for a successful organizing campaign in steel, autos, etc., some such psychology must be created among the workers in these industries as existed in the honeymoon days of the New Deal in 1933 when tens and hundreds of thousands of workers were enrolled in the Hillman and Lewis unions. The renewal of section 73, the enactment of the Wagner bill, the abolition of the present Auto Labor Board, will, they expect, do the trick. To secure these they used labor unrest and militancy to produce the threat of big strikes. Having gotten satisfactory assurances, as they believed, they put the brakes on the strikes.
It is common knowledge that some weeks ago Lewis submitted to the AF of L Executive Council a proposal to organize steel and was voted down by the die-hards. But the AF of L will be forced under such leadership as that of Hillman and Lewis to make a spurious attempt at organization in such industries, or the present leaders will be forced to surrender either to the company unions or to a radical leadership.
Any such attempt on the part of the AF of L will furnish a golden opportunity to a realistic revolutionary leadership. The workers in these industries feel that they need the support of the entire labor movement if they are to achieve organization. If the AF of L actually puts forces to work, they will respond. A merely negative attitude on the part of revolutionists to an organizing campaign, will not be understood by the workers, will isolate the revolutionists from them. In fact the latter must take the initiative, and that vigorously, in union organizing work in this period. This City a Union City, this State a Union State, this Industry a Union Industry, this Country a Union Country – these are the slogans today.
It is very doubtful whether the AF of L leadership will carry an organizing campaign through effectively to the finish, even assuming that it will launch one. That is why the honest, fighting elements in the unions must be organized as an independent force to put vigor into the campaign and to carry it to completion.
It is certain that the AF of L leadership will not carry out effectively the large scale, militant strike action without which no union which is more than a puppet of the government will be established in the basic industries. If the progressive-Left elements do make themselves an independent and powerful force in the unions, and they will have only themselves to blame if they do not, then when favorable conditions again develop and the workers under the lash of the crisis are once more brought to the point of striking, a terrific battle for leadership will be fought.
Then Lewis, Hillman and Green will not be the only ones claiming to represent the workers in Washington, and in any case the decisive events will not then occur in the White House with the smiling Roosevelt presiding as the cigars are passed, but on the picket lines in the steel, coal and automobile towns, as the gas bombs and the bullets fly about.
 







NEW YORK, May 30. – In a stirring address over WJZ on a national hook-up comrade A.J. Muste, national secretary of the Workers Party of the U.S. pointed to the fundamental maladies of the modern economic system. He concluded his broadcast by placing before the American people the dilemma that stirs the modern epoch – fascism or the workers’ revolution. Comrade Muste represented the standpoint of Communism in a three-cornered debate under the auspices of the League for Political Education, in which the other speakers were Norman Thomas and Lawrence Denis.
The complete text of Muste’s address follows:



I wish to make it clear that in setting forth the Communist answer to the problem confronting the American people today, I am not representing the Communist Party or the so-called Third, Communist, International, with which I have no connection and of which I have never been a member. I am setting forth the historic Communist position embodied in the experience of the modern working-class and in the writings of its great teachers, which constitutes the program of the Workers Party of the United States.
According to both the popular and the official conception, this nation embodies and was founded to realize certain great social ideals. It was to differ radically from “the old countries.” There were to be no aristocracies of birth or wealth. No individual or group was to be allowed to exploit and oppress others. Not for a favored few, but for the masses of the population there was to be abundance, security, an equal voice in the government, the opportunity for self-expression and self-development, – “a nation conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.”
Abundance for All
The material and technical rer sources for such a society, unquestionably exist in the United States today. No competent student doubts that insofar as it depends upon natural resources and the productive plant, everybody could have a comfortable and attractive home, abundant food, decent clothing, opportunity for recreation and education, security against accident, sickness, and old age; and the sense of independence and self-respect that goes with these things.
What we actually have, however, is mass unemployment, widespread poverty, a fifty percent cut in the standard of living since 1929, a society which does not know how to use the thousands of its youth coming out of the high schools and colleges, universal insecurity among industrial workers, farmers, small justness people, professionals, curtailment of liberty and the exercise of severe and brutal repression against efforts of the masses to right their wrongs. This appalling contrast between what might be and what is does not, in our opinion, spring from superficial causes. It arises from the nature of the economic system – capitalism – under which we operate.
A revolution in technology has occurred since 1789 and is still in process. Steel, automobiles, electric light and power, are produced and distributed not by individuals in individual enterprises, but through socialized, “cooperative” enterprises. Ownership and control, however, of these enterprises, and with it the right to make profit from them, to exploit the labor of those engaged in them, is still on the same individual basis, operated under essentially the same legal and political system as in 1789. It is Just as impossible for this antiquated system of private ownership and profit to function, to supply the needs of the population today, as it was for the feudal slave-holding economy in the Southern states to continue to do so in 1860. The system acts, obviously as a brake upon production so that, as the phrase goes, you have “want in the midst of plenty:”
If, therefore, the workers and farmers of the United States under the political leadership of the Workers Party were to come into power, they would take steps to end immediately private ownership and control over natural resources and over the plant for production, distribution and communication which their toil and skill have built. Ownership and control would be vested in society represented by the new Workers’ State. The owners, so-called, would not receive “compensation.” It is the workers and farmers, not the industrialists and financiers who have been coining profit from their toil, who have “compensation” coming to them! The new state will as a matter of fact take whatever measures may be necessary to make it impossible for the old owning class, the czars of industry and finance, to get back into power. All inhabitants, however, who are not engaged in organizing resistance to the new regime and trying to restore the old order of special privilege, insecurity and war, will have their opportunity to do useful social work and to share in the products of that work.
Citizenship in the new state will likewise be the prerogative of all who are engaged in useful work, industrial, agricultural, clerical, domestic, technical, professional. The workers of these various categories in the various enterprises will be organized in Councils or Unions democratically controlled. They will elect representatives to the higher governing bodies and eventually to the National Council or Congress.
A National Planning Commission, with subordinate and cooperating commissions in various industries and localities, will be established. Its business will be to plan for the most efficient production of goods and services of all kinds, to utilize fully the many inventions and discoveries already available but held out of use by their owners because no private profit can accrue from them at present, to set the scientists and technicians to work freely and with adequate resources in order to plan for still greater efficiency in the use of our resources and thus for greater abundance of leisure as well as goods. It should be added that the Workers’ State will envisage not only national but international planning. National boundaries are as artificial and restrictive today as state boundaries had become in 1789, and socialism is in essence an international, a world economy. Every effort to establish “planned” production under private capitalism breaks down, since the warfare between rival capitalists, in a nation and capitalist groups in different nations disrupts such efforts.
 
Obliterating Insecurity
The removal of the brake of private ownership which shuts, down factories, plows under raw materials and stultifies the scientist and technician, and putting in its place the social, that is, scientific, use of natural resources and the productive plant, will mean an immediate and substantial improvement in the standard of living of the masses. That improvement can be continuous. The specter of insecurity will be removed. The undemocratic economic domination of the few over the many will be at an end. No one can predict the cultural advances which may follow this release of the human spirit. On no other economic basis can the “American dream” of liberty, equality and fraternity be realized under the conditions of modern life. Like every ruling class, the present capitalist class will seek to maintain its power. In the period of its rise and expansion capitalism could accumulate profits and also raise the standard of living of the masses. In the present period, as is clear enough on the face of it, it can no longer do this. Profits can be made only by fiercer exploitation, cutting down the living standards, of the masses, taking away even such concessions as were previously made.
Since capitalism must keep pushing the standard lower and lower, it must eventually seek to destroy every vestige of democratic rights, every means of resistance that farmers, workers, small business men, etc. may have. For obviously no matter how meek, peaceful, conservative an organization of these elements may be, at. some point it will try to resist the imposition of further impoverishment and distress. To maintain their system, the capitalists will then seek to destroy any such organization in utter disregard of law, constitution and bill of rights. In other words, capitalism can save itself in the present period only by the resort to Fascism. Under these circumstances to assume that democratic processes will be maintained is an ostrich policy. Unquestionably the struggle and strikes of the workers against impoverishment and injustice which now goes on daily will have to be waged ever more intensely and on a broader front, becoming eventually a struggle against the economic system as such and against the government which resists even moderate adjustments as witness the Supreme Court decision on NBA and becomes more and more openly an undemocratic agency of oppression. The choice is between Fascism and revolutionary action for a new social order.
The Choice for All
To those elements in this country who are well aware from their own experience that something is radically wrong but who hesitate to face the clear and drastic alternatives, we point out what has happened to similar groups and classes in Germany and elsewhere. They espoused Fascism because they wanted an improvement in their standard of living; they are being beaten down to the level of bare existence. They desired security; and they have insecurity. They wanted national self-respect and peace; they are being rushed down the precipice to war. They wanted freedom and recoiled from the “regimentation” which they were told would obtain under socalism or communism; they have gotten the extreme of regimentation. They wanted a life based on the old virtues, and recoiled from the march forward to a new culture; they have gotten all the indecencies of Hitlerism. They wanted to go back to the “good old days” before the war; they are being swept back to the middle ages, to barbarism, to savagery. Capitalism today means retreat, reaction, Fascism, war, the collapse of civilization. The one road to security, to peace, to freedom, to cultural advancement is the road of the workers’ revolution.
This is your choice – capitalism which means reaction and chaos or a Workers’ World which means a higher level of civilization and culture.
 



I.
The term “American Approach” has been often used but seldom carefully analyzed. When a phrase is thus used, the inevitable result is that different people attach different meanings to it. In raising a discussion as to the real meaning of the term in ,a recent article (Modern Monthly, March 1935, For An American Revolutionary Approach), Comrade Budenz has rendered a service. He states that his thoughts are set down “for the consideration of honest-thinking radicals.” A further discussion of them here is consequently in order.
Tile Workers Party of the U.S. has recognized in the most authoritative way open to it the importance of a realistic approach to the revolutionary task of overthrowing capitalism in the U. S. – namely, by setting it down in the Declaration of Principles adopted by the Party at its founding convention. According to that Declaration the primary task of the Party and of the American working class is “the defeat of the enemy at home – the overthrow of the capitalist government of the U.S.” In carrying out that task the Party is pledged to “use the revolutionary potentialities of American tradition and history” and to adapt its strategy and tac tics to the concrete situation and the line-up of class forces in the U.S.
Theory and Practice
Some of those who have advocated the “American approach” have counterposed it, either openly or by inference, to the Marxian and Leninist approach. According to them you have to take one or the- other; you can’t have both. This is not the viewpoint of the W.P. The very same section of the Declaration of Principles to which I have just referred states- that “The W.P. of the U.S. is founded on the great principles of revolutionary theory and practice stated by Marx and Lenin and tested by the experience of the class struggle on an international scale, above all in the Russian Revolution of 1917.’’ It is precisely these principles that we propose to apply in a fearless, realistic fashion to the American scene.
In proposing to do that we are certainly not going counter to Marx and Lenin. Quite the contrary. Neither one of them regarded their theory as a “dogma to be learned by heart and repeated mechanical ly.” Both emphasize/! the importance of taking into account the special historical, cultural, political, economic, technological factors in different countries.
The “American approach’’ does not in and of itself give us a set of basic revolutionary principles. The term itself suggests that we approach the American scene with certain principles which we want to make effective there. We must make it clear, then, what these principles are. Are they the principles of Marx and Lenin. – the conceptions of the class struggle, of the state as the executive committee of the ruling class, of the nature of capitalist exploitation of the workers, of the role of the working class in modern society, of the revolutionary method, the character of the workers’ state, etc. set forth in our Declaration of Principles – or is another set of principles being advanced? If the latter, then we must have a clear statement of what the principles are, before any talk of applying them in the U.S. can mean anything.
 
Lenin’s Realistic Approach
If we are speaking of a realistic application of Marxist-Leninist fundamentals to American conditions, then it is correct to speak not only of an American, but of a French, British, Chinese, etc, approach, i.e., of taking into account the special conditions with which the revolutionary movement is con fronted In each country. And it is then important at this point to observe that it was,. Lenin who gave the world the supreme example to date of this fearless, realistic, yes experimental, reckoning with theoretical conditions in a given country at a given historical moment – which is not to imply, as we shall have occasion to point out later, that Lenin had a nationalistic outlook or philosophy.
There runs through the article of Comrade Budenz a “contempt for theory” expressed in vigorous and picturesque language. “Radical parrot-talk” of the “other-worldly brethren,” “the futile pyrotechnics of other-worldly theoretics,” and “pontifical theorology which is paralyzing effective radical action,” are excoriated. Precisely because some very vigorous head-thumping needs to be done, it is to be regretted that by the manner in which these things’ are said and by what is left unsaid in the article in question, the way is left open for very serious misunderstanding.
 
How Advise the Youth?
Lack of revolutionary theory in the swiftly changing, complex modern world Is exactly the same as want of a compass in mid-ocean. Shall we advise our young workers and students not to study the history of class struggles and the theory which Is based upon an analysis of that history? Tell them that this Is only a waste of time? Fortunately, they would not take the advice if we did give it. The alive and intelligent ones among them are eager to learn more of revolutionary theory. I am told that one of the ablest of the young workers in the former C.P.L.A. who would not and could not join the Communist Party, nevertheless for months secretly took every leaflet and statement that he drafted to a C.P. acquaintance to make sure that it was “correct from a Marxian viewpoint.” That was not an unsound instinct by any means! Lenin who has the most colossal practical achievements in working-class history to his credit was constantly and profoundly occupied with theory. Pragmatically and to say the least, it did not seem to affect adversely his practical efficiency as a revolutionist!
There is even place for a certain division of labor in the revolutionary movement. The man who makes a contribution to theory or history, who can teach young workers, Who writes a revolutionary drama or battle-song, is not necessarily to be read out of the Party because he never organized any steel workers or “educated” a scab on a picket line, any more than a picket captain who carries out the tasks assigned him by the Party – is disqualified for membership because he cannot carry on a disputation about Bonapartism or the permanent revolution with one of the Party intellectuals.
 
The “Lunatic” Fringe
There are pests, various brands of pseudo-theoreticians, who merit the severest condemnation of responsible revolutionists. One consists of those who participate in the endless gab-fests in corridors and cafeterias which are supposed to be profound theoretical discussions; only they are carried on by comrades who do not know theories, only words and phrases – discussions which will never contribute anything to revolutionary theory, any more than church sewing-circle talk-sprees ever contributed to theology or certain Greenwich Village gatherings ever added anything to the science of biology or to literary criticism. Theory is no substitute for action and hum-drum practical work; much less is talk such a substitute. We agree with comrades in the Party, and with Marx, Engels and Lenin in condemnation of those who use Marxian writings as a ritual or incantation, those who hav^ a pat, abstract, mechanical formula from the books to apply to every situation, and who led Marx to exclaim that he was not a Marxist. We can share also the contempt of some of our comrades for those who regard themselves as fully qualified to pontificate on the most complex and fundamental problems of the working class movement on the other side of the globe though they have never shown any capacity to contribute anything’ to the solution of the simplest problem under their own noses. Most eagerly do we join in putting in his place the upstart who has read a few books and taken a few courses and who regards it as his prerogative to look down from Olympian heights upon workers who have performed colossal tasks in the actual class struggle. “Activists” who encounter this species should not jump to the conclusion, however, that “theory is dangerous.” It is a case of youth or glands or something like that. Responsible “theoreticians” and responsible “activists” are not enemies, not thin-skinned individuals who cannot stand criticism; they are comrades who have much to tench each other.
 
The American Pragmatism
One other point may be touched in this connection. Americans, we are told, are not interested in theory. They are pragmatists, experimental ; they want action. Remembering that there are exceptions to all rules, and a good many to some, it seems to me that in the main this point is a valid one. We have already pointed out that this does not at all mean that the Party can dispense with theory or afford to despise it. Precisely because we are dealing with a working class which certainly to date has not acquired a working class philosophy or “world-view,” which is disposed to work by rule of thumb, try first this and then that way out, hail Roosevelt today, Long or Coughlin tomorrow – in a period when the pace of development is exceedingly swift and the choice between Fascism and the working class revolution may have to be faced very soon – the Party must have a clear conception of the forces at work and the basic trends, must not dissipate its energies and lose the confidence of the masses by falling prey to nostrums which will cure no ills and from which the masses will presently turn away in disgust, must not get bottled up in a blind alley. The Party must be sure of itself, able to endure opposition, even apparent isolation from the masses, not bargaining away for an easy and brief popularity, its chance to lead in the crisis that is certain to come. Lenin’s party too seemed hopelessly weak, poor, isolated from the stream of events as the year 1917 opened. It would actually have been worthless but for its discipline, its grounding in theory, its militant use of theory in action. Because it did not try to win the masses by any cheap device, it actually won the masses as the objective situation developed to the crisis point.
 
Assimilating “Activists”
One thing that we might expect from the American emphasis on action and experimentation is a comparatively large number of “activists” in the Party and in the radical movement generally. The Party must welcome them, assimilate them, learn how to utilize their qualities to the utmost, make them feel that the Party is the avenue for the expression of their militant energies, educate them or it will simply be subjecting itself to :i serious, if not fatal, handicap. Thousands of these militants have never been able to accept S.P. parliamentarism. They have tried the C.P. in many cases and given it up. Thousands more who have never been in any working class party or group are coming along in the new unions. From the picket lines we must recruit the most intelligent young. workers into the ranks of the Party. We must win, keep and develop inspiring leaders of mass struggles. They are hard to find and to replace if lost.
As a natural outcome of the country’s pioneer experience and tradition, movements of revolt in the U. S. and their leaders have had a strongly anarchistic tinge. Comrade Budenz correctly calls attention to this fact in his article. It is not without significance that the heroes he mentions are Jefferson, John Brown, Thoreau, Wendell Phillips, and that he writes with elation of being “free from the leading strings of any radical Mother Church.” This impatience of restraint and leaning to direct action is “American.” (Both reactionary American employers and conservative American trade unionists exhibit the tendency in strikes.)
 
The Fallacy of Individualism
Insofar as this tradition of “freedom” makes for resistance on the part of American workers to bureaucracy in the economic or political movement and to mechanical domination of the Party by a bureaucratic International, it is a useful and precious thing. The trouble with the individualist or anarchist is that his revolt does not express itself in an organized way. It takes the form of individual protest, “conscientious objection,” “civil disobedience,” putting oneself on record, withdrawal from society as in Thoreau’s case, a dramatic demonstration in John Brown’s case, etc. But this is for the most part futile, and side by side with it are found, consequently, the most extreme regimentation and conformity. Witness the autocracy in the trade unions. And nowhere can one find people with greater ability to have their minds changed for them instantly and painlessly, to declare that black is white and vice versa at the behest of the boss, than in the American section of the Third International. Thus it is essential for these mass workers and leaders to whom we have referred as important elements for the Party, to learn in turn the indispensable role of a disciplined, revolutionary party in the struggle of the working class today and in its final emancipation. They must learn to work in an organized way and to express their dissent, which often may be well founded, in an organized way, with in the Party. If they do not learn to work under the discipline or at. least influence of the Party, they are either condemned to futility in the end, or are drawn into the ranks or the service of the trade union bureaucrats (something that has happened with plenty of them in the American movement) or worse still go into the service of capitalists or even Fascists – as happened with a number of prominent Italian syndicalists, e.g.
The Vanguard
Where is there today a mass movement of workers, except the trade union movement which under its present collaborationist leadership is certainly not to be regarded as a model to be copied, or where is there a flourishing progressive movement in the unions themselves, except where there is some political party or group to give continuity, perspective and drive? The Party must express itself in mass organizations and mass work; but equally does the mass work depend for its very life upon the organized, conscious, disciplined, revolutionary vanguard.
It may not be amiss to follow these comments on anarchism through a step further. Anarchism is no solution for the working class today. The job is to overthrow the highly organized capitalist state and to construct a highly organized socialist society. For ei tlier the destructive or the constructive side of the task anarchism is helpless. Organization, not anarchy, is required. Let our comrades ponder deeply the brilliant and devastating comment of Trotsky after pointing out that Prince Kropotkin, anarchist leader, opposed the revolution and became a Russian patriot in 1917:
“The principles of liberalism can have a real existence only in conjunction with a police system. Anarchism is an attempt to cleanse liberalism of the police. But just as pure oxygen is impossible to breathe, so liberalism without the, police-principle means the death of society. Being a shadow caricature of liberalism, anarchism as a whole has shared its fate. – Like every sect which founds its teaching not upon the actual development of human society, but upon the reduction to absurdity of one of its features, anarchism explodes like a soap-bubble at that moment when the social contradictions arrive at the point of war or revolution.”
 



(Ed. Note: This is the second of a series of articles by Comrade Muste. The third article will appear next week.)

II.
There is another idea advanced by Comrade Budenz which along with certain valuable suggestions exhibits the same individualism, unreality, “other-worldliness,” the pioneer’s longing for a fresh start, the yearning for the ideal, as the conceptions we have been discussing. The “American approach” means, he suggests, that in building the American revolutionary party we must make a fresh start. The movement in this country must be “foot-loose from the broils of European radicalism.” Our workers and farmers are “nauseated with the charges and countercharges of ‘opportunism,’ ‘renegadism,’ etc. which fill the radical air.” They are “fed up on the neurasthenic fictions which one radical group must, as a. matter of duty, create about the other – muddying the waters and hiding the lesson of correct tactics.”
There is here, be it said in passing, a hint that it is only European radicalism which is afflicted with broils, that American radicalism would be free of them if these bad Europeans had not brought them over or if, perhaps, foolish Americans had not imitated the Europeans. There is surely no foundation in fact for such an assumption of the peaceableness of Americans, red or any other color, and a tendency is evident here to slip into language which might easily be given a nationalistic interpretation which its author would be the first to disown.
 
Mud-Slinging Methods
Now there is no question that radical parties and groups have sometimes devoted time and energy to wrangling over non-essentials or issues that had become dead. It is also true that controversy has descended at times to the level of petty sniping. The C.P. has pursued a policy of mud-slinging, character-assassination (at this very moment directed against Comrade Budenz), lying, double-crossing, breaking up meetings of other groups, which have introduced a demoralization and bitterness into the radical movement. With any protest against any of these tendencies wherever they may appear, the W.P. will associate itself. It has taken and will take the lead in the effort to eradicate them.
But there is here a lumping together of all controversies in the radical movement and the suggestion that they are not over serious and genuine issues but the product of “neurasthenic fictions” which each radical group has to trump up against the others as a justification for its own existence. Are the discussions which have indeed raged furiously many times in the radical movement thus to be discussed as the ravings of neurasthenics about fictions? Was there not a real issue between Marx and the Utopian socialists? Or Marx and Bakunin? And was it not essential to the advancement of the working class that these issues be fought out and clarified? To take another illustration, comrade Budenz would be the last to argue that there is no real issue as between the Social-democrat and the revolutionist or that it is not necessary to break the hold of the Social-democracy on the mind of the working class.
 
The Issue at Hand
It really comes down, then, to the question as to whether the conflict between the C.P. and the W.P., between the Third International and those who have raised the banner of the New, Fourth, International, has to do with significant issues. But to ask this question is to answer it! Conceivably an honest worker may be on one side or the other in the controversy, and we do not class those workers who differ from us as counter-revolutionists and social-fascists (a breed that, seerns suddenly to be as extinct as the dodo). But every day in the field our comrades encounter those who belong to the C.P. or are under its influence. They must be equipped to reason with them. What else should a responsible worker do with other workers?
Furthermore, the issues of the united front, the trade union policy of the C.P., social-fascism, party and workers’ democracy, socialism in one country, the foreign policy of the Soviet Union, cannot be dismissed as unimportant, “neurasthenic fictions,” any more than the controversy between Marx and the Utopians, or Lenin and the Social-Democrats could be. The advent of Fascism, the reasons why the workers’ movement did not prevent it, the debacle of the C.P. in Germany, the fact that in seven years, and such years, the Third International, claiming to be the general staff of the world revolutionary movement, has had no congress – all this, the W.P. claims, can only mean that the working class of the world has entered upon a new epoch, as truly as a new epoch dawned with the debacle of the Second International in 1914.
Confronted with such a situation, the revolutionary vanguard must first decide whether the basic principles of the movement remain or whether a new set is to be worked out. The W.P. bases itself upon the principles of Marx and Lenin. No one has come forward with any others that merit serious consideration.
 
The Point of Departure
It then becomes necessary to ask how the basic principles have been perverted, misapplied, departed from. How can the revolutionary movement possibly go on, unless it is simply to make a leap in the dark, save on the basis of an evaluation of the past, its successes and its failures? Since when has it become scientific and realistic for a movement not to strive earnestly to benefit by its own experience? To propose to “start from scratch” with a brand-new revolutionary movement is to cry for the moon. We cannot wipe out history. Our opponents will talk about it if we do not. It is not even true that the workers of the U.S. are nauseated with discussion of these issues. Most of them do not know anything about them, it is true. They are uninterested, rather than nauseated. But will any one say that there is less discussion in the S.P. for example, or among the more advanced workers generally, about revolutionary principles and the evaluation of European events, etc. than a few years ago?
Less now than ever before is it possible or advisable for the revolutionary movement in the U.S. to ignore or isolate itself from European or world-experience. As capitalism in the U.S. rapidly approaches the same stage of development as in Euroean countries and resorts to much the same devices to thwart the labor movement, we can learn very direct and specific lessons from European experience. Fascism is not a remote or abstract issue for American workers. War is not a remote or abstract issue for us. Furthermore, they are international, not national issues. Still further, it is utterly impossible to comprehend what is happening to the pocket-book, the home, the dinner-table of American workers and farmers, or to devise a way out, save by an understanding of what is happening to world-capitalism and of what the working class of all lands can do about it.
 
Unity – Its Real Meaning
One other point in this connection. It is true that the workers desire unity. They must achieve unity in order to win their freedom. But a revolutionist has no business to lapse into sentimentality or muddle-headedness. As we have pointed out on other occasions, there was a united labor movement in Austria, but it went down before Fascism because it was united on a false, social-democratic, basis. We must not, therefore, seek to evade the controversy as to what is the sound basis for unity. Rather must we fight with all the mental resources at our command for our conception as to what that basis is.
Are we then to become a “debating society” or an “academy of theoreticians?” If by that is meant that we have vigorous internal discussions over real issues, in the national and international sphere, we say, By all means: no organization has any vitality which does not have that sort of internal life. If, however, it is meant that we talk and write, but do not act, that we develop an ingrown party, the answer is that we shall permit that to happen at our peril. Again and again we say, the Party must get into the class struggle, yes, here in the U.S.A. It must prove itself in action, and if it does not, it will be thrown into the garbage-can, where it would belong, by the working class. Theory is with us the guide to action and is to be tested in action.
 
The Question of Stalinism
Are we to be an “anti-Stalinist” rather than an “anti-capitalist” party? It seems to mo that there are certain comrades in the Party who from different angles take an unrealistic view of the matter here raised. On the one hand, there are comrades who to all intents and purposes say that we have to answer the Stalinists’ arguments and if we do that we can dispose of them and go ahead, and those who from a slightly different angle contend that until the C.P. has been put out of the running, by whatever means, there is very little we can do.
For one thing, the Stalinist arguments nave all been answered, but that has not made the C.P. disappear. The arguments of the capitalists have all been answered too. Only comrades with a very academic, intellectualistic, i.e. non-Marxian, approach could possibly think that arguments, oral or written, by themselves, dispose of institutions and organizations. We have to demonstrate to the workers not only that we can win a debate With the C.P., but that we can offer them a living alternative, a revolutionary party that can actually function in the class struggle. Obviously, if we have to prove that we can function in order to win the leadership of the workers as against opponent parties, we have to function while these parties still exist and are also at work. Who would expect to be otherwise in the world of reality? Who can give the matter a moment’s thought and then propose that we put off trade union work until the C.P. has been liquidated rather than contest the field in the unions now with the C.P.? Yes, comrades, again: Project the party into the class struggle!
 
The Ostrich Method
On the other hand, there are comrades who practically take the position that the Party should ignore the existence of the C.P. “simply go ahead with its work,” spread its anti-capitalist message, build branches, help organize the unemployed, enter the unions, etc., but eschew controversy either about principles or practical matters. If the comrades referred to in the preceding paragraph suffer primarily from being academic, these latter comrades are afflicted with a sentimental outlook. It would indeed be pleasant if there were no serious controversies in the working class, if they were all engaged in a united attack on the capitalist system. But then the revolution would be here! The world does not happen to be as we would like it. In the real world we must fight those who mislead the working class in order to fight capitalism effectively. In any event, they will attack us and leave us no alternative but to fight.
And though argument about principles does not of itself suffice to wrest leadership from an opponent party, it is just as true that in order to achieve leadership the Party must do more than conduct picket lines. It must demonstrate its intellectual superiority. Partly because only thus can the most advanced and intelligent workers and intellectuals be won. Chiefly, because the Party’s job is not merely to conduct a series of skirmishes with the employing class, but nothing less than leadership in the overthrow of capitalism. The Party must have intellectual competence and satisfy the advanced workers that it has.
 
The Job Before Us
It makes a tremendous difference, however, whether the attack on Stalinism is regarded as a means or as an end, whether we think of ourselves or act as if we considered ourselves critics of another party which is after all to do the job or whether we are really conscious of being the revolutionary party whose task is to rally the workers for the assault on capitalism, which justifies itself in action on a broader and broader scale, and pays just so much attention to other parties as may be necessary as an incident in that major task. We are the anti-capitalist, anti-imperialist, revolutionary Party and our pre-occupation is not with the C.P. but with the capitalist system in the U.S. and throughout the world – the system which with our sister parties we aim to overthrow.
(The third article of Comrade Muste’s series will appear next week.)
 



Adapting Marxism to the American Class Struggle

The Use of Polemics in the Labor Movement

Twin Evils of Labor – Nationalism & Reformism

How the Job Can and Must Be Done
 



Ed. Note: This is the third of four articles by comrade Muste. The fourth article will appear next week.

III.
It is a short and easy step from an undervaluation of internationalism to a nationalistic attitude – or at least to attitudes and expressions which play into the hands of those reactionary forces which use “patriotism,” “Americanism,” nationalism, chauvinism, in order eventually to smash the workers’ movement and to impose Fascism upon the masses. I am thinking of such slogans as “Advance America.”
The hold of patriotic sentiment on the masses and the havoc wrought by capitalists and militarists by playing upon it, have been abundantly demonstrated. Those comrades who insist that we have here a crucial problem and that we must know how to deal with it are entirely correct. Yet for the very reason that we are dealing here with explosive material we have to be careful that the bomb we plan to use against the enemy does not blow up in our own hands!
 
Borrowing Symbols
The idea that seems to underlie a good deal of the discussion on this point is that if the revolutionists would take over the patriotic symbols and slogans, they would get the following instead of the Longs and Coughlins; and attaching new ideas and aims to these symbols they would make the masses fighters for a workers’ world. It is a tempting idea to many who foresee the danger of a Fascist triumph and who behold the contrast between the immense following of the demagogues and the handful of supporters of the revolutionary movement. If only we could use their tricks and get the masses to jump on our band-wagon! But, alas, the easy way is not necessarily the right way.
The same eagerness quickly to win a mass following for the idea of a non-profit economy, by the way, leads some to propose that the middle class which seem more rebellious than the workers should be “sold” on the right brand of revolution, instead of looking to the working class as the spear-head of the revolutionary movement. This quick cure Comrade Budenz correctly rejects. Let the middle class organize as a middle class, and the result will be reactionary, to maintain, not to overthrow, the profit system. But “merely threaten a general strike and chills and fever run through the present body politic.”
 
A Deadly Parallel
Equally dangerous and deceptive is the despairing resort to “patriotism.” How and why that is the case can be made clear, as one of the comrades has written in about this question suggested, by an illustration from another sphere. Religion, the argument would run, has a great hold on men. It is true that religion, its institutions and symbols, have been used as supports of the existing order. But it is also true that the great prophets of religion have denounced the rich and powerful, have pictured a world of peace and brotherhood, etc. Let us harness the institutions, emotions, symbols and slogans of religion to the revolutionary movement, therefore, and to carry the latter to victory! The realist, the Marxist, knows that this is a fantasy. Religious institutions are a bulwark of the existing order. Keep the minds and emotions of men bound to religious ideas and symbols, and you keep them bound to the existing economic and political order. The hold of those ideas and symbols must be broken. As one great prophet pointed out, you cannot put “new wine into old wine-skins.”
The state, the governmental system under which we live, is likewise an agency and bulwark of capitalism. We have to overthrow the capitalist state. But that means that we must break the bold of the symbols and the emotions that attach to the present state.
 
A Practical Example
When in the great unemployed convention in Columbus in 1933 hundreds of honest but politically undeveloped workers were roused to fury against us by labor spies and Fascists, and Arnold Johnson was about to be dragged from the platform and lynched on the ground that he was radical and un-American and did not properly respect the flag, we id not “wrap the stars and stripes around us” or make any effort to claim that we were “patriotic.” Arnold Johnson stood his ground, pleaded for reason and calm consideration. When quiet was restored, we claimed that those who raised the issue did so in order to serve the capitalists and their political henchmen by breaking up the Leagues and that the waving of the flag, patriotic appeals, etc. were constantly used for precisely this purpose, as when men were led to slaughter in “the war to end war. the war for democracy,” etc.
Statements about “serving” the nation, the country, the community, have also to be carefully guarded. The notion that the country is “our” country – i.e. everybody’s alike, that there is such a thing as nation or community, a mystic something to which we belong and which protects us, is cultivated by the ruling class for the purpose of hiding the fact of class cleavage, of exploitation for the purpose of making the worker think that when he goes to war he is fighting for “his” country, instead of against himself and for the capitalists.
 
American Tradition
The same caution holds for an uncritical use of “the American revolutionary tradition.” There are. to be sure, revolutionary traditions in American history, to which we shall have occasion to refer again. But the dominant American tradition has been that of capitalist expansion, exploitation, imperialist adventuring. Years of experience in workers’ education have demonstrated to my complete satisfaction, and I know that all who attended the classes at Brookwood or similar ones elsewhere, will back me up in this, that outside of the actual experience the American worker gets of injustice the most effective way to make him class-conscious is to teach him the real facts of American hstory, American history, i.e., from a Marxist viewpoint. And this is by no means to teach him in an uncritical fashion that anyone who oppresses labor is a “black betrayer of the ideals of the Founding Fathers” or that “Hancock and Adams slept with a price on their heads.”
Quite the contrary, it involves pointing out that Washington with his 30,000 acres of western lands; that Hancock and Adams with their mercantile business threatened with destruction by laws passed by a British parliament in the interest of British merchants, acted in line with their class interests when they engaged in the Revolutionary War and brought the American farmers and artisans into it; that as soon as possible after the war was over they conveniently forgot the “principles” of the Declaration of Independence and in the most high-handed fashion imaginable put over a constitution which protected their property interests against the farmers who had manned the revolutionary armies; and that this constitution has been used ever since as an instrument of class-domination; those provisions in it intended for the protection of the masses either being perverted like the “due-process” clause or simply not enforced like the amendment granting civil and political rights to Negroes.
By this means faith in America, i.e. in capitalist America, is broken down, and that is a prime essential for the building of a working-class revolutionary movement.
We have nothing to gain and much to lose from a romanticizing of American history. The unvarnished Marxian interpretation of it is a priceless instrument in our hands. Certainly in an age when patriotism is the dominant emotion upon which capitalism in its decline calls in order to fasten the chains of reaction and terrorism upon the masses, we must not fall into the trap of arousing sentiments upon which the demagogues can in any case play much more effectively than revolutionists can, and which in the end can only be used to destroy the revolutionary movement.
 
The Constitutional Amendment
At this point may properly come an analysis of Comrade Budenz’s suggestion of “a proposed amendment to the constitution” as a, or the, means to “strike a death blow at the profit system.” On the face of the article in question this amendment to abolish private ownership, wage slavery etc. is presented as the fundamental basis for an American revolutionary movement. It, the amendment, would “safeguard its integrity” (not, e.g., firm adherence to Marxist and Leninist principle) ; the movement will “give a focal point to the struggle by basing itself” on this amendment. “The proposal of this amendment, as a basic starting point, is essential for any real revolutionary movement in the U.S.”
If this was not intended, if the amendment is proposed as a slogan, the basis for a tactical maneuver at a certain point, then certainly it was a grave error not to make that clear in a serious and formal political document as this article proclaims itself to be.
 
A “Parliamentary” Revolution
If the expressions describing the proposal are taken at their face value, then it must be said that it is clearly and utterly out of accord with the position of the Workers Party. No indication to the contrary being given, one must assume that the amendment is to be put into effect in the manner prescribed in the Constitution, viz., by action of Congress, ratification by state legislatures, etc. This is certainly suggesting in a most extreme form the possibility of revolution by parliamentary method which Comrade Budenz has often violently denounced. In a country where it is impossible to get an amendment to abolish child labor passed, the profit system is to be abolished by constitutional amendment!
If the idea is to use the proposal of such an amendment as a slogan, a tactical maneuver at a certain stage of political development, then it is a matter of tactics and not of principle which would have to be discussed on its merits and from all angles when it came up as a definite political proposal in a given historical setting. Even so the question whether it fostered a fetishism of parliamentarism would have to be very seriously considered.
As for tactical considerations, in view of the difficulties and delays in getting any kind of constitutional amendment passed in this country, the proposal does not appeal to me at least. Nor can I conceive of it as making any appeal to workers or farmers generally. There are quicker ways of getting results, and ways more calculated to build labor militancy, as when in 1916 the threat of a general railroad strike forced the Adamson eight-hour law through Congress and got a verdict of “constitutional” from the Supreme Court – which, incidentally, can always have a few judges added to it if the will and the power are available.
If we ever had a situation where passage of a constitutional amendment abolishing capitalism was actually in sight, well, we could then dispense with formalities and write a brand-new constitution for the Workers Republic!
 
Logic of a False Position
There is one other possibility, viz.: that the idea is that the workers will gain power by revolutionary means an then enact a constitutional amendment. This idea has no merit either. In the first place, when the workers are once in power as a result of revolutionary action, they will not need to stop with an amendment. In the second place, it encourages the notion that in the main the machinery of capitalist government will remain and will serve the needs of a workers’ order. That notion is of course a flat contradiction of the position set forth in our Declaration of Principles.
(The final article in Comrade Muste’s series will appear next week.)
 



A YEAR ago the Workers Party of the United States came into existence as a result of the fusion of two of the most significant currents in the American labor movement. One of these was the American Workers Party (outgrowth in turn of the Conference for Progressive Labor Action), the other the Communist League of America. The A.W.P. forces came mainly from militant elements in the unions and unemployed organizations who, through practical experience in the class struggle, had come to realize the need of a theoretical foundation and political expression, and who believed that this foundation must be revolutionary and internationalist. Organizationally they had taken the position that new revolutionary parties and a new International, as against the Second and Third, must be built. The C.L.A. and its sister groups of the International Communist League throughout the world came out of the Communist (Third) International. They fought within that International and after expulsion as a group seeking readmission, against the Stalinist line of “socialism in a single country,” etc. After the debacle of the C.P. in Germany and .similar developments, they concluded that the Third International could no longer serve as the vanguard of the working class, that a new, Fourth, International, must be built. Hence the fusion of the C.L.A. and A.W.P. in December 1934.
Those who have some knowledge of the interaction of groups within the labor movement know that “fusions” by no means always result in fusion. The first year of the history of the W.P.U.S. has, however, demonstrated the genuine success of this particular fusion. It is true that there have been unclear individuals who could not be assimilated, and on the other hand ultra-leftist, sectarian elements that proved unfitted for existence in a revolutionary party with its face turned to the masses which was more than a debating society. The main core of the A.W.P. on the one hand and the C.L.A. on the other are fused into one. Whatever differences of emphasis and tactics may emerge, and those always exist in every living organization, the struggle over these differences will not, be as between former A.W.P. members and former C.L.A. members. They will be fought out by revolutionists who all stand upon the Declaration of Principles of the W.P. and owe unswerving allegiance to the Fourth International.
Now this achievement of fusion is in itself a big thing. If there were nothing else to record at the end of the year, this year in the existence of the W.P. would none the less be justified. It would have marked an important step in the creation of the Fourth International.
The fact that the year has not been marked by anything approaching a mass influx of members into the W.P. in no way invalidates this estimate.
The period in which the W.P. lived out its first year is predominantly reactionary in character. The trend away from parliamentary democracy, the open resort to Fascism in many instances, the piling up of armaments, the actual outbreak of war between Italy and Ethiopia and the increasing tension in the foreign relations of all the important capitalist powers are all illustrations of the general trend.
The pressure upon the working class movement from capitalism making a desperate effort to save itself is in such a period tremendous. The world labor movement has suffered severe set-backs in recent years and important sections, such as the German and Austrian, have been almost obliterated. Reaction is thus also characteristic of the labor movement, as is most clearly seen in the stampede to the right of the Stalinist movement – capitulation to social-patriotism, People’s Front, support of bourgeois democracy, etc.
From a superficial viewpoint the general trend is obscured by certain developments in the Second International and its parties. The crisis of the democratic state, the developing break of the bourgeoisie with social reformism in favor of Fascism undermines the internal stability of the social democracy as it involves its ultimate destruction. A cleavage between leaders and followers and within the leadership itself develops. The classic reformism of the party gives way to centrism, etc.
This does not mean that it is our concept that the Second International is now becoming the “international of revolution.” As the Open Letter stated, “the social democracy everywhere continues to remain the agency of the bourgeoisie within the working class.” The reaction – the capitulation or preparation for capitulation to social-patriotism – marks the main body of the social democracy everywhere, though camouflaged by centrist maneuvering and equivocation. We note, on the one hand, the trend in the Scandinavian countries, British Labor Party, Canadian C.C.F. In the main, on the other hand, “the shift to the left” in such countries as France and U. S. expresses itself in rapproachement with the Stalinists (organic unity, People’s Front, labor party, conciliationism toward pseudo-progressives in the unions, etc.) precisely at the moment when Stalinism most openly takes on the role of social-patriotic betrayal. Bureaucratic centrism and social democratic centrism meet to consummate the betrayal, to make it more certain by creating in the mind of the masses the illusion of strength through “unity.”
It is in such a period of reaction as we have described that the old Internationals finally break down – i.e. in the sense of succumbing to opportunism and social-patriotism and irrevocably losing the capacity to serve as a progressive force. In “normal” times the process of degeneration is not obvious, it still appears that the working class under its leadership is “making progress.” This also means that the “new” International comes into being in the period of reaction, of defeat, and of demoralization for the working class. Thus the Third International of Lenin came into being during the War, and the Fourth International comes into being in the present epoch of war and impending war.
It follows that the cadres of the new International are at first, a small minority isolated in a sense from the masses, though they alone express the true interest and need of the masses, as presently becomes clear. These cadres survive in such a period because they are intransigent; because they possess clarity and sharpness in theory and ideology; because they make the clearest and sharpest break – not merely in words or even program but also organizationally from the dead and corrupt body of the old International, and because they steel themselves against every weakness in themselves and every attack and temptation from without. The example of Lenin needs merely to be cited.
To use Lenin’s own words uttered during the early days of the World War, in such a period the basic task is “to unite the Marxian elements, however small their number may be at the beginning, to revive in their name the words of real Socialism now forgotten, to call the workers of all countries to relinquish chauvinism and raise the old banner of Marxism.”
There are, furthermore, particular reasons why the growth of the forces of the Fourth International on American soil does not proceed at the rate of thousands a month. Right on the heels of the founding of the W.P. came the first public announcement of the Stalinist 180 degree turn, viz. support of the labor party idea. This was followed by other breath-taking swings on the Stalinist flying trapeze. Now many of the points in the present C.P. program have a superficial plausibility and attractiveness for the workers and especially for intellectuals and liberals. To welcome all people who on any ground are “opposed” to war and Fascism, who want to see peace and a semblance of democracy maintained, into one all-embracing united front – how sensible that sounds, how attractive, how imposing the masses that seem to rally to meetings and parades around such a program! It takes time and effort to demonstrate, as the W.P. attempts to do and must do if it, is to be true to Marx and Lenin, true to the real facts, that this united front, is a mere show, that it is pacifist and will collapse when war really threatens, as all the imposing pacifist movements always have, that this fake united front means in reality dividing the workers from each other, because it opens the way to social-patriotic betrayal in war. A similar superficial attractiveness attaches to Stalinist proposals for an all-inclusive labor party, their abandonment of the dual unionism, social-fascism, united front from below, etc. of the “Third Period.” The task of showing the workers that the opportunist ditch in which the C.P. now wallows is as vile as the sectarian ditch of the earlier period is not an easy one.
But if in such a period and for such reasons as we have sketchily indicated, workers do not flock by themselves by thousands into the revolutionary party, there are compensations. Precisely the clearest elements, the most healthy and vigorous, the youth elements, penetrate beneath the surface. They see the capitulation to social-patriotism, the preparation for monstrous betrayal in the next war, the confusion and demoralization among the workers, which must result from the course of the bureaucracies of both the Second and the Third Internationals. These elements tend surely and irresistibly to move toward our program and our banner.
The past year has demonstrated that the program laid down for the W.P. in the Declaration of Principles is in every essential point unassailable. As the war issue has come to the front, the W.P. has been the one voice which has set forth a clear, a complete, a concrete Leninist position and has been able to explain events in the light of that position. Steadily this is making its impression on the genuine left currents in the Socialist Party, in Stalinist circles in some measure, and among the politically unattached who, in spite o and to some extent because of their confusion and demoralization, feel the need of some clear, albeit as yet small, voice amid the tempest.
The confidence built up among our own membership during this first year and among the most advanced workers in other groups, because on the burning, the real, issues of the revolutionary movement we speak with consistency and authority, is a great achievement.
Although this first year has necessarily been one devoted to organizing ourselves, laying foundations for the Party and its work – theoretical and organizational – the achievements in our external work have been far from negligible. In the very first weeks of its existence, the Party, through its own channels and through its support of the Non-Partisan Labor Defense, intervened decisively in the Sacramento trial, lifting that issue out of the obscurity into which the C.P. was seeking to throw it. By this and other activities our first year record in defense work was made highly creditable. The Party played a leading role in the Toledo Chevrolet and General Motors strike, which carried the struggle against the automobile barons on the one hand and the A.F. of L. bureaucrats on the other to the highest point yet achieved anywhere. In Minneapolis and the entire surrounding territory, leadership has been given in strike struggles, in organizing unions, in building the broadest and most vigorous left-progressive union movement in the country. Party members played a significant part in the conventions of automobile workers, teachers and rubber workers just preceding the Atlantic City A.F. of L. convention which opened the way for the head-on conflict between craft and industrial unionists which marked that convention and made it the most exciting and important in the entire history of the Federation. To a remarkable extent the Party has turned toward mass work and it stands out clearly as the one organization which has a trade union policy free, on the one hand, from “Third Period” sectarianism and adventurism, and on the other hand from Lovestoneite-Stalinist opportunism and conciliationism toward the trade union bureaucrats. In the unemployed field, in a difficult period of reorientation, the Party has continued to take a vital part, not least in pressing for unification on a sound basis of the two leading organizations with a mass base, the W.A.A, and the National Unemployed League.
While the Party has thus addressed itself to the concrete activities in the American labor scene, it has been internationalist in its outlook. Not in contrast to but as a part of its “American” work it has sought to do its share toward building the world-wide movement of the Fourth International. Each Plenum of the National Committee has seen definite progress: March, the establishment of special fraternal relations with the I.C.L. and the Dutch party, the R.S.A.P.; June, the signing of the Open Letter for the Fourth International and the setting up of a Contact Commission; October, placing the Party, after a vigorous discussion, four-square behind the French section of the Bolshevik-Leninists, calling for a conference for the actual establishment of the Fourth International at the earliest possible moment, laying the ground-work with the I.C.L. and the R.S.A.P. for a functioning Commission to deal with the work in colonial and semi-colonial countries, preparing programmatic documents, setting up a close system of correspondence with the Latin-American sections, etc.
Thus stands the record of the first year in the life of the W.P.U.S. – cementing of the fusion on the basis of a Marxist Declaration of Principles; emerging as the one party that combats all forms of social-patriotism and proclaims the uncompromising Leninist program for war: The real enemy is at home: smash your own bourgeoisie; significant contributions to defense, trade union and unemployed work; raising higher the banner of the Fourth International on American soil. This is our achievement. We are proud to “stand” on it for a moment as the first year ends – and to go forward to greater achievements in the second year.
 



DETROIT, Mich. – On every side signs multiply suggesting that before this winter is over the battle for unionization of the automobile industry will come to a head. The condition of the industry, the developments among the independent unions in the industry; the Green-Lewis controversy in the A.F. of L. over craft versus Industrial unionism, and the strikes that have already broken out or are about to explode, all point in this direction. It is hard to see how a gigantic conflict can be avoided. The automobile magnates’ nervousness is reflected in all the newspapers in the automobile centers of Michigan, Ohio and adjoining states.
The strike of nearly 4,000 workers in the Motor Products Co. in Detroit is holding firm. It is a preliminary skirmish in which the forces that will presently be cooperating or fighting on a grand scale are feeling each other out. The strike was called by the Automobile Industrial Workers Association (the “Coughlin” union) mainly composed of production workers, but the Mechanics Educational Society of America (composed mainly of tool and die makers though its last convention decided for industrial organization) which also had members working in the plant immediately called out its men and gave the strike complete support. The strike also has the support of the Associated Automobile Workers of America (known as the “Greer” union after its leader). As the New Militant reported recently, the executives of these three independent unions in the auto field have voted for amalgamation into an industrial union with a preamble recognizing the existence of class struggle. The referendum vote of the membership on the proposal will be almost unanimously favorable.
The Motor Products strike is thus the first test of the new amalgamation of auto unions. If it succeeds, as seems fairly certain, the new union will become a very potent rallying center.
The reactionary wing of the A.F. of L., headed in the automobile industry by Francis Dillon who gained unsavory fame for his collaboration with the bosses in the great General Motors strike last spring and was rewarded by Bill Green last August by being made president over the protests of the delegates of the A.F. of L. international, the United Automobile Workers, has behaved in characteristic fashion and has succeeded in finally discrediting itself in the eyes of the Detroit workers. Dillon tried to play an open scab-herding role. He stated publicly that he would confer with the management and “take the Motors Products workers back to their job at once.”
The strikers met the Dillon blast with two masterful strokes. First, they challenged Dillon to support an election under Federal auspices to determine which union represents the majority of the men. Dillon cannot run this chance. The firm will also oppose it as long as possible, because to allow an election means recognition of the Wagner Board and recognition of the independent union!
In the next place the strike leaders are inviting Dillon’s union to join the strike committee, help them to win the battle and telling him that they are willing in such case to have him take all the credit he wants for the victory!
Dillon will of course not cooperate with the “outlaws” and the chance that he will be able to do any damage to the strike is now practically nil.
It can be authoritatively stated that from both sides leaders of the M.E.S.A. and the A.I.W.A. and the John L. Lewis Committee for Industrial Unionism have been making exploratory moves to determine whether cooperation is possible. Here is the key to the situation so far as the workers’ side of the struggle is concerned.
The auto workers, especially in Detroit, have unquestionably lost faith in the A.F. of L. which they identify with Dillon and his predecessor, Collins. This outfit cannot organize the industry. The opportunity will pass this year, perhaps for several years, if it is left to them. On the other hand, the workers are not likely to have the confidence that any combination of independents can achieve the huge task, especially as long as an unsympathetic, reactionary A.F. of L. union remains in the field to keep the men divided and to receive the bosses’ support as soon as the independents really threaten the latter. The independents need the support of the John L. Lewis “progressives” to smash the Green-Dillon leadership from inside the A.F. of L. Then the basis will be laid for a genuine industrial union within the A.F of L. which can include the present independents. There are reasons to believe that the more far-sighted leaders among the independents have just such a perspective.
Thus the prospects for a sound foundation for building a union are better than ever. The workers are astir, furthermore, and here and there strikes are break-big out earlier than in other seasons, making it more likely that enough impetus for an extensive struggle will be attained before the season passes its peak. The condition of the industry itself is also favorable for an organization campaign and strike action.
 
General Motors Nervous
On the one hand, production Is running high. Detroit turned out 93,177 cars last week compared with 16,810 in the corresponding week last year. On the other hand, competition for business is fierce.
The companies are thus caught in a dilemma. If e.g. a plant producing even a minor part of a car is shut down, the production line in one of the big companies may be slowed down in a few days which means losing orders. The same drive of competition is leading companies to seek means of cutting down costs, which means that in the face of rising prices grievances accumulate among the workers. Thus the Motor Products Corporation strike started over an attempt of the company to put over a wage cut under the cover of a shift from piece to week work. General Motors is laying up trouble for itself, in its move to decentralize its trans, mission production, so that it may not be caught again as it was by the Toledo strike last year, by working the men in Muncie, Ind., and Saginaw, Mich. 25 percent longer hours and at correspondingly lower pay than the reduced force still working in Toledo. Little wonder the big companies exhibit symptoms of extreme nervousness!
Militants and progressives must not let this opportunity pass. They must make full use of it. In a real sense the fate of the American labor movement for a long time to come may hinge upon what happens in the auto industry between now and May of next year. Militants and progressives in meeting this challenge and opportunity will:
 
Program for Militants

Promote the amalgamation movement among the independent auto unions.
 
Fight to smash the Green Dillon leadership in the A.F. of L auto union once and for all.
 
Demand that the Lewis-Hillman “progressives” prove that they mean business by fighting Dillon, supporting strikes, whether of A.F of L. or independent unions, and undertaking to unite all forces in the Industry and in the labor movement for a large-scale organizing campaign to start immediately.
 
Support joint action of all elements in any organizing work and strikes now going on.
 
Aim at the creation in this production season of a powerful industrial union in automobiles with an autonomous international Charter from the A.F. of L. and democratically controlled by its own membership. Even if the Green-Woll forces block the movement and force postponement of a decision until the next A.F. of L. convention, this must not prevent cooperation of all forces in organizing and strike activity pending final determination of the A.F. of L. attitude.

 



The idea of winning American workers to Communism by showing them or talking to them about the progress of “socialist construction” ill the Soviet Union always had, its limitations. Of course, the Stalinist propaganda in this connection was always based on a fallacious theory, namely, that socialism could be built within the borders of the Soviet Union alone, if only war could be put off a few years by whatever means. Today “the final, irrevocable victory of socialism in the land of the Soviets” has been achieved according to the Seventh Comintern Congress. Any ideas or hopes based on such a theory, on an illusion, were bound to lead to confusion or disillusionment.
 
Achievements in the S.U.
Apart from this, it is true that there have been important technical and other achievements in the S.U. and we have every right to say that even the beginnings of a planned socialist economy under a workers’ state can do more for the workers, in the face of the greatest obstacles, than capitalism. But even when based on this more sober and correct approach, the demonstration of the economic progress made in the S.U. was not calculated to impress and convince the general run of American workers. They could not visualize the low plane of the prewar economy in Russia. They could see too plainly that the standard of living, technical development and labor productivity were still exceedingly low, compared to what they saw under their own eyes in the post-war U.S. under the most favorably situated capitalism in the world. They lacked the political development to analyze and understand what they saw.
There was a brief interval at the very close of the Hoover reign when very large numbers of American workers were impressed by the picture of no unemployment, etc. under the Five Year Plan in contrast with the misery, demoralization and vague alarm which pervaded the U.S. in those days, and said: “Pretty soon we’ll have to do as they did in Russia.” But even then the concept of Russia as the promised land was far more generally accepted among the intellectuals and even some of the agricultural population than among the workers; and the talk about doing as they had done in Russia often expressed a flight from reality rather than any determination to face it. Stalinist publicity seems now intent not so much on showing that things in Russia are superior to what obtains in the U.S. as upon showing that they are much the same in the Soviet Union as in the U.S.
 
Tell the Story of the Revolution
Yet the Russian revolution was and is of immense significance for American workers. The idea that it is a “Rooshian” affair, “foreign,” something that does not concern us, unless it be as an evil example, is of course false and dangerous. It is furthermore possible, I believe, to get large numbers of American workers to understand something of the significance of the Russian revolution, though it must always be remembered that the average worker is mainly concerned about things very near to home. It is after a new regime has been established in the U.S. also; not before, that his psychology and. outlook be genuinely internationalist.
In the first place, the story of the revolutionary crisis itself, the misery and disorganization resulting from the war under the Czarist bureaucracy, the overthrow of the czar, the miserable failure of the bourgeois and non-revolutionary parties to stop the break-up of all economic life, to meet the needs of the masses, the gradual upsurge of the masses and their rise to power, – all this merely as a dramatic spectacle is tremendously impressive. Workers who have been in strikes can live it from the inside. A popular version of Trotsky’s History of the Russian Revolution would be a powerful means for mass propaganda.
 
Show the Connection with War
The development should be shown in connection with the war. war is the only “way out” that capitalism knows. Permitted to remain in power it will lead the masses everywhere, in the U.S. too, to the abyss into which the Russian masses were thrust. Capitalism will stop short of nothing in order to retain its hold. The American workers are not immune, do not live in a universe apart, as they thought in the Coolidge-Hoover era. The depression has dispelled that illusion. There are only two ways to “stop war” – complete exhaustion, the collapse of civilization, or the way the Russian workers chose, the road of revolution which puts an end to capitalism itself.
The idea that finally the workers have to take things into their own hands, that they can trust no one but themselves; the great idea of masses in motion, no longer inert, no longer meekly obeying orders, but standing up in their own right, marching, sweeping everything before them – all this makes a genuine appeal to American workers. On a small scale they have demonstrated in their own strikes that it can be done. Paint the picture of mass action, direct action, on the grand scale in the Russian revolution and they will understand.
 
Revolution No Tea Party
Show them, too, that the revolution is not a tea party. The masses have to arm themselves in order to escape slaughter at the hands of capitalist henchmen. It is not a question of electing one set of politicians to replace another. A clean break has to be made. The government has to be overthrown. The whole capitalist state and its machinery, police, courts, army must be destroyed. The workers must put their own state, their own revolutionary government, in Its place. That is the lesson of the Russian revolution. American workers will come to see this too. There is that in their own tradition which will help them to see it.
The story of the Russian revolution, especially in connection with the contrasting policy pursued and results obtained in Germany and Austria, e.g. is the very best medium for teaching the workers what working class unity is and how it can be obtained. Impatience with divisions and “wrangling,” desire for unity, are deep-seated. But history shows us that all forms of “unity” between workers and other classes on another than working class basis, all forms of “unity” in the working class itself, on anything save a revolutionary program are undependable, a death-trap indeed for the workers. Precisely at the critical moment they break down. They produce not unity, but confusion and division. Genuine unity is achieved on the basis of a revolutionary program and under the leadership of the revolutionary party. There can be and there is no other way – the way of Lenin and Trotsky.
 
Only the First Battle
The impression conveyed by much of the Stalinist propaganda is that the war of the working class for emancipation basically came to an end with the Russian revolution. It “established” socialism. Henceforth virtually the sole duty of the working class of the world is to “defend the Soviet Union,” protect it from external attack, and then pretty much as a matter of course socialism will gain universal sway. This is bad, un-Marxian theory; it is also bad psychology. The Russian revolution resulting in the establishment of the first workers’ state in all history, is indeed of incalculable significance. But it was not the war of the workers against their oppressors which came to an end in 1917 on Russian soil. The first major battle of a direct revolutionary character was fought there and the first great victory recorded. But the war is on. Subsequently, the workers have suffered heavy defeats. No matter. The shining example of 1917 stands. The war is still on. Here on American soil also the battle must be fought. Preparing for that battle against American imperialism is the primary duty of the American working class which has also its fighting traditions, a fresh, vigorous class which has never yet suffered a major defeat, but which has also tests to face such as the past never presented. Put the matter thus and American workers will see and feel the Russian revolution as their own heritage, because it was not “Russian” but of the working class, not a war which is over, but a battle in a war in which they are themselves Inextricably involved, which for them also means either defeat with all the misery and degradation of a Fascist dictatorship or glorious triumph and emancipation. Put it this way, and set-backs and delays in “building socialism” in the Soviet Union do not have to be explained by a false theory which does not explain anything but simply confuses the workers, emasculates the revolutionary movement, and enables a bureaucracy to entrench itself. These set-backs and delays then appear as well-nigh inevitable incidents in a war in which the fortunes of battle swing back and forth until the final victory is won.
 
The Importance of Leaders
Finally, the masses see ideas as embodied in outstanding personalities. The revolutionist of course adheres to no “great man” theory of history. Washington and Jefferson did not “make” the American revolution of 1776 and Lenin and Trotsky did not “make” the very different proletarian revolution in Russia in 1917. But the revolutionist also knows that the masses are not theoreticians and that, as I have suggested, under the lash of objective conditions they will act to revolutionary effect in an historical crisis, if there exists the leadership of a Marxist revolutionary party whose theories and aims will embody themselves for the masses in its organization and its leadership. Now even the average worker in the U.S. senses that he is part of the world, does not live behind mountainous walls. He has begun to fear and hate Hitler and Mussolini. Despite all the propaganda of Hearst and the other red-baiters over a pace of nearly two decades, millions of American workers regard Lenin and Trotsky as their own.
 
The Figure of Trotsky
And it is through the medium of the life, the activities, the sayings of Lenin and Trotsky that the conceptions of revolutionary internationalism must in large measure be made real and living to American workers. A pamphlet of the most popular character on the life of Trotsky is one of our immediate needs for the broadest mass work. A popular book on the same subject is needed for those who have time and aptitude for more extensive reading. The conception that the figure of Trotsky, the chief organizer of the revolt in Petrograd during those “ten days that shook the world;” organizer of the Red Army, first army in all history under the control of the workers; bearer of the banner of revolutionary internationalism, the banner of world-revolution, in the face of bitter and colossal persecution – the conception that this symbolic figure must be kept in the background is not sound. He belongs to the Russian Revolution, to the Soviet State though not to the Soviet bureaucracy under Stalinist domination. He belongs to China also, to Germany, to France, to Latin America. He belongs to the working class and to the revolutionary party, the Workers Party, in the United States. Even Stalinist defamation win in the long run make clear rather than obscure that fact.
The American workers were deeply stirred by the Russian events of 1917, as those of us who were old enough at that time can well remember. The American workers are much nearer not only in point of time but with respect to the development of economy under which they live, and in point of their own political development – much nearer now to facing such a crisis as the Russia masses encountered eighteen years ago. As the capitalist crisis, including the war crisis, swiftly develops, so will the American workers rapidly develop a greater interest in the Russian revolution; come to know it as “their” revolution also, the first mighty victory in the world-revolution which will not be stopped until the working class has everywhere established its rule and humanity can advance to a new stage of civilization in comparison with which the highest that has so far been achieved will appear cheap and barbaric.
 



It was pointed out in a recent issue of the New Militant that the Communist Party in following out its new “labor party” line was flirting with left liberal congressmen. In California Utopians and legislators who stand for Upton Sinclair’s Epic plan for the abolition of poverty within the borders of one state (deduction from the “theory of Socialism in one country” and leading eventually to the abolition of poverty in the tenth ward perhaps?) seem to be regarded as “comrades to be” in the new labor party.
This is, however, mild stuff compared to the line which Ambassador Troyanovsky gave the Bond Club of New York in his speech on March 22.
The ambassador of the Workers’ State was addressing the gentlemen of the Bond Club on the peace policy of the Soviet Union. He suggested that the United States might agree to refrain from helping an “aggressor” in the next war. This would exercise a restraining effect upon “hot-headed adventurers” (Marxian analysis of the war mongers !). He went on to give the Soviet diplomat’s definition of “aggression”.
He expressed encouragement over the prospect of “general acceptance” of this definition “among countries interested in the observance of peace” (and which imperialist nations may they be?).
 
Physician for Capitalism
But “this would be merely a first step on the road to maintaining peace”. At last we are to get the Bolshevik doctrine, one opines, especially as the ambassador goes on to assert: “We have to dig to the bottom of contemporary troubles.” Breathless the workers hang on his words. What is the true road to peace, according to the oracles of Moscow? Here it goes: “It is necessary to work out practical plans for the economic rehabilitation of the world and especially for Europe.” Can it be that Troyanovsky actually means that not workers’ revolution but the economic rehabilitation of capitalist countries is the road to peace? In order to dispel all doubt he went on to say: “Probably the advice of broad-minded business men would be available and useful in this connection.”
When British or German Social Democrats collaborated with “broad-minded business men” for the economic rehabilitation of capitalism in one country instead of using the crisis for the overthrow of capitalism, what did the C.I. say that was? And when the ambassador of the Soviet Union offers collaboration with “broad-minded business men” for the rehabilitation of world capitalism as the road to world peace, what shall we call this policy?
 
Don’t Rock the Boat!
Socialism ca n be built in one country, the Soviet Union, according to Stalinist theory, even though the rest of the world remains capitalist. From this nationalist standpoint it appears quite logical that the Soviet Union should help rehabilitate capitalist countries in order, let us say, that it may obtain credits from them. Since the Communist parties presumably cannot follow a line in contradiction to that of the present rulers of the Soviet Union but rather exist primarily or well nigh exclusively for “the defense of the Soviet Union,” the Communist parties also must not “rock the boat” in capitalist countries, must maintain the status quo of the Flandin government in France, must actively or passively, openly or tacitly, help in the economic rehabilitation of these countries.
Thus the Soviet Union through the present leadership of the Communist (Stalinist) International is used not for the overthrow but for the rehabilitation of capitalism, not to build but to emasculate the revolutionary movements in capitalist countries. These nations get a chance to organize their forces for the eventual attack upon the Soviet Union. The one real defense of the Soviet Union, the revolutionary movements in capitalist countries, is destroyed. The destruction of the workers’ state is prepared.
 
Pacifism with a Red Color
The policy of the Soviet Union is not a proletarian peace policy – the only true peace policy is that of working class revolution – but a pacifist policy. Pacifism has ever proved and will again prove the road to war, to the ruin of the masses. The Stalinist policy is not internationalist, but nationalist. It is not progressive, it is reactionary.
If the workers of the Soviet Union, those who made the revolution, knew what was happening they would overthrow this regime. But they do not know. They cannot know. The arguments Stalin uses against party opponents is exile or a bullet in the head. Those who do understand what is happening are well nigh powerless to do anything about it. Well may we reiterate, therefore, the statement of the Declaration of Principles of the Workers Party:
“The effective defense of the Soviet Union today and the support of those revolutionists in the S.U. who fight for the reform of the Soviet State and the revival of the Bolshevik Party of Lenin’s time based on the principles of revolutionary internationalism and workers’ democracy depend therefore upon the building of new revolutionary parties in the capitalist countries and a new revolutionary international.”
Upon this depends also the liberation of the masses in capitalist countries from unemployment, poverty, Fascism and war. To this task the Workers Party dedicates itself.
It is no wonder to us that the C.P. daily subjects the Workers Party to bitter and slanderous attack. That does not disturb us. It furnishes daily confirmation of the fact that the C.P. has no real answer to the issues that we raise, that it is well aware that the W.P. and the other parties throughout the world, striving for the Fourth International, are its real and destined to be victorious, foes.
By that same token we are the heralds to the workers of the world of the new revolutionary movement. In place of the party and the international which have organized defeats we shall organize victories. For the Workers Party! For the Fourth International!
 



Fellow-Worker:
It may be some time before I get a chance to write you again. In this last letter I want to stress a couple points which are necessary for an understanding of the Workers Party and constitute additional reasons why it is the only party tor American workers.
In the first place, as was pointed out in my last letter, the workers in each nation do not live within four sky-high walls, isolated from other countries. What happens in any part of the earth, affects us here in the U.S., may be a matter of life and death for us. In these days of war threats we can all see that plainly.
The government of the U.S. is not “our” government for which we fight against the masses of other countries. The government is the bosses’ government which we aim to overthrow. The same is true for the workers in every other country, except the Soviet Union.
 
Internationalism
For these and other reasons, a revolutionary party cannot be nationalist in spirit and character. Nor can it be confined to a single country. It must be part of an international of revolutionary parties in which the forces of the workers throughout the world may be united against capitalism, Fascism, war.
Just as we had to take the forces that were ready in the U.S. as material with which to start the building of the new revolutionary party, so the forces in various countries which recognize the breakdown of the Second and Third Internationals must be used to build the new, Fourth, International. The W.P. has already entered into fraternal relations with parties and groups in Canada, Panama, Cuba, other Latin American countries, Holland, France, China, South Africa, Australia, etc. which stand on the same fundamental program as we, in order that as soon as conditions permit definite steps may be taken toward the actual establishment of the new International.
An army composed of battalions which exist only on paper will not do much fighting – except on paper or in windy discussions. Our biggest contribution to the revived international movement of the workers consists of building the W.P. into a powerful revolutionary force right here in the U.S.A., in the mightiest of the capitalist-imperialist nations. Nobody else can do that job for us. The responsibility rests on our shoulders. When a powerful revolutionary movement actually exists here in the U.S. it will change the whole face of the revolutionary movement throughout the world.
The W.P. seeks to be the party of the American workers – created by them, not imposed upon them. It enters into all their struggles; it gains experience and strength and recruits new forces out of these struggles.
We stand firmly upon our principles. We do not despise theory. On the contrary, without a theory we are lost, we become the victim of every kind of faker in this welter of the twentieth century. But as Engels pointed out in a well-known passage: “Our theory is a theory of development, not of dogma to be learned by heart and repeated mechanically.” It is our job to take the tested principles of the international working class movement and make them work in the American scene. There are revolutionary traditions in American history which can and must be used in this connection. The class struggles of the past in American history have been fought out in the most bitter conflicts. As a result “the right to revolution” has been written into the most basic documents of American history. Thomas Jefferson asserted that a revolution might be necessary about every nineteen years. Unless “the tree of liberty” were “watered with the blood of tyrants” that often, it was likely to die!
 
American Traditions
The conception of “a nation conceived in liberty and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal,” a nation in which no individual or group should be able to rule over or exploit another, is a part of the picture of America which the masses have been taught to cherish. Capitalism has made the realization of any of these ideas impossible. Only through the revolutionary action of the working class and its allies – against capitalism and for the establishment of an international socialist economy – can these ideas be made real in the twentieth century. Most important of all, there is a tradition of militancy and struggle in the American working class itself which stands forth on many brilliant pages of labor history and upon which we can draw today, as it becomes necessary to raise these struggles to a higher and higher plane, to the plane presently of outright revolutionary action for the overthrow of capitalism.
All the physical and material conditions for an economy of plenty and security for the masses are here. Fired with hatred of what capitalism has done to mankind and by the vision of what can be done with modern productive forces, the workers must march forward now to the battle to make that vision real throughout the world.
 
Study the Program
To those honest and militant workers who are today members of other working class parties, we of the Workers Party say: “We shall not call you counter-revolutionists and Social-Fascists if you continue to work and fight where you are – so long as you are firmly convinced that you are working in the most effective way possible for the overthrow of capitalism.” We do, however, ask such workers to take the program of the W.P. and the issues we raise and to demand that they be discussed in the parties and groups to which they belong. The W.P. is perfectly willing to abide by the result of any open discussion before the working class. If, however, any party refuses to face and discuss the issues we raise, such a party is not revolutionary and a true revolutionist cannot remain in such a party, For the first characteristic of a revolutionist is that he thinks for himself. Otherwise he would still be believing in the capitalist system like all workers who take their ideas unthinkingly from the boss press. If a worker joins a so-called revolutionary party only to lose his right to think, that is stultifying himself and stultifying the revolutionary movement.
 
Revolutionists Must Organize
Thousands of those who accept in theory the principles of the revolutionary movement, who in the past have taken part in labor struggles, are today outside of any political party. To them we say that today more than at any other time no one should be sitting on the fence or standing on the side lines. We have no time to lose if we ere to build the revolutionary party before the forces of reaction have too firmly entrenched themselves and establish some form of Fascism here in the U.S. also.
A revolutionist cannot be an individualist. He cannot work as an irresponsible free lance. He must work in an organized and disciplined way. That means he must belong to the organized vanguard of the working class, the revolutionary party. The process of integration and unification of the revolutionary forces has begun here in the United States as well as in other countries. The days of retreat and defeat shall end. Under the leadership of the revolutionary vanguard the American working class is organizing to prevent the triumph of Fascism here, and to join with the workers of other lands to wipe it from the face of the earth wherever it has already triumphed. Build the Workers Party of the United States! Build the New, Fourth, International!
 



“A paper is not merely a collective propagandist and collective agitator.” It is “a part of an enormous pair of bellows, blowing every spark of the class struggle and of popular discontent into a general conflagration.”
Thus spoke Lenin himself, master of theory and master also in the field of practical achievement.
If the symbol of the bellows applied to the organ of a revolutionary party was ever or anywhere appropriate, it is at this moment in the United States.
To take the popular discontent stirring everywhere in this country today, still manifest largely in the hearing given to utopians, false prophets and mountebanks and transform it into a revolutionary conflagration! To enable the fighting elements in the unions to take the leadership in steel, automobiles, textiles, rubber, away from the bureaucrats who want to put down the fire of discontent so that the discontent of the Workers with rising prices and felling incomes, with sham company unions, with labor hating bosses, may be fanned into a conflagration sweeping the nation like a prairie fire during this spring and summer! That is the task of the Workers Party.
To achieve that task the New Militant must be distributed in increasing thousands. It must become the paper of the American workers. Our field workers, our comrades in the front line trenches in the strike areas, our comrades who have to meet the arguments or the slanders of other parties and groups, the party organizers and members who meet the militant workers In the unions and unemployed leagues and win them for the party, – all must be armed with the New Militant – their work must be supplemented by the New Militant going in thousands into the factories, mines, stores, offices and workers’ homes.
Blow “every spark of the class struggle into a general conflagration”.
That means, today, support the New Militant subscription campaign.



 


National Committee of W.P.
A.J. Muste, Secretary



 







From A.J. Muste, national secretary of the Workers Party, comes further word of the tour he and James P. Cannon, editor of the New Militant, are making to present the program of the W.P. to the workers of the country. Reports indicate that Comrades Muste and Cannon’s tour is a march of triumph.



* * *
NEW CASTLE, Pa. and YOUNGSTOWN, Ohio. – From the debacle which overcame the militant movement of the steel workers last spring when Bill Green and Mike Tighe sabotaged the general strike in the industry, the movement is slowly recovering.
The determination to build a union is not dead among the steel workers, though they are somewhat lost in the maze of Labor Board elections, injunctions by the steel companies against the union and by the union against the companies and what have you. A crisis breaking into a strike may develop in one of these mills where an election is denied.
 
W.P. Has Many Contacts
The militant leaders hope nothing too serious will break before they get their forces organized better than they were last year. Comrade Cannon and I were called into conference by some of them. We find the Party has many contacts in steel.
Comrades McKinney, Cooper, Sullivan and Herman from Pittsburgh popped into the New Castle meeting. They are hoping to tie in the unemployed movement here with the national movement.
The Party branches in New Castle and Youngstown have a good start and are thoroughly in earnest. The meetings for Comrade Cannon and me brought out most of the active spirits in the locality and made converts to the W.P. After the mass meetings, the branches kept the national officers up until four in the morning to discuss branch problems!
* * *
CLEVELAND, Ohio. – On the way up here we visited an old steel worker’s home. He still goes to work when there is work. “We are lucky if we make 10 dollars a week now, when we used to make, that in a day.”
The day before, one of his shopmates fainted on the job, narrowly escaping being burned to death. “He has a wife and three or four children. He just doesn’t get enough to eat to let him do a trick in a steel plant.”
 
Two Husky Sons
Two husky sons of our friend sat in the house – no jobs. The father put a question to us – really to the capitalist system: “Do you think they’ll fix it so there will be something for the young men to do?”
The answer of capitalism to that momentous question we got an hour later when we drove through McDonald, where Carnegie Steel was just breaking ground for a new strip mill. Referring to the labor to be displaced by the new process, the young steel worker riding with us said : “They won’t need anything in this damn industry pretty soon except a few button-pushers.”
 
Same Old Story
We had a well-attended meeting here. Same old story as to C.P. and S.P. They can’t meet us in an argument on our Declaration of Principles. The branch has good material, is working out a program of action. It will be felt in the labor struggle in Cleveland.
The branch conference in Cleveland was attended by party members from Akron. As dispatches to the New Militant bave indicated, things may pop in rubber very soon, If so, Akron will be the first Toledo-Minneapolis of 1935. Our party members and sympathisers are the only advanced group having real access to the rubber workers. Would that Louis Budenz were well enough to take the field. What a chance his America of the Middle West would give him!
* * *
TOLEDO, Ohio. – If there was ever any doubt as to whether our Toledo comrades would be able to dig in and follow up (never mind if the metaphors are mixed, Comrade Editor) the work they did in the great Auto Lite strike, that day is past. The Central Labor Union supports the Unemployed Leagues openly. Our comrades are asked to write for the Central Labor Union paper.
The Auto Workers’ Union has kicked out Ramsey and Bossier and its present lenders make no secret of seeking the help of our comrades. The union is growing rapidly and despite the fact that the Auto-Lite plant itself is still half company union, thanks to Ramsey’s influence, the Mininger interests hesitate to provoke a quarrel. They’ve had a lesson!
Five members of an S.P. local drove 60 miles over roads that were a sheet of ice to our Toledo mass meeting. And they weren’t sorry!
Toledo branch is growing. Sam Pollock can’t be spared for Detroit just now. Ted Selander, however, is going to Columbus to hold down the office of the National Unemployed League of which he was elected treasurer last summer.
* * *
DETROIT, Mich. – There’s going to be big political news soon from Detroit. It will mean a substantial accession to the W.P. But we’ll have to keep the comrades guessing for a while.
Meantime we can report that the Detroit branch has a good start, has the respect and confidence of the best elements in the trade union movement, and with the forces that are being sent in will prove itself capable of handling even as big a situation as Detroit.
Reports on the interesting and complex industrial situation here, the New Militant is getting from other comrades. Capitalism is booming here. Ford working 24 hours a day.
So there’s no unemployment in Detroit?
Say, comrade, we said capitalism is booming.
* * *
CHICAGO, Ill. – A hall jammed with nearly 400 people. Spartacus Youth with their red sashes, the crowd so interested that we had to get the management of the hall to extend our time, the C.P. and S.P. attempts to answer us so weak that the workers present often roared their derision, the singing of the International and three mighty cheers for the Workers Party of the U.S. – that was the Chicago meeting.
 
A Hot Situation
It’s 10 below zero here meteorologically speaking, but it’s a “hot” situation as far as our branches, the Spartacus Youth League and prospects of growth are concerned.
The Chicago branches believe that a district comprising Illinois, southern Wisconsin, eastern Iowa and Missouri and northwestern Indiana, with headquarters in Chicago, ought to be set up soon. Comrade Cannon and I are convinced by their arguments and are recommending action to the Political Committee.
There are a million things to Write about Chicago, but here as elsewhere the time is all too short. Besides, I CAN hear the editor cussing now because this copy isn’t in. Better have mercy on us. As I said, it’s 10 below zero here, the weatherman says the cold wave is staying for a while, and we’re headed for Minneapolis and – the North Pole!
 







Making a couple of preliminary stops in Canada, A.J. Muste, national secretary of the Workers Party of the United States, and James P. Cannon, editor of the New Militant, have launched their tour to present the W.P. program to the workers of the country.
First reports from Comrades Muste and Cannon tell of a growing miltancy among Canadian workers, and of Tory Premier Bennett’s “new deal” gestures to try to halt this ferment.
In Toronto the Workers Party of Canada, sister organization to the W.P. of the U.S., has an important and widening influence. In Hamilton, Ont., where labor has long been conservative, and in Tonawanda, N.Y., where as recently as last year a Democratic politician dominated the unemployed organization, workers listened eagerly to the message of the Workers Party.
From week to week the New Militant will follow Comrades Muste and Cannon in their tour across the country.



* * *
TORONTO, Ont. – The first stop Comrade Cannon and I are making on our tour to present the Workers Party program to the workers of the United States is in Canada! This we may take as a symbol of international working class solidarity and a prophecy of an international Workers’ Republic.
 
Speak to 400
For our mass meeting here more than 400 workers crowded the Labor Lyceum, notwithstanding the fact that the Communist party staged a rival meeting. The worker’s stayed until almost midnight, asking questions. They showed intense interest in recent events in the Soviet Union; Comrade Cannon’s replies completely silenced the Communist party members of the audience.
The Canadian Worker admits that two Ukrainian workers who went to Russia, one deported from Canada for C.P. activities, were recently executed by the Communist party in the S.U.!
The Workers Party of Canada has a flourishing branch here, another in nearby Hamilton, and in Montreal, Winnipeg and Vancouver, with contacts in other towns. Its Program of Action includes: 1) a $1,500 fund to enable it to issue a weekly organ; 2) a tour by Secretary Jack MacDonald in the spring; 3) a national conference following the tour.
Here in Toronto, our WP. comrades are the leading influence in a promising unemployed movement.
At the office of Vapaa Sana, a bi-weekly Finnish paper, we found Comrade Eero Boman of New York translating the Declaration of Principles of the W.P.U.S., which is running in the paper.
 
Canada’s “New Deal”
There is excitement here over radio broadcasts of the Tory premier, R.B. Bennett. This conservative politician is adopting Rooseveltian tactics, declaring “laissez-faire, old-style capitalism” is dead and advocating social insurance, “fairer distribution of income” (without very specific suggestions), control of stock speculation, etc. The fact that a Tory must come out for such a program is a measure of the revolt stirring among the masses.
In the United States we have seen what a “new deal” really means to workers. Here Bennett seems to be taking the wind out of the liberal party sails on the eve of election. Even the Cooperative Commonwealth Federation, social-democratic farmer-labor party, finds it hard to criticize Bennett’s program; there is even talk of a “national” cabinet, with the possibility that the C.C.F. leader, J.S. Wood worth, and Bennett will yet do a Stanley Baldwin-Ramsay MacDonald brother act.
 
Opportunity for W.P.
All this means there is a real opportunity for the W.P. of Canada, as the Marxist party able to analyze these issues clearly and keep the workers from being misled by vague promises.
There is a splendid group of young comrades here. After our meeting, when we were having coffee and tea (yes, both!) in a restaurant, they sang labor and revolutionary songs. The branch has a chorus. New York and other districts take notice! – That’s an idea for us. And we should have a song book.
Off for Hamilton!
* * *
HAMILTON, Ont. – This is the most highly industrialized town, in proportion to the population, in Canada. But the labor and radical movement is weak. The discontent of the workers expresses itself in voting for “friends of labor” of the A.F. of L. stripe.
Yet there is some radical activity: A small but lively branch of the W.P. of Canada vigorously pushes its propaganda.
Our meeting here was not large, but the workers showed by their 25 questions after our speeches how eager they are for help in forming a revolutionary program.
* * *
TONAWANDA, N.Y. – Back to the United States! In a rather bleak hall in this industrial center hangs a charter of an A.F. of L. central trades council, and around it half a dozen local charters – of union locals long since defunct.
Here an unemployed organization met last year, under the influence of a Democratic politician. A couple of our comrades were expelled, for being too radical. It, too, is now dead.
In this hall, on Sunday afternoon, we talked to a group of deeply interested workers about what might be in the U.S. and of labor’s road to power.
When we had finished, one of these workers said, “Send a young comrade up here as an organizer, and I’ll see that he gets a bed and three squares a day.”
 



Fellow Worker:
In my last letter I wrote about how the Workers Party came into existence, after many years of splits and disintegration in the radical movement, as a new unifying center for the revolutionary forces. I concluded by stating that we base our party on the teachings of Marx and Lenin which have been tested in the experience of the international revolutionary movement of the working class and seek to apply these principles to the realities of the American scene.
When we speak of our party as “revolutionary” we mean, on the one hand, that its aim is revolutionary and on the other hand that we believe in the revolutionary method. We do not believe that the masses can be delivered from poverty, unemployment, degradation, war, by any reform of the capitalist system under which we live. That system must be abolished, wage slavery must be done away with altogether. The workers must own and control the machinery of production.
We do not believe that the workers and their allies can overthrow the capitalist state, governmental system, and the capitalist economic system by purely legal, “democratic”, peaceful, parliamentary methods. They will have to take the revolutionary road to their goal.
 
An Example of Reform
As for curing the ills of the workers by reforming capitalism, we have just been living through two years of the Roosevelt New Deal which was to do just that. And you know only too well what that has got us. “Salvation” has been provided not tor the workers, but for the capitalist class. Factory pay-rolls are only 60 percent of the 1926 level, for example, but dividends and profits 150 percent. The average wage of the American worker who was lucky enough to have a job at all last year was around fifteen dollars a week. The citizenship paper of millions of “the proud American working class, sons and daughters of Washington, Jefferson and Lincoln”, is a relief ticket – which entitles them to nicely calculated rations after snooping social workers have made sure that there isn’t an extra loaf of bread in the closet or a nickel in the pants pocket.
This takes place in a country where everybody could have a decent, comfortable home, plenty of attractive clothing, abundant food, educational opportunity, money for travel and amusement, if factories were not standing idle, food being plowed under, and so on.
There is always some one who promises the workers to fix things up. Hoover with his chicken in every pot and two cars in every garage. Roosevelt with his New Deal. Hooey Long with a house, automobile and radio for everybody. Isn’t it about time that the workers realized what Marx taught long ago that it does not make any difference how well-meaning these capitalist saviors may be, there is no way out for the masses under capitalism?
For example, you tell employers that we now have a New Deal, no one is to get below a certain minimum, everybody is to get high wages so “the masses may have purchasing power to buy the output of our mass production” and then turn around and tell the boss that he must run his business at a profit in competition with other bosses, and his chief concern is necessarily to put his prices up as high as possible and to keep his costs, including his labor costs, as low as possible. Thus all the chiselling on wages, the speed up, etc. under the codes and other New Deal rigmarole.
If for the moment the wage rates are maintained, the boss looks for some other way to squeeze out profit, as by putting in “labor-saving” machinery and putting workers out on the street. The steel barons have a new process with which 1,600 men can turn out as much as 32,000 do now. Out of every 320 now employed 304 can be fired and the other 16 do the work!
 
General Trend Today
Under capitalism, in this its period of decline, the general trend is toward greater misery for the workers. Capitalists make their profits by paying the worker in wages a smaller value than he creates by laboring. The capitalist thus gets what Marx calls surplus value. It is the only way profit Can be created. Under modern conditions expensive plants and equipment are increased, but the work is done with fewer workers. Thus they must be exploited ever more fiercely in order that surplus value – profit – may be squeezed out of their labor, the only possible source of profit.
At an earlier period capitalism found a way out by getting outlets for surplus capital, possibilities of exploitation, etc. in so-called “backward countries”. But as the situation grows more tense in the advanced capitalist countries and the “backward countries” also become industrialized, it is a case of bigger and hungrier dogs fighting for fewer and fewer bones. Terrific and awful wars break out We have had one world-war. Another is in the making.
Things might be better. Plenty and security can be had. But even if the American working class were willing to accept meekly the fifty percent cut in its standard of living since 1929, it will not be given the “privilege”. Capitalism will force the standard lower and again lower. It will lead the masses to slaughter unless they take things into their own hands.
Thus the workers become convinced that capitalism cannot be reformed, it must be abolished.
For the most part, however, the workers who have reached this conviction have been under the influence of the “Social-Democratic” philosophy of the Socialist parties and the Second International. According to this philosophy, we can gradually replace capitalism with socialism and we can do it by peaceful, parliamentary, “democratic” means.
 
Riding in Opposite Directions
What has happened in Germany and other countries since the war shows plainly enough that this philosophy of “Gradualism” means rum for the workers and their movement. The idea of running a capitalist and a Socialist, a profit and non-profit, system side by side is crazy. It is like trying to ride on two horses going in opposite directions. The capitalist system remains under all these “Socialist housing schemes” etc. and so the crisis is not resolved; it gets worse. There was a time when capitalism was able to make concessions to the workers, better the standard of living, without cutting into profits. Then the “gradualism” of the social-democratic parties and the unions brought certain results. Now capitalism maintains itself only by taking away concessions – wage rates, social insurance benefits, etc. – which it once gave. To stick to “gradualism” now means one retreat after another for the workers. furthermore, “democratic” methods accomplish nothing. For capitalism itself destroys every vestige, every pretense, of democracy and maintains itself at last by means or an open, brutal, Fascist dictatorship. Capitalism will inevitably do this everywhere.
Why? Because capitalism must drive the standard of living lower all the time. In face of this, if the masses have any freedom at all, any union or party no matter how conservative, meek, legal, respectable, peaceful, they will offer resistance. They will fight for mere existence. Therefore capitalism wipes out “democracy”, smashes every trade union, farmers’ organization, political party. The workers cannot save themselves or their movement by being humble and cautious.
Right here in the U.S. today workers are killed in strikes when they try to assert their right to collective bargaining under Section 7a of NRA. The militia is called out against them, not against the bosses! Radical parties are kept off the ballot. A big movement is on foot to deprive the unemployed of the right to vote.
Under these circumstances, to rely on “democracy”, to say that we will gain our ends by electing a president and a majority of congress pretty soon, is to disarm the working class while capitalism arms itself to smash us. That is what the Social Democracy has done.
History gives us no instance of a ruling class which voluntarily gives up its power. It took the English Revolution, the French, the American, to smash feudalism. It took four years of civil war in these United States to smash the slave-holding aristocracy of the South (even after a president and congress representing a new class had been elected by parliamentary methods) and to put the new capitalist class in power.
The capitalists will not quietly Land over their power to us, fellow worker. We cannot use the capitalist state, system of government, whose very purpose is to maintain capitalism, in order to overthrow it. We have to smash the capitalist state and put the workers’ state in its place. Then we can begin to build a new society on new foundations.
(A third letter will be published in the next issue of the New Militant)
 



Fellow-Worker:
My last letter pointed out that we workers cannot obtain plenty and security, deliverance from misery and war, by trying to reform the capitalist economic system. We have to abolish it. And we cannot abolish it except by the revolutionary method. The capitalists are not going to retire gracefully and without a struggle from the scene!
In your answer you said that the workers in your shop kicked about a lot or things like wages and the way they are being speeded up and the high cost of food, but that they did not read any serious papers or books and were against any “radical theories” You added that although they growled a lot they did not show much fight and that you did not think they would ever be ready to “make a revolution”.
If by this you mean that you do not have any hope that the masses of the workers will become students of economics and government, will understand and accept the theories set forth in Marx’s Capital, and as a result of intellectual reflection will determine to overthrow capitalism, you are perfectly right. That is not the way things happen in history.
You know how it is when a strike occurs in your mill. It does not happen primarily because the workers have been reading statistics of what is happening in the industry, or because in general they have become radical in their thinking. It comes because of grievances about things in which they are directly concerned, the way in which a foreman treats them, a wage cut, an attempt of the boss to squeeze more work out of them. Such grievances pile up. Presently workers who have had a meek attitude and still regard themselves as thoroughly conservative, strike and fight. In the strike they learn a great deal about the economic system, the banks, the role of the government. Many a worker has become class-conscious and been started on his way to a life of activity in the labor and revolutionary movement in this way.
 
What the Masses Fight For
The masses may be said always to fight for direct and simple things, for the right to exist, for a better life. When the great Bolshevik revolution broke out in Russia in 1917, they were not moved by a conscious determination to build “a new social order” and a clear picture of what kind of an order it would be. The slogans in the fight were Peace, Bread, Land. The whole economic and political machinery of the Czarist regime was broken up, was ceasing to function altogether. The soldiers wanted to quit the army where they were being slaughtered like cattle. The masses in the cities wanted to eat. The peasants wanted the land which was in the possession of the big land-owners.
The time had come when in order to exist, in order to prevent complete ruin, the masses had to carry on their fight, ever more broadly and intensely, and at last against the economic system which served to maintain that economy. Thus, under the leadership of the revolutionary party, the masses carried through the revolution to overthrow capitalism and establish the workers’ state.
All the details as to how the job was done in Russia, or how it may be carried through here where, of course, the conditions are not exactly the same, we need not go into here. But we can see before our own eyes how things may shape up. We recall how last year in Toledo, Minneapolis, San Francisco, and plenty of other places, tens of thousands came out on the streets and picketed in support of strikes which in many cases involved directly only a small number. When a “general strike” occurs, even on a restricted scale, who decides whether milk shall be delivered to children or the light and power kept on in the hospitals?
The mayor, the city council, etc. have become powerless. The instruments of capitalist government cannot function. The workers’ Strike Committee, or in some cases where food is involved a farmers’ Strike Committee, decides such things. You have them taking over some of the functions of government. Thus we can see the possibility of Workers’ Councils emerging, the instruments with which workers carry on the light and also the instruments through which the government of the workers functions after they have taken power. The Russian name for councils is Soviets. That is why we often speak of the workers’ state as Soviet power.
Thus the picture unfolds. The capitalist system, though the development of productive forces makes plenty possible, cannot function effectively any more. It presses the standard of living of the masses ever lower. The capitalist state also begins to break down. The workers, in order to exist, have to fight on a broader and broader front. Presently they have to overthrow the state and abolish the capitalist economic system altogether. Then they establish the Workers’ State which functions through new governmental instruments and disbands or destroys the old agencies and forms of the capitalists’ military forces, etc. Then and not until then, under the workers’ state, the masses can use the productive forces to provide plenty and security.
 
How Are Strikes Caused?
At this point, another important factor must be emphasized. You know that agitators and radicals do not cause strikes, as the kept press tries to make out. You have had plenty of experience of how at certain times no amount of agitation can cause the slightest stir among the workers. Rotten conditions cause the workers to revolt, particularly when they see a chance o£ doing something about them. But yon know also that when last year the unrest increased in your mill, it was you and the other fellows I have been writing to who got together, talked things over, called a meeting at Bill Roberts’ house, got a lot of workers to sign cards that they would join a union if and when half the mill was signed up, later called a mass meeting, set up the union, sent for a charter from the international, etc. You fellows and a few others are the officers of the union, you serve on the department committees, you were on the strike committee.
In other words, there was a leadership. It consisted of the men who had read and studied some, who knew more out the labor movement than the general run of the workers, who could organize, who had courage and fighting qualities, who could look ahead and plan. Besides, you acted as a group, rather than as individuals. The time before when the workers wanted to do something, but everything was fed by this fellow Jackson, a good fellow in many ways but erratic and a free-lance, everything went wrong. The same conception holds good for the entire revolutionary struggle of the working class.
 
The Revolutionary Party
That is why we say that the basic instrument of the workers in the revolutionary struggle is the revolutionary party.
The working class as a whole is not homogeneous. It is divided by many interests. Many sections are backward. It cannot, as a class, directly plan and guide its battles. Just as you found in your mill, a staff, a vanguard is necessary. If there is none, or if its basic policies are wrong, only confusion, defeat and disaster can result for the workers. As our Declaration of Principles puts it, “this is the revolutionary party. It embraces the most advanced, the most militant, the most devoted workers, unites them firmly on the basis of tested principles, and welds them together in rigorous discipline”.
The party does not impose its leadership on the masses. It wins their confidence and support by its devotion to the interests of the masses, its courage, the correctness of its policies. Even immediate struggles are carried forward effectively only where such leadership plays an important, if not a leading, role.
When, and only when the revolutionary party, as the crisis deepens and conditions ripen, gains the support of the majority in the Workers’ Councils, or whatever the mass struggle organizations of the workers may be called, establishes its leadership, can the revolutionary struggle of the workers be carried to a victorious conclusion.
That is why it is so important that you and workers like you should join the W.P. – why on the one hand you should contribute your strength, energy and intelligence to it and on the other hand receive from membership in the revolutionary party the training, discipline, comradeship and enthusiasm which can come in no other way, and without which we cannot accomplish the colossal and urgent task before the Party, before the working class here in the U.S. and throughout the world!
(A fourth and final letter be published in next week’s issue of the New Militant.)
 



Fellow Worker:
You have asked me come interesting questions. Why should I join the Workers Party? What is the program of the W.P.? Why was “another” party necessary? Can we not remove the evils from which workers now suffer without revolution ?
Workers have every right to ask these questions of us. No worker, indeed, should join the W.P. without carefully considering and understanding our answer to these questions.
I am going to give our answers to them in as straightforward and simple a manner as possible. I hope you will discuss these letters with the other workers in the shop and in your neighborhood about whom you wrote me. We ask nothing except a careful consideration of our program by honest, class conscious workers. We believe the result will be that they join the Workers Party ranks.
 
How W.P. Began
First of all I am going to tell you briefly how the W.P. came into existence; for that in itself tells something very important about what kind of a party the W.P. is. The W.P. was launched on December 1, 1934. Thus by the calendar the W.P. is, so to speak, a baby. But this is the case only if you judge by the calendar. In organization, in tradition, in personnel, in program, the W.P. begins its life as a mature party.
For the W.P. did not suddenly descend from the clouds or spring up out of the sea. It is not the result of a “bright idea” in the brain of some individual. The W.P. came into existence as the result of the merger of two previously existing organizations, each of which had an honorable history of some years in the labor movement, both nationally and internationally. One of these organizations was the American Workers Party, the other the Communist League of America, popularly known as Trotskyists.
The C.L.A. was composed of revolutionists who were expelled from the Communist Party and the Communist International. They differed with the line taken by the C.P. and C.I. in certain matters of principle and tactics. They asked for the right to state their views in the party discussions, being willing to carry out party discipline in action, if this elementary right of the members of a revolutionary party were granted them. They were refused the right and expelled.
Nevertheless, they continued for some years as a faction of the C.P. and C.I., attempting to correct their line, hoping to reform them and get back in. When the comrades of the former C.L.A. saw that the evils to which they had pointed were not corrected, but aggravated, and when they saw the result of these evils in the complete collapse e.g. of the Communist Party of Germany before Hitler Fascism, they decided that they would be untrue to the working class if they continued trying to reform the C.P. They decided that a new revolutionary party and a new international must be formed.
The American Workers Party, on its part, was the outgrowth of the Conference for Progressive Labor Action. The C.P.L.A. was formed in 1928–29. It was composed mainly of trade unionists, most of them in the A.F. of L., some in independent unions. They fought against gangsterism, racketeering and autocracy in the unions. They agitated for a militant policy as against the class-collaboration, “cooperation with the bosses”, policy of the A.F. of L. officialdom. They sought to organize the workers in the basic industries which were utterly neglected by the A.F. of L. at that time. When the depression continued, they took a leading part in organizing the unemployed in many states and in building the National Unemployed League.
 
Found Need of New Party
While the leading members of the former C.P.L.A. carried on their activities mainly in the economic field, they had a revolutionary outlook. They realized that actions relating to the immediate needs and grievances of the workers could be carried out effectively and help in the eventual emancipation of the workers, only if the vanguard elements among the workers had a correct outlook and philosophy, and this meant being organized in a revolutionary working class party. When they looked about for such a party to which they could belong and bring the workers, they did not find it in the C.P. or SP. or any other existing party or group. Thus in the fall of 1933 they also came to the conclusion that there must be a new party and a new international, and set up the Provisional Organizing Committee of the American Workers Party.
Thus there were two groups, which had come from very different directions to the same conclusion. Soon the C.L.A. and the A.W.P. entered into discussions. We said, “If we really mean the same thing, when we talk about a new party, we should be building it together.” We were deliberate about the thing, however. We decided that we must not fuse politically, unless we were really in agreement on the fundamentals of a program. Lacking such agreement, we could still work together on concrete issues but political merger must be on the basis of principle. Thus for eleven months discussion went on. At the end of that time a joint committee of the two organizations wrote a Declaration of Principles and a constitution which were adopted at their conventions and which constituted the basis of the merger and of the formal launching of the Workers Party of the United States.
 
Not a Hasty Decision
It is clear, then, that here was no hasty, irresponsible decision to go and launch “another party”. The workers in the C.L.A. and A.W.P. acted in the most careful and responsible manner in dealing with the problem before them, as revolutionists should.
The W.P. does not, however, trace its history back merely to the former A.W.P. and C.L.A. The members of these organizations has been active in labor and revolutionary work, here and abroad, long before the organizations themselves came into being. So it came about that in the founding convention of the W.P. here were present not a few or the founders of the C.P. and C.I., workers who had been active in the Socialist Party in the days when that was a progressive force, workers who had participated in the Russian revolution, workers who had stood firm in the trying days of the Great War, who had taken a leading part in the labor struggles in the U.S. for the past thirty years and more. The Workers Party is rich in tradition and experience.
 
Our Credentials
A party needs more than traditions, however. You and your fellow-workers have a right to ask whether we have credentials from the working class today, what role we are playing in the surging movement and the vast struggles of the present. Our answer is that we do have such credentials. We point to the fact that in the founding convention of the W.P. the leaders of the National Unemployed League, the strongest and most stable of the unemployed organizations which have come out of the depression, the leaders of the great Toledo strike, the leaders of the great series of strikes in Minneapolis, active workers in steel, automobiles, textile, rubber, transportation, the public utilities took part. We are an integral part in all sections of the country of the working class movement and the struggles of the masses.
Let me go back for a moment and emphasize again that the W.P. is the result of a merger. For ten years and more we have seen splits and disintegration in the revolutionary movement. Sometimes it seemed as if every week produced a new party, group or grouplet. No wonder that you and many other workers felt discouraged and even sometimes disgusted. Here at last we have a case not of “another party”, not of two groups where there was one before, but of one organization where before there were two. Here is an example of revolutionary unity. This, we submit, means more than just adding one and one to make two. The establishment of a unifying center marks an historic turning point in the revolutionary movement. This example of unity will be as contagions, we believe, as was the example of splits in an earlier period. The fact that the former C.L.A. and A.W.P. were able to begin this process of unification is proof that they represented healthy, vigorous and responsible elements. That they may work with these elements to further the crucial job of unifying the revolutionary forces Is one big argument for workers joining the W.P.
 
Unity – On What Basis?
When we speak of unity today we have to understand clearly what we mean. Unity – on what basis? Merely repeating the word “unity” or “united front” will not accomplish anything.
Political unity, for one thing, is not the same as united front. United front means united action for specific purposes, against wage cuts or evictions, for the defense of labor prisoners etc. by organizations which have grave political differences. Membership in a political party of the working class is not on the same basis as membership in a union. A union is a mass organization to which all workers in a given trade or industry belong – Republicans, Democrats, Single Taxers, Workers Party, C.P., S.P., Baptists, Presbyterians, Prohibitionists, etc. It does not follow that you can put the same Republicans, Democrats, Single Taxers, Prohibitionists, Baptists, etc. in a political party, and have a labor party, much less a revolutionary party.
The revolutionary party does not deal merely or primarily with immediate issues of wages, hours and conditions of work. It deals with the problem of the economic-political system as a whole, how it must and can be changed or abolished, etc. A revolutionary party must, therefore, have a philosophy, a theory, a program. If it has the wrong one, then at the critical moment it will fail and betray the masses.
Take the example of Austria. There we had a great working class party, the Social Democratic Party. It had no rivals. It had in it practically all the best elements in the Austrian working class. There was likewise a powerful trade union movement, closely linked with the political party, great cooperative, cultural, sports organizations. Yet this mighty and united movement collapsed before Fascism. Why? Because it was based upon a false, Social Democratic, philosophy and program. To the consideration of that philosophy and program, I shall turn in another letter. Suffice it now to point the obvious moral: the working class does not want the kind of “unity” that leads to Fascist concentration camps, any more than it wants the divisions that lead to defeat at the hands of Fascism. An army moving unitedly in the wrong direction cannot get to the right place!
What, then, is the philosophy and program of the W.P.? It is not something brand-new, which we patented yesterday. Our Declaration of Principles says: “The W.P. of the U.S. is founded on the great principles of revolutionary theory and practice stated by Marx and Lenin and tested by the experience of the class struggle on an international scale, above all in the Russian Revolution of 1917 (the “October Revolution”).” The W.P. carries on, in other words, the great revolutionary tradition of the modern working class. To it belong Marx, and Lenin, and Trotsky, for we are not of those who have read him out of the revolutionary movement. To it belongs the Russian revolution, through which the one workers’ state, beacon light of inspiration to the workers of the entire world, was brought into being.
As the revolutionary party of the American working class our primary task, as the Declaration of Principles states, “is the defeat of the enemy at home – the overthrow of the capitalist government of the United States” Thus, proceeding from the basic principles of Marx and Lenin, we “will use the revolutionary potentialities of American tradition and history”, adapt our tactics to the concrete situation and the line-up of the class forces in the U.S., in order to inspire and lead the American working class and its allies in other exploited sections of the population, to the overthrow of capitalism and the building of a society in which natural resources and the machinery of production will be used for the benefit of the workers and not for the profit of a few.
(Comrade Muste’s second letter will appear in the next issue.)
 



AT THE MOMENT of writing no large scale strike is under way. There is a possibility that such a struggle may break out in the rubber industry in Akron. Just now, there are skirmishes only, desultory firing, as in the drivers’ strike in Fargo, N.D., the hosiery strike in Georgia, etc. Are these rear-guard actions following the strike wave of 1934 or do they presage fresh major battles?
The answer to this question must begin with an analysis of last year’s strikes. These demonstrated certain things about the employing class and its attitude, about the Roosevelt administration, about the mood of the workers, and about the condition of the unions and the role of the trade union leadership.
The employers, particularly in the basic industries, demonstrated that they are as adamant as ever against unionization of their employees and collective bargaining. The most determined resistance was offered against all attempts to organize. The building of company unions to confuse the workers was persistently pushed. Bitter and brutal methods were employed in the effort to smash strikes when they occurred. Moreover, the aggressiveness of the employer attitude toward the government and its gestures in “support” of labor’s right to organize, was intensified as the months progressed. Sabotaging of the various labor boards by resort to technicalities and endless delays, open flaunting of the authority of the boards in many instances, appeals to the courts on the issue of the constitutionality of the NRA, occurred. At the close of the year the employers’ associations openly demanded abrogation of all New Deal measures except those which strengthened monopolistic tendencies, such as suspension of the anti-trust laws. Proposals to outlaw sympathetic and general strikes are now being waged. It is a far cry from the spring of 1933 when the Chamber of Commerce of the US was begging Roosevelt to take control of industry for a couple of years on almost any terms.
When one reads the reports of vastly increased corporation profits as a result of the boosting of prices on the one hand, and the pegging of wages at a low point on the other hand, the basis for the employers’ attitude is revealed. Since, furthermore, it is only by the process of restriction of production, fixing of prices and severer exploitation of labor that profits can be made in this period of capitalist decline, their attitude toward unionism and collective bargaining will not and cannot change. Under the circumstances unions relying on cooperation with the employers can by no stretch of the imagination gain anything for workers in the basic industries. Any conceivable temporary gains and even the defense of existing standards can be won only by fighting organizations through the most intense struggle. Stable unions living for long periods in peaceful contractual relations with employers will not be a dominant feature of the landscape.
The Roosevelt administration, on its part, completely capitulated to the big industrialists in the strikes of 1934. Any pretense of “cracking down” on them and forcing them to bargain collectively was thrown to the winds. The notion is as dead today as is the great Poo-Bah Hugh Johnson himself. Administration representatives continued to issue conflicting interpretations of section 7A of NRA, which admirably served the purpose of keeping the workers hoping that Roosevelt would do something, enabling William Green and his henchmen to contend that the workers must stick to them in order to please Roosevelt and get the benefits of NRA, while the employers were at liberty to smash strikes, build company unions, etc. The gullibility of human nature is illustrated once more by the fact that for some time the fiction was maintained that it was Roosevelt’s underlings, and not the Great White Father himself, who were betraying the workers, though it was Roosevelt who personally wrote into the automobile code last March the “proportional representation” clause giving company unions the same status as independent unions. Even the most liberal of the various labor relations boards made no attempt to force employers to deal with unions or despairingly admitted that they had no power. Arbitrators and conciliators, even the best of them, considered it their main duty to prevent strikes or settle them expeditiously, not to help unions to win them so that section 7A would cease to be a dead letter.
Police and militia were regularly called out against the strikers. During the textile strike the militia was out in seven states at one time – not to whip the employers into line, but to keep strikers in line. No word of rebuke issued from the White House. To the contrary, when “Red hysteria” needed to be whipped up in order to smash the Pacific Coast strike, not only reactionary Hugh Johnson but supposedly liberal Frances Perkins of the Roosevelt staff helped to do the job.
As the new year gets under way, Roosevelt renews the automobile code, openly slapping William Green, who describes himself as the President of the “great American Federation of Labor”, in the face of refusing to remedy any of the conditions which have enabled the automobile barons to maintain the company unions. From Green, from John L. Lewis, and other trade union bureaucrats who hailed the NRA as the Charter of American labor and tricked the masses into a vast scheme of collaboration with the government in order to save capitalism, now issue howls of disappointment and rage. Of that more will be said later. Here it is important to set down the observation that so far as the issue of unionism is concerned the workers as a whole have been cured of faith in Roosevelt. I have just passed through the mine fields of southern Illinois where men were threatened with mob violence in the fall of 1933 if they showed any reluctance in joining in Blue Eagle parades. You are more likely to be laughed at today for defending the New Deal than regarded as a “Red” for attacking it! The workers may not yet fully realize that they will have to fight the government as well as the employers in order to organize unions and win strikes, but they do know that no support is coming from Washington.
What of the workers’ attitude as revealed in the year which witnessed the aluminum strike, Toledo, a near-general strike in steel, Milwaukee, Kohler, Minneapolis, San Francisco, the textile general strike? They evinced, and all the signs indicate that they still possess, a determination to organize. They are willing to fight for unionism, even under the most inadequate leadership. The general strike in textiles was finally called by the leaders of the United Textile Workers only after the most terrific pressure from the ranks. It was “settled” by the former on terms which, to put it charitably, gave the workers much less than they might have obtained. Tens of thousands of them went jobless for months because no defense against discrimination was provided in the settlement. Yet if these same UTW leaders call a general strike tomorrow, the indications are that more workers will respond than last fall. Thus have the lessons of the depression sunk in. Thus has the desire for unionism been sharpened.
Of fundamental importance is the evidence furnished in the struggles of 1934 that the craft idea is disappearing and the sense of class solidarity growing by leaps and bounds. In Toledo only five hundred union members were on strike in the Auto-Lite plant, but ten thousand Toledo workers were on hand on the afternoon and evening when the plant was stormed. A similar story can be told of every one of the big strikes of the year. Moreover, in practically every case, the unemployed trained by the unemployed organizations, especially the National Unemployed League and its units, fought side by side with their striking fellow workers on the picket lines, in fact in a number of instances took the initiative.
It was conclusively demonstrated that where, as in Minneapolis and Toledo, a realistic revolutionary political leadership was available, the workers were willing to follow it; and this leadership in large degree supplanted the conservative trade union bureaucrats, or at least forced them to take progressive steps, as the struggle pained breadth and intensity.
Despite all this, numerous strikes did not come off at all, including the very crucial ones in steel and automobiles. Save in exceptional cases, the strikes failed to achieve what under the objective conditions might have been gained. The responsibility for this must be placed in the first instance at the door of the AF of L leadership. As has already been noted, they depended upon the favor of Roosevelt, not upon struggle with the employers, to produce results for labor. They have been betrayed by their “friend”; the employers have once again demonstrated that they will not be “patriotic” and sensible, and sign union contracts. The union bureaucrats are now beating their breasts, wagging their heads, cursing such old friends as Donald Richberg, ex-attorney of the railroad unions, who learned collaboration with capitalists from no one but themselves.
Does all this mean anything for 1936? It would be a grievous error to imagine that Green et al. are now going to adopt a genuinely militant policy. They have long since forgotten how to fight, they are saturated with a conservative, capitalistic outlook. Even with regard to respectable social issues such as old age pensions they have displayed no leadership but have followed in the wake of social workers and politicians. They will make further compromises in the pinch rather than run the risk of alienating Roosevelt and giving him a pretext for calling them unpatriotic, obstructionists of the national recovery, etc. The battle for militant unions in the big industries which can only be born out of strikes must therefore necessarily be a battle against the present collaborationist leadership of the unions.
Nevertheless the experiences and revelations of the past year have weakened the position and diminished the prestige of the union bureaucrats. It will be easier for opposition forces to organize, harder for the bureaucrats to discredit those who from the beginning predicted what reliance upon the NRA would bring. Everywhere today one observes an increasing aggressiveness on the part of the progressives and militants, a defensive attitude on the part of the officialdom whose anti-Red campaign, e.g., has come to naught, and a growing disposition on the part of the masses to follow the progressives.
Furthermore, the AF of L leadership will be forced to make an effort to regain its prestige. It will have to go through the motions of trying to organize in some of the basic industries. It will have to talk in “militant” language again. Witness William Green’s speaking tour through the big industrial centers. Thus the cloak of AF of L respectability may be thrown over certain organizing campaigns and even strikes (cf. the steel strike of 1919) and the support of the labor movement as a whole gained, and this may prove of real, even decisive, help – .provided that the progressive trade union forces, with revolutionary political leadership and inspiration, maintain control of developments and use the opportunity to the utmost. An adventurist and unrealistic policy on the part of the latter will only play into the hands of the bureaucrats and offer them an alibi for inaction and sabotage. On the other hand, a Lovestoneite-SP line of timidity, of avowed or tacit alliance with the bureaucrats, can only result in the failure of organizing campaigns and the betrayal of strikes. There is, e.g., on the one hand grave doubt whether a large-scale organizing campaign and a strike in steel can be achieved today without AF of L “support” of a sort. It is certain, on the other hand, that no organizing campaign will show substantial results and no effective strike will be permitted to occur at all, unless the work is done and the actual as distinct from the nominal leadership given by the progressives and militants. To split up the masses is a crime; to split the masses from the collaborationist bureaucrats is another matter.
Under these circumstances unions independent of the AF of L cannot be ruled out of the picture ion cavalier fashion. The workers will in certain instances turn to them for all of Lovestone’s warnings! They may serve as a base for militants and revolutionists to contact workers. Their very existence is a challenge to AF of L unions and a spur to action. The most scrupulous integrity and most intelligent judgment must, however, be exercized in the situations where there is more than one union in the field. It is so easy, as in the case of the Progressive Miners and the United Mine Workers in Illinois today for the employers to play one against the other while the workers are saddled with two sets of bureaucrats instead of one! The revolutionists must stand for and vigorously push the issue of amalgamation into one democratically controlled industrial union in all such cases, and of course advance the slogan of identical demands and joint action in case of strikes. They must take every means to bring the rank and file of the organizations into contact with each other. The onus for division and splitting must rest in every instance upon the bureaucrats.
To the present writer it seems extremely doubtful whether in the long run the AF of L will be transformed into an instrument of struggle for the masses of the workers in this era of capitalist decline. No intelligent observer will be so bold as to claim that he knows for a certainty that it will. Even today there is no guarantee that the strikes which will certainly be necessary in basic industries if any semblance of organized power is to be developed by the workers, can be achieved within the framework of the AF of L. The choice between an open break with the AF of L or an ignominious and fatal abandonment of struggle may be presented to the workers. That must not be lost sight of for a single moment. Nor must the workers be left in any doubt as to what course the revolutionists will advise in such a case.
The analysis of the past year and the present position is not completed, however, with the estimate of the role of the AF of L leadership. Where were the progressives and militants in the strikes of 1934? Where were the political parties whose responsibility it was to give political direction to these struggles?
The extent to which the Left-progressive forces failed to play an adequate and decisive role in this year of insurgency in the working class may be gauged by the fact that when under pressure of the situation the AF of L convention last fall had to add “new blood” to the Executive Council, four out of the five chosen were Lewis of the Miners, Hutchinson of the Carpenters, Berry of the Pressmen, and Tobin of the Teamsters, four of the most notorious labor czars in the entire movement! The failure of the Left-progressive forces to make a better showing was due to the sheer inexperience of the more militant younger elements in the new unions; to personal rivalries among them; to their lack of political and economic background which offset their native militancy. It was due, above all, to the fact that they were unorganized. As a consequence they were more easily defeated by the old politicians of the movement, and the lessons of one struggle could not be adequately utilized in the next.
The lack of organization among the militants was in turn due to the failure of the SP to provide any independent leadership whatever in the union field and on the other hand to the disruptionist policy of the CP in the last period which had demoralized the Lefts and isolated them from the masses, and made it easy for the bureaucracy to kill the influence of any opposition by tagging the “communist” label on it. Thus the key to the developments of 1935 is in the hands of the new revolutionary party and of the organized Left-progressives in the unions.
Economic conditions are such that the workers, both in private employ and on public projects, will be driven to struggle. There is no doubt that the will to organize is still strong among them, even though in such an industry as automobiles e.g., after the experiences of last year, they hesitate to give their full confidence to any union in the field. Trust in the employers, the NRA and the union officialdom has been shaken. There is an unquestioned tendency practically everywhere to look with hope to the militants. These militants and Lefts must speedily learn to work together; they must organize both locally, in each industry, and nationally for the trade union movement as a whole. This is essential for defense against the reactionaries who one day will smash isolated centers of militancy. It is likewise essential because no headway can be made with such stupendous problems as steel or automobiles, e.g., by weak and scattered forces who operate in a haphazard fashion.
In this connection the “new line” of the CP must be dealt with. Disaster having overtaken it as a result of its former policies, the criminal incorrectness of which we had pointed out for years, the party is now executing the biggest zig-zag yet. In its latest program the “revolutionary” unions are liquidated, the united-front-from-below is in the discard, there are no more social Fascists it would appear, it is not wise to “raise the question of an independent federation of labor”, AF of L unions are no longer company unions. To the naive it might appear that the leopard has changed his spots, and that a thoroughly correct and realistic trade union policy has been worked out. The work in the AF of L unions will now be carried on with all the circumspection that CP leaders and followers, long-trained in a false line, can muster. Mighty efforts will be made to ingratiate themselves with progressive unionists who yesterday were fakers and capitalist agents, preventing the workers from rushing into the “revolutionary” unions. There is no doubt that with its apparatus, press, etc., the CP can momentarily make some headway with this policy. It has already gained a slight foothold in one or two fields where previously it was barred. Yet, for all its painful, stilted efforts to act tactfully, to put on an “American approach”, it is already demonstrating in the steel situation that it cannot get rid of its mechanical way of handling things, that it can only play in an adventurist fashion for capture of a movement, for a big story to write about in the Daily Worker, but cannot responsibly, patiently and honestly build a mass movement.
The plausibility of the CP’s present line must not prevent any revolutionist or intelligent trade unionist from understanding its real nature and pressing the attack until this party which has everywhere in recent years led the workers to defeat has been completely isolated and eliminated as an evil influence in the labor movement. Its recent turn does not result from a reasoned view of the situation and it is not based on principle. It is based upon the exigencies of Soviet Russia’s policy, under Stalinist leadership, of conciliation with the capitalist world and lack of confidence in the revolutionary movement in capitalist countries. If it were based on principle, the new line would have been taken long ago and the havoc that has been wrought in the unions by the scattering of the Left-progressive forces and in other ways prevented. If the new turn were a principled one, it would be marked by some Bolshevik self-criticism of this havoc wrought in the past. But we look in vain for any such analysis of past mistakes and crimes in CP literature.
We are assured that a new united front policy is now to be carried out but our comrades in Toledo found recently that there is the same old trickery and chicanery as before. The honest militants everywhere will find that to be the case. The CP makes a great show of wanting to establish an honest united front with the SP and the AF of L unions, but at the same time makes vehement attacks upon the Workers party and upon its members, adherents and sympathizers in the unions, in the Unemployed Leagues, in Toledo, Minneapolis, the Illinois mine fields and other centers where these workers have constituted the backbone of the progressive fighting forces for years! What kind of a united front is it which can take in social democrats, conservatives and reactionaries but must exclude and even attack Allard, Battuello, Selander, Pollock, the Dunne brothers, Bill Truax, Arnold Johnson, Ramuglia, Bill Brown? And exclude and attack the Workers Party – the one party which the CP cannot logically accuse of not being revolutionary and hence now describes as “ultra-revolutionary”? By this course the CP undoubtedly displays partisan tactical sense, recognizing the one force that can effectively challenge its pretensions, has indeed put it completely on the defensive everywhere. But it likewise gives conclusive evidence that it does not possess the competence and integrity to give leadership to the labor movement.
Some obstruction to progress the CP may yet he able to offer, yet even this can be reduced to a minimum and certainly will be if the Workers party rallies all its forces and gives the workers that leadership which they crave. For the workers are not in large numbers going to “fall”, for the latest CP argument:
“We have, after wreaking untold havoc in every corner of the labor movement, had to throw overboard in indecent haste every major policy of recent years; ergo, we have proved that we are the only party that can do anything for the workers!”
Within the CP itself the sudden new turn is causing profound disturbance. Many honest members and sympathizers now listen willingly to the propaganda of the Workers party and study its literature. With an increasing number of former CP sympathizers we shall now be able to work. Not a few members will join our ranks. Hot flirtations with social democrats and conservatives may temporarily gain the CP some sympathizers among the latter. It will be at the cost of alienating true revolutionists in its own ranks who have no means of telling when some new exigency of Stalinist policy may bring orders – for still another zig-zag!
Thus the Workers Party must assume its responsibility in the strike struggles of 1936, in the building of the new Left wing in the unions. The fact that the American Workers Party existed and that the Communist League of America turned to mass work profoundly affected the character of the mass movement and the strike struggles last year. Without Toledo and Minneapolis things would have been very different. The merger of these two organizations brings the revolutionary forces to 1936 with strength, clarity and purpose much more than doubled. There is no time to be lost in rallying all the sound revolutionary elements into the new party, in bringing all militant forces in and out of the party together for united action, lest the upsurge of the masses in 1935 again fail to achieve results commensurate with their militancy. If on the other hand we do measure up to our responsibility the political level of the struggle will be greatly raised this year and American capitalism challenged as never before by the organized might of the masses.
 



The following letter calling for the “further unification of the revolutionary forces” has been seat to the Proletarian Party by the Workers Party:
* * *
Proletarian Party of the U.S.
c-o John Keracher, National Secy.
Chicago, Ill.
Comrades:
On December 1–2, 1934, the Communist League of America (Trotskyists) and the American Workers Party held a unity convention in New York City. The Workers Party of the United States was formally launched by the merger of these two organizations on the basis of a Declaration of Principles and Constitution which had been formulated by joint committees and unanimously adopted in the conventions of the two organizations preceding the unity convention.
We regard it as a noteworthy development that after a decade of splits and disintegration in the revolutionary movement, two organizations: should have set an example of unification on the basis of a thorough-going Marxist and Leninist program.
The problem of unifying all healthy revolutionary forces in the United States is of the utmost urgency and importance. The mobilization of the left progressive forces in the unions, the organization of the masses in the basic industries and of the unemployed, the waging of effective strike struggles in the big industries, the combating of Fascism and war, as well as the rallying of revolutionary forces throughout the world, after a period of demoralization and defeat, for a victorious attack upon capitalism and imperialism – the achievement of all these depends in large measure upon the building of an effective revolutionary party in the United States. Delay in unifying the revolutionary elements, and especially those which are already agreed on accepting neither the Socialist party nor the Communist party, the Second International nor the Third, is dangerous and may be fatal. On the other hand, further positive steps toward this goal will have an electrifying effect upon the working class in the United States and throughout the world.
We present herewith copy of the Declaration of Principles and Constitution of the Workers Party of the United States for your immediate consideration. We believe that you are in agreement with this proposition. If you are, it should not be difficult to initiate a serious objective discussion on this urgent question of further unification of the revolutionary forces, thus providing added impetus to the building of the new revolutionary party and the new international.



 


For Political Committee W.P.U.S.
Fraternally yours,
A.J. MUSTE, National Secretary



 



Fellow-Worker:
You say that quite a few of the men you have been talking to have been impressed by my arguments about the need of overthrowing the present economic system and of building a Marxist revolutionary party to lead the workers and their allies in doing the job. You have, however, a member of the Communist (Stalinist) party in your shop and he says that the C.P. is the only revolutionary party, and the Third (Communist) International the only international revolutionary organization. You are against the Soviet Union, according to him, if you are against the C.P. The C.P. is the party that is doing the fighting for the workers, the Negroes, etc. Of course it has made some mistakes, but it has corrected them, and “any one who attacks the C.P. or builds another party now when the C.P. is being attacked by Hearst and others is helping Fascism and attacking and undermining the Soviet Union, and is no better than Hitler himself.” The Workers Party is ready to meet that argument and to meet it in no uncertain terms.
We hold that the C.P. and C.I. are no longer revolutionary organizations. They have in recent years organized and are now organizing defeats and not victories for the working class. Insofar as they have influence, they retard the building of a healthy and vigorous revolutionary movement everywhere. Furthermore, the policies of the Stalinist leadership which dominates the Soviet Union and the C.I. do not strengthen the defense of the Soviet Union, the one workers’ state in the world; they are weakening and destroying those defenses; they are preparing the way for the overthrow of the workers’ state.
We must not be deceived by the paper programs of the C.P., by the claims it makes for itself, or the fact that it still has a considerable number of members and adherents. The Social Democrats called themselves Marxians, claimed to have the only way to establish Socialism and maintained big parties of the Second International in various countries after the betrayal of the masses into the hands of nationalism in the Great War of 1914-18. But the Social Democracy had ceased to be a progressive force, had become a hindrance to the onward course of the workers’ revolution. The vanguard workers, the best fighting elements left the S.P. Under Lenin’s leadership the perspective of building the new, Third, International was raised. Although the number of those who accepted this line was at first small and they were apparently isolated from the mass movements which had plunged into support of the war activities of the imperialist powers, the future was with the forces looking toward the new International. Very soon, in the crisis in Russia in 1917, they demonstrated their soundness and their power by giving the final blow to Czarism, overthrowing the middle class and establishing the Workers’ State. Even so, the future today is with the parties and groups looking toward the Fourth International.
I do not have the space in this letter to go fully into all the evidence to back up our estimate of the C.P., the C.I. and the Stalinist leadership of the Soviet Union. We have dealt and will deal with them in the New Militant, the New International and in pamphlets and books. Here I want to list just a few points which I am sure will convince you and which you can use in discussion with workers who are still under official C.P. influence.
1. The Third International has not had a Congress since 1928 – seven years! Why not? Back in the days when the Soviet Union was being attacked on a dozen fronts World Congresses of the C.I. were held in Moscow every year. If the leadership of the C.P.S.U. prevents the holding of World Congresses now, it must be because it does not care to or dare to face a World Congress – or both. What kind of a vanguard international party of the working class of the world is it which in these years of the triumph of Fascism, in these days of war preparations everywhere, holds no World Congress? What evidence is there that the present leadership of the Soviet Union is interested in the world revolution? How many more years have to go by without a Congress of the C.I. before the C.P. will admit that in reality there is no longer a C.I. and will graciously allow that it is not “counter-revolutionary” for the workers to build a new International?
2. Consider the debacle of the Communist Party in Germany. Here we had the mightiest Communist Party in the capitalist world. Ever since the war a powerful Communist movement had existed in Germany. Yet this movement collapsed like a toy balloon at the advent of Hitler – without a gesture of resistance, without a single fight in the streets. Surely this is evidence of a terrible degeneration in the C.I. How many debacles like that in Germany do we have to permit before the workers have a “right” to call a halt, brush the C.I. aside, and build a new International?
3. All the leading policies of the C.P. of the U.S. in recent years have proven bankrupt and have recently been tossed overboard. The A.F. of L. unions are company unions and must be smashed; “revolutionary” unions dual to the A.F. of L. must be built; a federation of labor dual to the A.F. of L. must be established; we do not enter into a united front with the S.P. etc. but only into a “united front from below” with the members of the S.P.; Socialists are social-fascists, “Social Democracy is the twin of Fascism”; those who advocate a labor party are simply trying to keep the masses out of the C.P. – these have been the basic policies of the C.P. in this country for six years. They were reaffirmed by a unanimous vote (all votes are unanimous in the C.P.) at a party convention last June. Any who questioned any of these policies were denounced in the most vicious and scurrilous manner as counter-revolutionists and social-fascists. Today all these policies are tossed overboard without even the formality of a party convention. A somersault in fact has been executed. Stalinists have to go into A.F. of L. unions. C.P. leaders fawn upon trade union bureaucrats and S.P. leaders. They are silent as the grave about the dearly beloved united front from below. It seems that there are no more social fascists on the earth. The C.P. takes the initiative in building a “labor” party – a mass, class, federated, class-struggle, not reformist, not revolutionist, highest form of united front ‘’labor” party! I cannot imagine that this group of workers meeting at your house will “fall” for this C.P. “conversion”, a conversion like that of the habitual drunk at the Rescue Mission; and for the colossal impudence of the C.P. plea to American workers: “We have a 100 percent record of failure on all our policies. Everybody else saw it years ago. Even we see it now. Consequently, we are the only qualified revolutionary leaders of the working class!”
4. A Dictatorship of one man, Stalin, exists in the Third International. Earl Browder, secretary of the C.P.U.S. is his messenger boy. Under these conditions the C.P. is utterly incapable of correcting its mistakes. It can only execute zigzags. Consider what happened a month or two ago. The C.P. Is against a “labor” party. Browder steps off the boat; just returned from Moscow. He hurries to Washington. A non-party gathering, the Unemployment Insurance Congress, is in session there. Some Lovestoneltes (whose main aim in life, curiously enough, is still to get back into the C.P.) distributed a leaflet calling for the building of a labor party. Using the type of argument at which they shine most brightly, the Stalinists tore up the leaflets and beat up the Lovestoneite distributers! Then the meeting opened and Browder made them a speech informing them that they were now for a labor party!
What happened? True, some of the comrades turned pale momentarily and experienced that sick feeling at the stomach. There had to be some explanation in the Daily Worker. The nature of this explanation is the best evidence anyone could ask of the low intellectual level which has been reached in the C.P., and that includes the “intellectuals”, critics, novelists; poets, artists, social workers, preachers, etc. who are C.P. members or stooges.
The Daily Worker explained: The Labor Party question is one of tactics not principle, so we can change the line without much ado. Anyway, it was not really a change of line; we always were for a labor party under proper conditions. As for having a party discussion before changing the line, in the first place in the C.P. the members have such confidence in the Political Committee that the Committee can act without consulting the membership; in the second place, in the C.P. discussion does not precede action – we discuss and act at the same time (though to the eye of the simple-minded outsider it looked as though Stalin gave the order, Browder obediently repeated it, the party leaders and members blinked their eyes, swallowed hard, accepted the order like the robots they have become, and only then indulged in a little “discussion”, a very little “discussion” in which no one breathed the least doubt of the omniscience of Stalin, “the beloved and genial leader of our party and of the working class”, as he is now described in the Soviet Union with a fulsome flattery which Lenin would have had a word for). Naturally enough about all that emerged from a “discussion” conducted on that level was that “Trotskyist” opposition to the labor party or criticism of the way in which the turn in the party line had been effected was part of a counter-revolutionary plot to assassinate Kirov!
5. Many an honest worker in the C.P. and outside finally swallows all its mistakes and crimes and remains loyal to it, because he accepts the C.P. argument which runs something like this: The Soviet Union is the only workers’ state in the world. It is the workers’ fatherland. It is in terrible danger today. Our main, practically our sole task, is to defend it. Save the Soviet Union and all is saved; lose it and all is lost. “Attack” the C.P. today and you attack Stalin; attack Stalin who has the full support of the workers in the S.U. today and you attack the S.U. Any one who does that is doing just what Hitler does: he lines up with Hitler, he is an assassin of Soviet leaders, he is that vilest of all creatures, one who under the disguise of a revolutionist would destroy the Soviet Union and the October Revolution.
We too believe that the Soviet Union is a workers’ state. We point to the achievements of the workers in the S.U. as evidence of how planned socialist production even in the face of the greatest obstacles and when as yet only the beginnings of the foundations of a socialist system exist alongside of vestiges of capitalism, can do more for the masses than capitalism can. We stand, and we alone, for the real defense of the Soviet Union.
To hold that you can defend the S.U. and advance the interests of the Soviet workers only by accepting the Stalin regime and not criticizing Stalin is like saying that in order to defend unionism in the U.S. and advance the interests of organized labor yon have to accept the regime of Bill Green, John L. Lewis, Matty Woll and Dan Tobin and have to regard any criticism of these bureaucrats as treason. Our contention is precisely that in both cases the interests of the workers can be advanced only by defeating the present leadership.
The Stalin theory is that Socialism can be built – that is, poverty abolished, classes done away with, etc. – in the Soviet Union alone and although capitalism still holds sway in all other lands. It is natural that under these circumstances those who believe this and especially office-holders in the S.U. should become lukewarm about the revolution in other countries, should concentrate all their attention on “building Socialism” in the S.U., and tell the Communist parties in other countries that their only job is “defending the Soviet Union”.
What is the result of the working-out of this theory? The international revolutionary movement is emasculated. Not a Congress of the C.I. has been held in seven years, as we have pointed out. The Communist parties in capitalist countries are forced to change their line mechanically as the exigencies of the foreign and domestic policies of the present leadership of the S.U. dictate. Upon parties thus weakened Fascism inflicts one defeat after another.
The Soviet Union not being able to count under these circumstances on the backing of any powerful revolutionary force in capitalist countries, the Stalinist leadership leads it further and further into a swamp. In order to postpone War, the S.U. enters the League of Nations which Lenin described as a league of imperialist robbers, and Stalin proclaims this as a victory for the workers. A military alliance or “understanding” is entered into with imperialist France. Non-aggression pacts are signed with various countries. “Leagues against War and Fascism”, mainly composed of middle class intellectuals, are organized. Workers are imbued with the pacifist illusion that peace can be maintained by these means. But oven that is not the worst that Stalinism can do and has done.
The Bolshevik party in the S.U. has been destroyed. Of the Political Bureau of the party in Lenin’s time no one but Stalin remains. All the rest are in prison, exile or retirement. Party opponents of Stalin are sent to Siberia or shot. In their place men like the present Soviet ambassadors to London, Paris, Berlin, Washington, who were bourgeois professors or Mensheviks or actually engaged in counter-revolutionary activity at the time of the October revolution, are elevated to office, and along with professors and social workers in the U.S. who discovered Russia yesterday, become authorities on how to defend the Soviet Union!
Recently one of these 1935 model Bolsheviks, Troyanovsky, Soviet ambassador to Washington, spoke to the big shots of the Bond Club of New York about non-aggression pacts (with capitalist powers) as a means to preserve peace. He argued that the nations must go further – “dig to the bottom of contemporary troubles”. How? “It is necessary to work out practical plans for the economic rehabilitation of the world, but especially for Europe.” In order to make it perfectly clear that he meant rehabilitation under capitalism he added: “Probably the advice of broad-minded business men would be available and useful in this connection.”
Thus the way is prepared for Communists (Stalinists) to work for the rehabilitation, not the overthrow of capitalism and to fight for some imperialist nation when war comes on the ground that this nation is allied with the Soviet Union and that failing to fight for it will mean to weaken the “defense of the Soviet Union”. Thus also the destruction of the workers’ state in the Soviet Union is prepared, for a war in which the S.U. is involved, while the revolutionary working class movement is demoralized and impotent can only end in the overthrow of the workers’ state in the S.U. – and the triumph of Fascism or the utter breakdown of modern civilization.
All the policies of the present leadership of the S.U. lead in that direction. Their paper protestations that the destruction and defeat of imperialist powers is their aim mean no more than the declarations on peace and socialism of the Social Democratic leaders before 1914. The defense of the Soviet Union today and the liberation of the masses in capitalist countries depends today upon the building of new revolutionary parties and the new International.
Sometimes workers have protested that these are “Russian” questions and do not concern American workers. But it is clear that nothing can concern American workers more directly than questions of the trade union policy, labor party, war, and on all of these the situation in the C.I. determines the policy which the C.P. tries to impose on American workers. Whatever weakens the revolutionary movement and strengthens Fascism anywhere directly concerns us, in this world where peoples do not live within sky-high national walls, where the workers must build a new international economy or perish in the slaughter created by the nationalists and imperialists.
It is just because it is so tremendously important that we build a powerful revolutionary party in the U.S. that we must deliver the revolutionary movement in this country from the domination of the C.I. and the C.P.S.U. That can be done only if we understand the fundamental reasons for the degeneration Which has taken place in them under the regime of Stalinism.
 



Letter 1

Letter 2

Letter 3

Letter 4

Letter 5
 

  The rejection by the recent Cleveland convention of the American Federation of Teachers of William Green’s demand that Local 5, New York, be “reorganized” in order to (make it possible for the Linville-Lefkowitz faction in the Local to get rid of the opposition, must be considered as a part of the larger movement of insurgency within the A.F. of L. Recently there have been numerous and weighty instances of the insurgent spirit in Minneapolis Local 574 of the Teamsters has had its charter lifted by Tobin, the czar of the Teamsters’ International, and one of the dominant figures in the A.F. of L. machine, and has to battle in addition a combination of local trade union bureaucrats, Farmer-Labor politicians and Chamber of Commerce. Nevertheless Local 574 has not only been able to stand up under this attack but has organized new groups of transportation employees, has been the leading factor in a series of militant strikes and the mainspring of a widespread progressive movement in Minnesota and adjoining states.  Forcing Dillon on Auto Workers A few weeks ago the federal automobile locals met in convention in Detroit for the purpose of establishing an International union under an A.F. of L. charter. At the beginning of the convention Green in person laid down an ultimatum to the effect that the delegates must accept Francis J. Dillon, who as head of the A.F. of L. work in automobiles had consistently sabotaged an effective organization campaign and betrayed the General Motors strike last May, as the president of the organization at least for the first year. They were also informed that the jurisdiction of their international would not cover the skilled craftsmen in the industry; in other words, that their demand for a genuine industrial union could not be granted. Although in the main the delegates to this convention had not come from the progressive slates in the federal unions, they promptly rejected by a decisive majority the demand that they accept Dillon as the first president of their union. Notably, the Toledo delegates, who bad been elected as conservatives in their local union, voted unanimously against Dillon. Despite this clear and to nearly everybody unexpected expression of rank and file revolt, Green felt strong enough in this case to impose Dillon in the teeth of the rejection of the delegates. Nevertheless, the action was a real blow to his prestige and a clear indication that among the members is profound distrust of the A.F. of L. bureaucracy, a spirit of independence and a strong demand for trade union democracy.  Teacher’s Convention Somewhat later in the same week the struggle in the American Federation of Teachers convention came to a head. Doubtful of being able to put over their reorganization of Local 1 proposal on the delegates, Linville, Lefkowitz, Borchard and other reactionaries appealed to Green. Having the habit of issuing decrees and on every occasion whacking “Communists” over the head, Green sent a strong message to the Teachers. They must get rid of “Communist” influence, and to reorganize Local 5 and kick out the opposition was the one way to make their union safe for Americanism and “true trade union principles.” There has been a reluctance, natural enough in a way, in the A.F. of T. as a small international, depending largely upon A.F. of L. support in state legislatures for advancing the interests of the teachers, to alienate the A.F. of L. leadership. But we are living in a new economic era and Bill Green is not Sam Gompers. The teachers by a decisive majority rejected Green’s demand. Whereupon the reactionary minority walked out of the convention, clearly revealing themselves and all such bureaucrats as Green as splitters of the labor movement. There is this difference between the case of the Auto Workers and that of the Teachers, that so far, at any rate, Green has not been able to impose his will upon the latter. Local 5 has not been reorganized.  Green at Akron During the past week the Rubber Workers have been in convention in Akron, the demand on the part of the federal locals in that industry for an international union also having become so insistent that the A.F. of L. had to yield. In Akron Green was present in person as he had been in Detroit. Once again he undertook to lay down an ultimatum. The Rubber Workers must accept Coleman Claherty, the Francis Dillon of the Industry, as their president for the first year. Again a howl of protest arose. A pungent two hour debate started in the course of which, according to a press report, “the A.F. of L. officialdom was criticized strongly.” When on the following morning the vote of 44 to 9 for rejecting the proposed appointment of Claherty was announced, Green, perhaps “softened up” by the blows received at the Automobile Workers’ and the Teachers conventions, capitulated completely and announced to the delegates: “I accept your judgment in the matter as final” All this has an important bearing on the question of what is likely to happen In the case of the A.F of T. at the approaching A.F. of L convention and what should be the course of the progressive elements in Local 5 and In the Teachers Union throughout the country. It seems to me most unlikely that an attempt to take away the charter of the entire Teachers Union or to “reorganize” the Federation will be made. Such an action is without precedent in the A.F. of L. It is true that the A.F. of L. frequently steps in in support of the machine of an international union, in reorganizing a local, or an entire group of locals. In this case, however the recognized International officials are opposing the reorganization of the local. It is true also that where two distinct organizations emerge as a result of an intra-union conflict, the A.F. of L. determines which has “jurisdiction,” and, of course, almost invariably “recognizes” the conservative group. At yet, however, the locals which walked out of the A.F. of T. convention have not dared to organize a separate national union and to apply for an A.F. of L. charter which would invalidate the charter of the present A.F. of T. Even in normal times the A.F. of L. Executive Council tends to proceed slowly in such matters, since, after all, per capita tax income is one of its first considerations. That the drastic action of outlawing the A.F. of T. at this convention will be taken seems most unlikely because these are far from normal times in the Federation.  Struggle for Leadership There is, in the first place, a struggle for leadership in process and in consequence a division within the official family itself. It is not yet clear whether John L. Lewis will openly contest the presidency with Green in Atlantic. City. The mere fact, however, that the contest is possible will tend to prevent extreme and precipitate action in the Teachers’ case. Each side will be looking for votes and anxious to maintain the present organization intact though, of course, Lewis, no more than Green, entertains any affection for the progressives and militants, not to speak of the revolutionists, in the Teachers’ union. In the second, place, with such evidences of insurgency in the ranks of the workers as I have already noted (and these instances could easily be multiplied) the A.F. of L. bureaucrats, no matter how much it may irritate them, will have to think twice before they run the risk of adding fuel to the flames of revolt by pulling off so raw deal as would be involved in the reorganization of the entire Teachers’ International or the setting up of a dual organization which certainly at the outset would represent a decidedly small minority of the organized teachers.  Conditions Favor Progressives The Executive Council of the A.F. of T. and the progressives throughout the union face on the whole, therefore, at this moment favorable situation. There is no doubt that they can, for the present at any rate, have the upper hand, counting upon the general spirit of insurgency among the workers and in the A.F. of L. unions, provided that they stand their ground firmly and carefully avoid giving the bureaucrats any impression of fear or weakness – an attitude of which the bureaucrats know only too well from long experience how to take advantage. The proposition, for example, which the Stalinists made in Local 5 to conciliate Linville and Lefkowitz by dissolving all groups in the union is, even from the lowest tactical point of view, unsound. To run after a retreating enemy, so to speak, urging him to stop in order that you may give him concessions, in fact, turn over your sword to him, is more than a little ridiculous. This is, however, not to say that the progressives in the A.F. of T do not have a stiff fight now and will not have a stiffer one in the future. The reactionaries, both in the A.F. of T., and in the A.F. of L. generally, will fight back. The Teachers must utilize the present opportunity precisely in order to consolidate their positions, strengthen their forces, organize the progressive elements locally and nationally and equip themselves for effective resistance against counter-attack and for future advances and victories for progressive, militant unionism.  Groups in Unions In this connection, insistence upon the right of groups to function in a responsible fashion within the union is of the greatest significance. Having such groups is not by any means without precedent in the American Federation of Labor. In the Typographical Union, for example, there have for years been two or more openly recognized “parties” putting forward their programs, putting up slates in the local and national elections, etc. The Printers find it as logical to have parties functioning in the trade union democracy as that there should be parties, for example, in a political democracy. A similar situation has existed, though perhaps not so continuous or on so large a scale, in many other A.F. of L. unions. There are bound to be varying points of view in any living organization. It is far better that they should function openly than that they should operate in an underground fashion. Why is it that the reactionaries in a union always fight against the existence of “groups,” insist that this means splitting up the union, etc.? Does this mean that there are then no groups in the union? Not at all. What it means is that there is only one group, and that is the group which is dominated by the union machine. It is perfectly well known that in the unions thus bossed there are always organizations, frequently known as “clubs,” which constitute in effect the caucuses of the trade union machine. The cry of “no groups” means “no groups except our own” representing the union bureaucracy.  Bureaucracy is Organized The bureaucracy always functions in an organized fashion and never relaxes its vigilance. Consequently, even if an occasional revolt breaks out, the machine presently rides roughshod again, because the opposition does not maintain a continuous organization. The Teachers must not only not give up the right of groups to function but must steadily and rapidly extend the organization of the progressives. Nor must the teachers permit themselves to be intimidated by the cry of such elements as Linville and Lefkowitz, that these groups are “dominated by political parties and do not have the genuine interest of the union and of the Teachers at heart.” To say that the politically most developed members of a union must not function as fractions in an organized way is to say that precisely those elements which should know most about the problem and be most devoted to the cause of the working class must not make their maximum contribution to the solution of the union’s problems. To try to forbid members of a revolutionary party to function as fractions in the union and in progressive groups does not mean to remove political influence. Anyone who has the slightest acquaintance with the union movement in this country knows that in proportion as the influence of working class parties is weak, the capitalist parties (Tammany Hall in the New York building trades and printing trades unions, etc.) dominate the union. Trade unions cannot possibly function in a non-political world, least of all unions of teachers.  “Politics” in the Union The Stalinists have, of course, by the irresponsible and disruptionist fashion in which they have functioned or tried to function in the mass movement, put a weapon in the hands of the trade union bureaucrats and have alienated many honest but uninformed workers. But this does not mean that “politics must be kept out of the union.” Political organizations, the same as progressive groups in the unions generally, must be tested first by the program for the union which they advance, and secondly by the way in which they seek to advance that program. The Workers Party stands for a progressive, militant teachers Union in which trade union democracy obtains and believes that its membership should seek to davance what they regard as the sound program for the union openly, by educating the membership, trying to win them to this program, at no time seeking mechanical domination or resorting to cheap politics, alliances with reactionaries, etc., in order to advance their views. The members of the Workers Party, bound to act under the discipline of their party in the union, will, precisely because they are under that discipline, work harder for the union, fight more vigorously in all its battles, display a deeper and more consistent loyalty to the union.  Revolutionists Play Their Part It is not an accident that in each of the situations mentioned earlier in the article the Workers Party and its members have played a part – in some instances as in Minneapolis and among the automobile workers in Toledo a leading and conspicuous one; in others as among the teachers and rubber workers a lesser role. We are not by any means seeking to make revolutionary political parties out of the unions. But even now, only with a core of revolutionists equipped with Marxian methods of analysis and disciplined and hardened for struggle, can progressive groups be built in the unions which can successfully challenge the entrenched and hardened bureaucracies; and in the end it is only under the leadership of the revolutionary party that the workers will be able really to solve the problems which the present age creates and to free themselves from poverty and insecurity and the frustration of spirit to which the masses under capitalism today are subjected.   


From events reasonable human beings must draw conclusions. They must evaluate them and then act upon those evaluations. I wish to comment briefly on the conclusions that are being drawn and that ought to be drawn by certain groups from the present Comintern Congress and what it symbolizes and confirms as to the present role of the so-called Communist parties and the C.I.
It is not necessary to dwell upon the reaction of the real intellectuals who are capable of independent thinking and of probing below the surface, whose “Marxism,” if they be Marxists, is not an extraneous ornament, who are not merely sentimental or professional “friends of the Soviet Union.” These elements are drawing conclusions and their conclusions will bring them to us.
Nor do we concern ourselves at the moment with the honest advanced workers or farmers who were not introduced to the revolutionary movement the day before yesterday and whose minds have not been stultified by too long a sojourn in the thought-stifling atmosphere of Stalinism. These elements will also draw their conclusions and those conclusions will bring them to us. That is already being demonstrated by the fact that the younger, more militant Socialists are coming to us and are drawing closer to oar theoretical position even when they do not yet draw organizational conclusions; and by the fact that practically the whole of the former Stalinist farm leadership in three northwestern states has recently come to the W.P.
 
The Lovers of Peace
There are certain groups whose first reaction to the present Comintern is, however, a favorable one. One of these consists of the pacifists of various kinds, those whose absorbing concern is to prevent or put off war. In the past these elements regarded the Soviet Union itself and the Communist International as disturbing forces, against the Versailles treaty, wanting to change the status quo, etc. Now they are impressed by the “peace policy” of the S.U. and think of the S.U. and C.I. as a powerful force against war.
In effect the Comintern says to them: “The Soviet Union wants to stave off war in order that there may be time to strengthen its economic regime, ‘build Socialism,’ strengthen the Red Army for defense against any possible Fascist attack. But while the Soviet Union opposes war for its own reasons, there is no reason why all ‘lovers of peace’ on whatever ground should not join hands with it for the moment.” And thus the Leagues Against War and Fascism, etc. flourish.
Few even of the more intelligent pacifists today believe that war can actually be postponed indefinitely or permanently. It is then a question of putting off the evil day a few years, a year, a few months. But what exactly does that mean in the actual situation of today? It means that the capitalist nations get a breathing space to complete their war preparations. Pacifist measures have always meant that and it is no different today. Would any major power hesitate for a single moment to embark on war if it were ready or saw a clear advantage in that course?
 
Disarmament
A few years ago the Soviet (Stalinist) “peace policy” was a Disarmament policy. In those days, when capitalist economy was relatively stable and the political crisis not acute, the Powers could safely talk about armament reduction, etc. In that period, the war preparations appropriate to it could be carried on behind this particular smoke-screen. Where is the disarmament talk now?
Now the “peace policy” is a policy of pacts and alliances. The Powers are lining up in two groups, while feverish increase in armaments is the order of the day. This lining up of rival groups is always the signal of approaching war – not a means of staving off war.
Consider, for example, the effect in Germany of the Franco-Soviet rapprochement when it was in the making. The French course – Versailles treaty, revenge policy, maintenance of status quo, indemnities, etc. – paved the way for the nationalist reaction in Germany and eventually for Hitler. What happened when the French imperialist government, in making its war preparations entered into a pact with the Soviet Union also? What effect does this have upon the German workers? Can it have any other effect than furnishing Hitler further support in his counter-preparations for war? Is this a “peace policy” or the time-honored way to move toward the abyss?
Consider, friends of peace, that Stalinism has worked out and is advancing a theory of two kinds of capitalist nations – aggressive and non-aggressive, had Fascist powers and good democratic powers. Such ,a theory helped pave the way for war, helped to swing the workers and liberals in various countries into support of the war when it came in 1914. Inevitably it must perform the same function today. It spreads illusions, throws up a smoke-screen behind which the armies, the guns, the gas, are prepared.
Already, as we have previously pointed out in the New Militant, the effect of such a “peace policy” has been clearly shown in the failure of the Soviet Union to utter one word of protest against the rape of Ethiopia by Italy and against the course of France land Britain in virtually abetting Mussolini’s coarse, although Maxim Litvinov sits as chairman of the Council of the League of Nations! Is this promoting peace? Is it staving off war?
Disregarding the Marxist answer to these questions, on their own premises and assumptions the more intelligent liberals and pacifists cannot believe that Stalinism has a genuine peace policy, that pacts, Leagues of Nations, etc. will avail to prevent catastrophe now any more than similar pacifist measures did in 1914.
 
Those Who Fear Fascism
The same elements of which we have been speaking, and others as well, are disposed to think favorably of the C.P. and C.I., to support Stalinist auxiliary organizations, demonstrations, etc., even directly or Indirectly, with substantial funds, on the ground that the C.P., etc. constitute a great bulwark against Fascism. A well known intellectual stated the other day that many Jewish people, even of means, now follow this course. The Comintern appears sensible and temperate. The C.P. is a less disturbing factor in the labor situation. All it asks of supporters is that they be “against Fascism.” Their class and social status is not affected. They fear Fascism above all else. They welcome this ally, once so unprepossessing, now a very decent and sensible fellow. One may even get the thrill of being something of a “red” himself without making serious commitments in associating with the C.P. of the Fourth Period!
Unquestionably all liberals, all minority racial and national groups, all who have cultural interests, do well to fear Fascism and to welcome all allies in the struggle to ward it off in the U.S. We need not pause here to paint the horrors of Fascism. By the same token all elements do well to make sure that their course will really defeat Fascism and that their allies are effective – not a broken reed to lean upon!
Anti-Fascists will do well to study carefully the question on which we think we can shed considerable light, as to why the most powerful of all Communist parties, the C.P. of Germany, did not succeed in staving off Fascism there. If, for example, the C.P.’s united front-from-below policies and Social Fascism theory were partly responsible, as the C.P. itself may be thought to have admitted by its precipitate abandonment of them recently, then anti-Fascists will do well to make sure that a movement which could once make such a colossal “mistake” will not make another, that it has indeed changed fundamentally, etc. Or again, war will inevitably mean the abandonment of democratic forms and the establishment of Fascism in one guise or another. If then, as we have shown, the Stalinist “peace policy” is not what it claims to be. Is Stalinism an effective and trustworthy ally against Fascism?
 
Fascism Concomitant of War
Capitalism, we say openly, will inevitably seek to resort to Fascism when in any given nation the economic and political crisis becomes severe enough, when it is only by means of an open and brutal dictatorship that it can push down the standard of living and keep the masses in subjection. Liberals and others cling to the illusion that somehow it will be possible to go back to the “good old (democratic) times” under capitalism. But to “go back” – as Fascism does in the economic, the political, the cultural field – means, as Hitler continues to prove daily, back to the Middle Ages, to barbarism, to savagery. The one way to freedom, to advances in civilization, is the way forward through the workers’ revolution.
If now the Comintern, the would-be bearers of the revolutionary standard, also preach a merely defensive war against Fascism, also encourage the illusions that democratic rights can be retained under capitalism, that bourgeois democracies must be fought for, shall those elements which have such abundant reason to fear Fascism be deceived into thinking that this fellow who takes off his rough proletarian blouse and cap and puts on the diplomat’s frock-coat and top hat, has thereby become a trustworthy ally, a safe and main bulwark against Fascism?
Once again, actual events are already giving a clear answer. The same Stalinist regime which failed to stay the advent of Hitler today stands with its French imperialist ally in preparing for war against Germany, but raises no voice against the present course of that arch-Fascist Mussolini and of Fascist Italy in Ethiopia! Is this fighting Fascism? Do any intelligent persons among the Jews in the U.S. or elsewhere believe for a moment that given similar conditions Mussolini’s attitude toward racial, national or religious minorities would differ essentially from Hitler’s? Ask the black peoples of Ethiopia if it does.
Before it is too late, let the lovers of peace and those who dread the advent of Fascism here and in other lands awake to a true understanding of the situation. Let them ponder deeply now while things still hang .in the balance, while western Europe, the Americas, have a breathing spell, how war and Fascism may be smashed, and who are dependable allies, or rather leaders in that task.
 



The Workers Party of the U.S. participates this week in an action of the greatest significance for the international proletariat, viz. the publication of the Open Letter on the Fourth International. Signing this letter in addition to the W.P.U.S. are the Revolutionary Socialist Workers Party of Holland (R.S.A.P.), the International Communist League, the Workers Party of Canada and the French Bolshevik-Leninists. Of course the signature of the I.C.L. implies that of its other sections also, Russian, South African, Chilean, Cuban, Chinese, etc.
The signature of the Open Letter by the W.P.U.S. was authorized, depending upon the fulfillment of certain conditions, by the June Plenum of the National Committee of the party. The chief conditions were that the S.A.P. (Socialist Workers Party of Germany) should be given a month’s time to join with other signers, the S.A.P. having been one of the signers of the Declaration of Four in 1933 where the concept
of the Fourth International was proclaimed; that the headquarters of the Provisional Contact Committee provided for in the Open Letter be Amsterdam; and that certain paragraphs dealing with the Franco-Soviet pact and with the situation in the U.S. and other American countries be included.
The S.A.P. expresses sympathy with the movement to build the Fourth International but asks that parties such as the W.P. join the I.A.G. (London-Amsterdam Bureau of centrist parties), a condition which the W.P. plenum rejected.
The other conditions laid down by the W.P. have been fulfilled.
In accordance, therefore with the action of the June Plenum of the N.C. the Political Committee of the Party has ordered the publication of the Open Letter in our official organ as the official proclamation to the world labor movement of our concurrence in the Open Letter and renewed evidence of our determination to proceed as rapidly as possible to the building of the Fourth International.
In this hour of mounting war danger and on the other hand of renewed evidence of capitulation of the Second and Third Internationals to social patriotism, the W.P.U.S. joins with joy, pride and hope in raising higher the banner of the Fourth International. We call upon the workers and intellectuals throughout the world, and especially here in the United States, to whatever organization they may today belong, to read and study the Open Letter and in the light of its contents and the present world situation to determine where their allegiance belongs. We have no time to lose in deciding bow the working class may be saved from fresh betrayals and defeats, under what banner and how the vanguard and the masses may be rallied for the revolutionary victory over capitalism and the building of a workers’ world.



 


A.J. Muste
National Sec’y
W.P.U.S.



 



THIS ESSAY makes no claim to finality. It is an attempt to raise questions and provoke discussion rather than to provide definitive answers to the question of the role which unions and other mass economic organizations may play in the working class revolution in such a country as the United States.
Two other preliminary observations are required. In the first place, though confining ourselves here in the main to discussion of mass organizations, we are not implying some theory of “spontaneity” of the masses. It is our position that the leadership of the revolutionary Marxian party is indispensable for the success of the proletarian revolution.
In the second place, important as it is in certain respects, we are not dealing here with the question of the A.F. of L. vs. “independent unionism”. The question we are posing is: Regardless of how this issue may be resolved, what role will unions and other mass organizations play in the revolutionary crisis?
One of the more able of the younger American historians of the labor movement has frequently made the assertion in private conversation that there would never be a proletarian revolution in a country where a strong trade union movement had been built up. He based his contention on the fact that these unions themselves become great vested interests clearly tied up with the capitalist operation of industry; that the officialdom constitutes a privileged group which develops close relations with the employing class and a psychology similar to that of the latter; that the tactic of compromise, “give and take”, progress by slow degrees, becomes ingrained and sets up a resistance against risking all on a throw of the revolutionary dice, and so on; and that these unions gain such a hold upon the workers, come to seem so indispensable, that the workers will not act independently of them even in a major crisis.
The evidence in support of a part of this contention is very strong. The way in which the unions in western Europe and the US survived the war and post-war crisis, in fact, came out of it with enhanced numbers and prestige, as well as the doggedness with which the German workers clung to the unions when these were forced to retreat and quite obviously were no longer able to offer any substantial measure of protection, much less to solve the crisis, sufficiently illustrate the hold of the unions upon the workers. Some form of inclusive organization through which to carry on the immediate struggle, offensive or defensive, on the job, the workers are bound to seek or cling to, so long as they have any opportunity to struggle at all.
It is not necessary, either, to dwell upon the conservatism which has characterized trade unionism in Germany, England and the US, for example, the enormous difficulty experienced in shaking even a little the entrenched trade union bureaucracies, etc.
Are we then forced to accept the conclusion that, on the one hand, the unions cannot be uprooted and, on the other hand, can-, not be expected to play a progressive role as the crisis deepens for the working class – that in order to protect themselves against the assaults of the employers the workers have as it were encased themselves in a suit 0f armor which in the last analysis weighs down the workers themselves, prevents them from breaking their way to liberty, keeps them rooted to the ground while the reaction showers its blows upon them?
There is indeed no escape from this conclusion – unless it is conceivable that revolutionary Marxists can take the leadership of the unions away from the trade union bureaucrats with their limited vision (even where other vices do not exist) and from the social democrats with their reformist, parliamentarian, pacifist, social-patriotic outlook. But if this possibility has come to seem remote, just barely conceivable, almost in the realm of miracle, this gives us a measure of the extent to which the Communist International (i.e., the Third) and its sections have failed to function as revolutionary Marxian organizations and of the consequent calamity they have brought upon the proletarian movement.
The “normal”, the to-be-expected course, is precisely that the influence of the revolutionists over the mass organizations should grow and presently become preponderant. As the crisis of the capitalist economy becomes deeper and more intense, the masses are set in motion. Instinctively, we might say, they fight back against the attempts to lower their standards. The struggles become more bitter. The illusion that employers and workers have mutual interests tends to break down. The state comes out more and more openly against the workers, no matter how elementary their demands. The struggle is waged on a constantly broader front. More and more workers are drawn into strike actions. “General” strikes break out in localities or industries and the strike organizations have to intervene in governmental functions, such as maintenance of supply services, of order in the strike area, etc. All this is elementary and has been observed often enough.
Such situations open the door wide for the politically developed workers and for the revolutionary party, provided that the latter has not pursued a course in the unions which has discredited it and left it isolated. The developing actions which we have referred to require energy, initiative, the will to struggle, courage, capacity to organize large-scale actions, ability to sway masses in motion, to arouse mass enthusiasm, interpret the subtle changes in mass psychology, and a political outlook on the part of the leadership. But the conventional trade union leadership is, to put it mildly, not distinguished for these qualities. They will try, but they cannot hold back the masses from struggle. As the struggle extends and sharpens, they must call for or, with as much grace as they can muster, accept aid from the radical elements or be pushed out of the picture entirely.
At this point it should prove both interesting and useful to introduce a somewhat detailed description of how this process worked out in certain dramatic episodes during the Auto-Lite strike in Toledo in 1934. It is common knowledge that this strike was on its last legs owing to the indifference of the A.F. of L. leadership in automobiles, the inexperience and passivity of the local union leadership, etc., and that it was brought back to life by militants in the union and in the Lucas County Unemployed League under the leadership of Workers Party elements. Mass picketing and demonstrations in defiance of injunctions culminated in “the battle of Toledo” during which ten thousand Toledo workers, enraged at the brutality of special deputies, stormed the Auto-Lite plant, etc.
The revolutionists had begun to talk up the idea of a general strike of all Toledo workers to compel the Auto-Lite management to settle with the union. The idea got an instant response among the workers. The Central Labor Union, an A.F. of L. body, less reactionary and bureaucratized than similar bodies is some of the larger cities, but not in the remotest sense “Red”, was compelled to take cognizance of the agitation. It appointed a Committee of Twenty-three to take a strike vote of the locals affiliated with the CLU, with the understanding that the organization of a general strike, if the vote were favorable, rested in the hands of the Committee. As a matter of fact, out of the one hundred or so local unions over 95 voted in favor of such a strike in support of the Auto-Lite workers, and only one against.
The vote having been taken, the disposition among the CLU officials was to do nothing definite about it. As the Auto-Lite Company dragged out the negotiations, however, the workers began to press for action. The officials then resorted to a characteristic device. They called for a big parade and mass meeting to be held on a Friday night. This would serve to let off steam. They did not dare, however, to offer the demonstration openly as a substitute for general strike action. They had to give out the impression that it was in preparation for the strike, that at the mass meeting probably a final call to strike on Monday would be announced.
The spirit of enthusiasm and militancy was running high among the workers. The local union leaders had to bend to it. A few days before the mass meeting, for example, they asked the present writer, known to be a Workers Party member, to be one of the speakers. As the demonstration day came nearer, however, the employers and the higher-ups in the A.F. of L. put on the screws. Things must not “get out of hand” at the meeting since there must not be a general strike. There must be simply a parade with a very brief meeting at the conclusion at which three or four safe CLU officials would speak briefly and prosaically. Then the crowd would be sent home – without any mention of general strike. A few hours before the parade started, the writer was accordingly informed that he would not be called upon to speak: after the parade the crowd would be “too tired to stand and listen to speeches”.
The parade exceeded all expectations in numbers and enthusiasm. The mass meeting opened peacefully with a few remarks by the chairman of the Committee of Twenty-three. The next speaker talked in an uninspired manner. To test out the sentiment of the crowd, someone called out to the speaker who was carefully staying a thousand miles away from that subject: “What about the general strike Monday ?” The speaker played dumb. But the crowd quickly demonstrated that the general strike was the one thing in which it was interested. The question was shouted from all directions at the speaker. In a few minutes he gave up the attempt to speak. The same question greeted the chairman of the meeting as he tried to introduce the next safe and sane functionary. The crowd insisted on an answer to its question. The bureaucrats had none to give. The uproar increased. The meeting was thrown into turmoil. The bureaucrats threw up their hands in despair and walked out on their own meeting. The more astute ones perhaps conjectured that the crowd would leave too, and thus the strike issue would be downed.
That is, of course, what would have happened if there had been no experienced revolutionary mass leaders present who had the confidence of the workers, or could at least get their attention, and who knew what to do in such a situation. They were present and acted promptly. Sam Pollock, picket leader, Unemployed League official and party member, took the chair and quickly got the attention of the workers. One speaker after another got up, as per agreement, and hammered home the messages the workers needed and wanted to hear: “General Strike on Monday unless the Auto-Lite Strike is settled by then. Spread this word around over the week-end. Do not go to work on Monday, but wait for orders from the Strike Committee. Disperse quietly when this meeting is over: let no one provoke you.” While this was going on, some one came to the platform and said to me: “You fellows have all had your say. Why can’t a man who has been in the trade union movement here for 25 years have a chance?” It developed that he was the editor of the official organ of the Toledo CLU He was given his chance to speak, as I would not have been if his fellow-officials had remained in charge of the meeting!
The general strike did not take place, because on Saturday the final negotiations were started which on Monday ended in a settlement between the union and the Auto-Lite firm. Had the strike occurred, representatives of the Unemployed Leagues who would have been party members would undoubtedly have been added to the Committee of 23. Militants would have been put in charge of picketing. Known party leaders would have been drawn in for consultation and would have wielded increasing influence. An enlarged strike committee on which militant rank and filers would have predominated would have been elected in the shop meetings. As the struggle became more intense, the same thing would have happened with the strike that happened in the mass meeting – leadership would have slipped out of the hands of the bureaucrats utterly incompetent and unwilling to handle such a situation and the militants and revolutionists would have taken it up.
Furthermore, if the strike had occurred including the transportation system, the light and power plants, etc., the strike organization would have had to give orders to, interfere with, in greater or less degree replace the mayor, the police, the health authorities, the public utilities commission, etc. To the extent that it did so, it would have foreshadowed and approximated a Soviet, a workers’ council – an organ of workers’ government as against the orn gans of capitalist government. And we can think, of course, of developments such as these we have sketched occurring not in a single locality, but in an entire basic industry and over a wide territory eventually on a national scale.
It is suggested, then, not only that the unions, unemployed leagues, farmers’ organizations, may under the leadership of revolutionary Marxists be prevented from becoming bulwarks of reaction, but may as the struggle for power sharpens be transformed into or be directly instrumental in helping to form the organs of workers’ power.
It must be understood of course that this will involve the bitterest struggles for control over the mass organizations, for leadership within them. The fact that we have presented our illustration from Toledo in a simplified and abbreviated manner does not imply an underestimation of the violence of this internal struggle.
It is likely that there will be many variations in the process. In a mining region, for example, the union membership and the working population will be nearly identical. The union is the agency through which the miners habitually handle their economic, political, cultural problems. The elections for the Council of Action (Soviet) in that region may very likely take place in the miners’ union meeting. The same sort of thing may take place in a farming community which has a militant farmers’ union.
In cases where the union organization is not fully responsive to the developing situation and the moods of the workers, the shop organizations may take the initiative with the mild approval or toleration of or even in opposition to the union bureaucracy. In general, as the struggle develops and nears a climax, the masses will get into motion, take things into their own hands in the establishments. It is to be expected, however, that this rank and file participation will in general reflect itself in the union organization. The reflection is likely to be uneven. The union machinery may in many instances prove too cumbersome, the control of the officialdom too rigid, so that the workers will have to proceed independently of them, as the pace of events quickens. This would be especially likely to happen in the case of long-established organizations of the highly skilled workers. Generally speaking, however, we cannot conceive of an advance of the working class to a point where it can enter upon a struggle for power, without an advance in the economic organizations in the direction of industrial unionism, a class struggle philosophy, rank and file control, close contact with the shop and the happenings there, etc.
In connection with all this, it is important to remember that the unions become repositories of an immense amount of information about the operations of industry – technical, engineering, administrative, etc. This also makes them exceedingly important agencies in the process by which the control of the workers over industrial operations is made actual and productive of efficient operation amid the difficulties of the period when workers’ power is being consolidated.
The alternative to the general conception we have sketched is to suppose that the unions are peculiar to an earlier period in capitalist development, that they are no longer able to function in the interest of the workers in the period of capitalist decline and collapse, that, therefore, the workers must abandon them or that they will in fact be wrecked by the capitalist reaction.
We cannot accept this perspective. In the first place, as we have already suggested, the workers have demonstrated a remarkable tenacity in clinging to their unions. Whatever may happen to this or that union or any number of unions, the workers do not wish to abandon the union movement but to broaden it, increase its militancy, etc. So long as capitalism endures, organization of some kind on the job to deal with the boss is indispensable. Instinctively the masses fight to defend the unions, the right to strike, etc. If the mass economic organizations are smashed, what in practise can that mean except the establishment of Fascism?
From the other direction the question arises: If the general trend is as we have indicated, toward the broadening of the mass organizations, increase in their militancy, acceptance of Marxian leader ship, struggle on a broader scale and a higher and higher political plane, etc., then is it not likely that the unions as a whole will, so far as the industrial sections of the country are concerned, become the workers’ councils, the instruments of workers’ power? Thus the Central Labor Union, now of course with workers of all categories in its affiliated unions, becomes the Soviet of a given city and the national union federation convention, with its delegates from all industries and sections of the country, becomes the industrial part of the national congress of Soviets?
Theoretically, it seems to me, this possibility cannot be excluded. The “seizure of the factories” by the Italian workers under the direction of the General Confederation of Labor comes to mind in this connection. When a body such as the British Trade Union Congress calls or sponsors a general strike in support, for example, of the miners, the conflict almost from the first moment takes on the character of a direct clash with the state which either places the leading union body in a hopeless dilemma or leads to revolutionary steps, depending on the character and the aims of this same leading body. Other things being equal, a movement of the workers with the full sanction, under the leadership of the organization through which they have been accustomed to carry on their struggles would seem to have more promise of success – starts out with a ready-made machinery for communication, action, etc. – than a movement where this condition does not exist.
Much more attention must be given both to the analysis of this possibility and the details of seizure of power where this condition prevails, than has yet been given to the subject to this author’s knowledge.
It would be far from safe, however, to assume confidently that such a condition will exist. The trade union organization as such, while being drawn into the current of revolutionary action and in the main supporting, may not be ready or entirely fitted to conduct the movement, even assuming that the revolutionary party has the dominant influence in it. The union organization is after all primarily economic rather than political and not in the first instance equipped to deal with the larger national and international political issues. Furthermore, it is entirely possible that the pace of development in various unions may vary as I have suggested at an earlier point in this article. The revolutionary party must give a great deal of study to these questions and be prepared as the actual crisis develops to deal in accordance with the facts of the situation and the actual forces at its disposal.
For the present, we conclude with brief practical suggestions. First, the slogan “Deeper into the unions” (whether they happen to be A.F. of L. or independent) must be applied by the party and all its committees and members much more thoroughly and enthusiastically even than heretofore. Second, in every strike situation the policy of drawing in the broadest forces – all the unions, unemployed organizations, political parties and groups – must be carried out, in order to break down trade union provincialism, politicalize the struggle, develop class consciousness, face the workers with the problems of conflict with capitalist governmental agencies, etc. Third, the greatest emphasis must be placed on drawing the employed and unemployed organizations together, forming Councils of Action on which these and also the more militant farmers’ organizations are represented, to prevent the division of the working class into employed and unemployed, to insure the broadening of all struggles and again in order to accustom the working masses as workers, and not as craftsmen, skilled or unskilled, etc., etc., to confront the employers and the state.
 



The Roosevelt administration attaches great importance to the passage of the Social Security Bill last week. The measure provides for federal subsidies for unemployment insurance, the setting up of an old age pension system by taxation of employers and workers, special subsidies for aged persons not covered in the contributory plan and subsidies for certain forms of child welfare.
It is set forth by the administration as a partial but substantial redemption of its pledges to do something for the “forgotten man” and to keep the big fellows in their place though not destroying the foundations of the capitalist system itself. It is expected to be a vote-getter for Franklin D. in the 1936 elections. If the Supreme Court should declare this and other New Deal measures unconstitutional, Roosevelt still has his choice of campaigning next year as the champion of the masses against the reactionary few for a constitutional amendment; or if economic conditions are fairly good and discontent not sharp, forgetting about the whole business and campaigning as the man who brought back prosperity and did his best for the plain people.
Neither the present Social Security measure nor the other laws enacted by Congress in the closing days of its long session will do anything to relieve immediate distress. Not until the first of next year does a 1 percent tax on payrolls for unemployment insurance go into effect and the full 3 percent tax does not go into effect until January 1, 1938. The contributory old age annuity tax does not go into effect until January 1, 1937. Even after the tax goes into effect it will be some time, of course, before any benefits obtain. So far as the present and immediate future go the hammering away at wage standards via the WPA and other channels is the Rooseveltian gift to the masses. Social Security legislation is a cover under these conditions for the wage-cutting campaign. Little wonder that as the business organs report, no particular enthusiasm is being displayed by the workers over the passage of the act.
 
Big Business Indifferent
As for the business interests, they are expressing comparatively little alarm over this legislation. They are much more concerned about the measures relating to banking, security and public utilities which Congress is threatening to pass and which might in some slight degree interfere with the piling up of profits and with the “right” of private business to “manage its own affairs.” There is good reason for the absence of intense alarm over the social security legislation. In the first place, as we have already pointed out, it is some time before these measures go into effect. In the second place, the possibility of emasculation by the Supreme Court remains. Thirdly, the increased costs of production may always be passed on to the consumer. Fourthly, new machinery, more intensive methods of production to keep down the cost of social legislation for the employer, can and will be resorted to.
In any case the taxes will be comparatively small, 3 percent of the payroll for unemployment insurance and a maximum by January 1, 1949, of 3 percent for the old age pension system. The exchange of a few million dollars in social security benefits for a cut of billions of dollars in the wage bill is decidedly “good business.” Let Ma Perkins, Eleanor Roosevelt and the rest of the social workers have a fling. Finally, as experience in other countries has conclusively demonstrated, it is always possible, as the capitalist crisis intensifies, to effect a cut in the munificent benefits due under these social insurance programs.
 
Perkins Waxes Eloquent
It is important to note the philosophy back of this legislation. It is based on the concept that the present “revival” in business, the upturn on the stock exchange etc. is the beginning of a real capitalist boom. In a feature article in the New York Times Frances Perkins states:
“The cost of social security will be comparatively small for some years to come. This was deliberately arranged by the committee for the President in order that the incidence of tax might be gradual, as business and workers will be paying this tax in the early years of recovery from depression and before the full prosperity level has been reached.”
She becomes positively eloquent in painting the figure of the U.S. under liberal capitalism.
“The foundation has been laid. On it will be reared a structure, through the experience of the years to come, which will prove a haven for the nation’s wage-earners in times of economic distress and when they become old and feeble. It will be a refuge also for widows and dependent children. In achieving such results it will likewise benefit all employers and investors by promoting and stabilizing mass purchasing power.”
The intelligence displayed by economists, business men, workers and Congress in the passage of this legislation and “the intellectual courage and human insight of the President” have brought “a renewal of faith in the possibilities of life in this great nation as broad as a continent.”
Of course, as per the formula of liberal capitalism, this prosperity is to be made “permanent and real” by achieving a balance of consumption and production by “the promotion and stabilization of mass purchasing power without which the present economic system cannot endure.”
 
No Revival at All
The fatuous exponents of liberal capitalism continue to hold forth this hope and doubtless in many Instances actually to believe it themselves, in spite of the real facts about the present “revival” of business, etc. as set forth, for example, in the statistics of the U.S. Dept. of Commerce itself. These indicate that there was an increase of about 5 billions in the national income for 1934 as compared with 1933 but when relief wages are eliminated the net share of labor in 1934 was only 64.2 as compared with 65.5 in 1933. This does not take account of the fact that prices during the period rose as fast or even faster than wages so that the real wages of labor have decreased.
According to the same report the dividend and business profits rose sharply from $7,365,000,000 to $8,103,000,000 between 1933 and 1934.
Wage earners in 1934 received only 52 percent of their 1929 income. Property owners received 61.4 percent and men in business for themselves 65.2 percent of their 1929 income. Thus all the indications are that both earned and unearned incomes above $5,000 are going dp and that incomes below $5,000 are going down.
Nothing has taken place in these closing days of Congress to cause any change in the program of the masses of workers and farmers, namely, fight against the Roosevelt wage-cutting program, against the entire WPA set-up, against fake social security, for substantial protection against the risks of sickness, accident, old age and unemployment, at the cost of employers and government. bove all, organization to achieve power and thus to end, before It inflicts still further misery upon the masses, a system whose most liberal and humanitarian exponents can do no better than the Roosevelt “social security” program.
 



On a mountain side near Old Fort, N.C., hundreds of men and women gathered last Sunday for the funeral of Larry Hogan, Workers Party member and Southern strike leader. The mountain folks from whom he had sprung, farmers, unemployed, hosiery workers, textile workers whom he had organized and with whom he had fought on a hundred picket lines, union officials, composed that crowd.
Editorials in the capitalist press of North Carolina commented on his death which was the result of an automobile accident, pointing to him as an arch enemy of the employing interests, yet paying grudging praise to his courage, skill and power over the masses. Colorful, dynamic, filled with a passion for social change, were the expressions they used about him.
Less than seven years ago Larry Hogan, a young married man of 24 who had come down out of the hills to work in a cotton mill, was not to be distinguished from tens of thousands of Southern textile workers. When, however, a $11.00 wage for a 70 hour week, plus a merciless speed-up, finally forced the workers of the Marion Mfg. Company to revolt, Larry was one of the leaders of the union and emerged from the long strike, in which six men were killed by drunken deputies on a picket line, as an outstanding figure.
 
Learning from Life
Larry learned many things during that strike. At its beginning the quartette of which he was the leader was singing “We are building Jacob’s ladder, soldiers of the cross.” Before many days had passed the words were changed to read: “We are building a strong union, workers of the mill.” He had learned, in other words, to use the idealism which had been bred in him in the only realistic way possible under modern conditions, namely, for organizing the workers to cope with the oppression and misery to which they were subjected. He learned the basic fact of the class struggle in modern society and from that time on read men and events in the light of that Marxian truth. He learned, furthermore, that the struggle was not a superficial one but must end with the destruction of the prevailing economic system. He had become a revolutionist. He also learned that within the labor movement itself there are the fighters and the class collaborationists, and decided that his place was with the former. At the close of the strike he could have eased into a secure position as a trade union organizer if he had been willing to trail along with the machine. He felt instead the need of study in order to discover the intellectual justification for the convictions he had reached in the struggle and to equip himself for translating his ideals into reality. Thus he became a student at Brookwood Labor College which had shortly before been placed under the ban of the A.F. of L.
His course at Brookwood was interrupted by an educational period on the chain gang in North Carolina, the state having found “sufficient evidence” in his strike activities to warrant a sentence, though it had not been able to discover “evidence” on which to convict the deputy sheriffs who had killed six strikers.
 
Plugging Along
Following the completion of his work at Brookwood, Larry went back to North Carolina. It was a period of dullness and slump In the labor movement. He plugged away nevertheless organizing farmers, unemployed, textile workers, building small, secret groups, picking out individuals and patiently teaching them the meaning of the class struggle, helping Pioneer Youth to work with groups of mill and mountain children, etc.
Beginning with the general strike in High Point three years ago a change occurred. In one town after another the workers were ready for revolt and wanted instruction and leadership. In 1933 the Hosiery Workers Union launched large-scale organizing campaigns in the South. Larry was a member of the staff and called upon incessantly for strike organization activity. Characteristically, he was on the way from High Point to Durham for a strike meeting when his car was crowded off the road and the accident which in a few days brought on his death occurred. Characteristically also, during this summer he had backed up his father and other progressive natives around Old Fort in having Negro as well as white children at Pioneer Youth camp in spite of the suspicion and opposition of many of the neighbors. He had plans for putting up in the mountain retreat where he was building his own little house, a couple more buildings to house a training school for organizers.
“Pick out the promising young fellows and girls,” said Larry, “who emerge in a strike, take them to Old Fort for a month and teach them something of what it is all about, send them back into practical activity, bring them back again for further instruction after six months or a year; that is the way we will develop a leadership for the revolutionary movement in the South.”
These words are written not to praise Larry Hogan as an individual; but because he and his experience are typical of hundreds, thousands, in the South and in other sections of the country who can be recruited into the revolutionary army and because it is important that the Workers Party should realize both the assets which it possesses in these American militants and jts responsibility for finding and developing them. With such as these a really “new” South, new America, new world will be won – the workers’ world.
 



War clouds become thicker and blacker. Daily occurrences and speeches furnish conclusive and final proof that the Stalinist bureaucracy of the Soviet Union and the Comintern have capitulated to French imperialism, sold the revolutionary integrity and soul of the Third International for a mess of pottage. Under the circumstances Socialist workers in the United States and elsewhere – those of them who have abandoned the fallacy of classic Social Democratic reformism and who claim to be “revolutionary” – are more and more insistently confronted with the question: How and under what banner may the revolutionary elements in this period be welded together into a powerful, international, revolutionary party, under whose leadership all the forces of the working class and its allies may unite, not merely for defense against Fascist aggression but for the counter-attack to destroy capitalism.
Socialist party members in the United States in evaluating their own party and their own responsibility in the face of this question must make up the balance sheet of the party development during the little over a year that has elapsed since the Detroit convention of the S.P. and the adoption of the Detroit Declaration. This development has been reported and provisionally analyzed in the New Militant and the New International and it is not necessary to review it at length.
 
The Detroit Turn
At Detroit, in 1934, a National Committee was elected which the Militants claimed to dominate. The Detroit Declaration was far from a Marxist one. It represented, however, a certain turning away from reformism. In other words, it was a Centrist declaration. The election of the N.C. and the adoption of the Declaration were hailed by the Militants, on the one hand, as a climax of their work over a period of years, as representing a decided turn to the left, and the vindication of their contention that the S.P. could be made a “revolutionary” party. On the other hand, they stated that this was the beginning of a vigorous and more rapid move toward the latter goal. On this basis “unattached radicals” were invited to join the S.P. and “Communists” such as Goldman, Gitlow and Zam accepted the invitation. Those who were not convinced that organizations such as the A.W.P. and the C.L.A. should be liquidated and join the S.P. were put down as hopeless sectarians.
The Old Guard in the S.P., and especially the New York section, promptly took the offensive. Organizationally it defied the N.C. Politically, it declared that the Detroit Declaration was “Communism” if it meant anything and that the Socialist Party must stand openly and unequivocally on a gradualist and democratic basis, that is, on reformism. At the Boston session of the N.C. as a result of this course the Old Guard again proceeded promptly to follow up this opening and further baited the N.C. The Militants on their part, as well as their “allies” such as Norman Thomas, realized that the Old Guard was gaining ground and that they must put up a much more determined fight if they were not to be routed. So the Socialist Call was projected and established, and talk that those who had hoped to be able to avoid a split in the party were wrong and that the Old Guard must be kicked out began to be heard.
 
The First Blow
At Buffalo three months later the Thomas-Allen, etc. group made a gesture of attack on the Old Guard, laying down certain requirements which they must meet within a given period or (presumably) be kicked out At the same time a much more decisive attack, however, was made on the left wing by means of the resolution which declared “advocacy of armed insurrection” as incompatible with membership in the S.P. The notion that one could hold any views, and especially revolutionary ones, in the S.P. was thus abandoned. The Centrists made an attempt to establish a political position of their own as that of the S.P. by an organizational gesture against the right and a political blow against the left.
The denouement which might have been expected and which some of us had frequently enough predicted, came at the recent New York Plenum of the N.C., which has been reported in the columns of the New Militant. There Thomas, Hoan, etc. signed a peace pact with the Old Guard so that all good Socialists could get ready to roll up a big vote for the party (meaning for Hoan?) in the 1936 presidential election. The basis of the pact is the exclusion of “Communists,” that is, Marxists from the S.P., technical “acceptance” by the Old Guard of the Detroit Declaration with the understanding that the right to “criticize and modify” exists, etc.
 
Militants Fail to Create Left Wing
The first point that stands out today to that after all these years of work by the assorted varieties of militants in the S.P., no revolutionary left-wing of any proportions has been crystallized in the party.
The militants who said they were going to do this job – yes, even make the S.P. itself revolutionary – and who rode so high and sung so confidently a year ago, suffered at the New York Plenum an obvious and shameful defeat. So far from being kicked out, the Old Guard is in the ascendancy and in a stronger position to advance its avowed purpose of undermining any attempt to build a left wing.
Under the circumstances those who question whether any considerable left-wing will be built in the S.P. have some basis for their doubts. The real point, however, is that no left-wing can be built on the basis and by the methods the Militants have employed in the last half dozen years.
What is the reason for the failure of the Militants to do what they professed they were going to do? First, they have never worked out a political program and sought to gather followers, educate the membership of the S.P. and carry on the fight against the Old Guard on the clear basis of such a program.
Secondly, having no clear political basis on which to fight, their struggle has been an organizational one. “We will get control of the N.C. and of the party by uniting all elements opposed to the Old Guard for this purpose and then we will use our control to make the party revolutionary” – this is in effect what the Militants said to themselves. The Old Guard on its part carried on a political fight on the basis of a program though, of course, an incorrect one, and they won out. The opposition to them, not standing united on a program, being composed of politically unclear, heterogeneous elements, fell to pieces just at the critical moment. Norman Thomas, for example, having no principled differences with the Old Guard, could not make a final break with them, no matter how many violations of discipline they committed, how ruthlessly they might hold him up to ridicule, and how many oaths of loyalty he might swear to the Militants, and thus run the risk of having the party get into the hands of “revolutionists” with whom he does have differences and whose control of the party would mean to discredit it “in the eyes of the trade unions,” that is, of the A.F. of L. bureaucrats.
 
The Fetish of Unity
Because of this inherent political weakness the Militants also had their hands tied by a formal and fetishistic conception of the “unity of the party.” Keep the party together, there must be no more divisions in the working class, was their plea. Suffice it at this point to make three brief observations:

First: “Unity” on an unsound and unclear basis means, as repeated experiences of the working class have demonstrated and as the Militants have now once again found out, disruption at the critical moment – disruption precisely of the more progressive forces to the benefit of the reactionaries.
 
Second: What kind of unity is it which means political collaboration with the Old Guard, reformists and trade union bureaucrats, but no collaboration with, objectively, even enmity towards revolutionists?
 
Third: Such painless births as are envisaged by those who expect a revolutionary party to be born on the basis of keeping all the boys together in a party may have become a possibility in the biological realm but it is not yet in the social!

If the Militants have learned anything from recent experiences and expect to go seriously about crystallizing the left-wing, they must begin by facing the fact that they are now in a very weak position. The Militant leaders have themselves given the clearest indication of their helplessness and unpreparedness, by the failure of the Socialist Call, for example, to make even a plausible attempt to state their position and plans since the N.C. Meeting.
 
Important Questions
Among the chief sources of their weakness in the fight against the Old Guard and as a force for the crystallization of a genuine left-wing is their attitude on the labor party question. With few exceptions they are for a Labor party and have in no important sense differentiated themselves from the Old Guard on this point. The role of a Labor party in the U.S. in this period is bound to be a reformist one. Politically, how build a revolutionary wing on the basis of building a reformist labor party? Organizational activity to build a Labor party, get votes for it and get elected to office on its ticket will furnish a means of evading fundamental revolutionary problems. In such activities all militants will have to play a tail-endist role, no matter how fine a face they may try to put on it, to the Old Guard and the trade union officialdom – the role of a minority which does not know precisely where it is going.
Secondly, the Militants are weak because of their lack of a clear position on what are now the real test questions before the international working class movement – the questions of the Soviet Union, the role of the Stalinist bureaucracy in international relations, the attitude to the Second and Third Internationals and to the movement for the Fourth International, the question of how in the approaching war crisis a betrayal more infamous and tragic than that of 1914 is to be prevented. Even the R.P.P.A. forces are either unclear on these points or in some instances tend still to a Lovestoneite position. The Old Guard does not conceal its purpose to follow the same fundamental policies of betrayal as in the past. How pretend to be crystallizing a revolutionary wing unless you have a clear answer to the masses as to how you are going to prevent this betrayal? How postpone this answer?
 
The Trade Union Problem
Third, the economic basis for existence upon which many Militant leaders depend will prevent them, unless, of course, they break away from it, from following an out and out revolutionary policy. The Old Guard leaders in the S.P. are professionals, lawyers, for example, who are related to the top officials in the unions and get their practice, directly or indirectly, from them. They behave accordingly. The Militants are younger professionals on the make, the second layer of officials in the unions, etc. Now if they held their positions in the unions as representatives of a rank and file opposition to reactionaries and conservatives, they would be pushed to the left because the interests of this rank and file in the capitalist crisis would demand it But in the main this is not at present the case. Therefore, though advocating progressive measures up to a certain, point the Militants cannot contemplate an intransigent battle against the trade union bureaucracy and a decisive break with it, for this would mean a threat to their jobs and also to the basis of their prestige, their social position, in the labor movement. Thus even at Detroit the Militants either offered no opposition, or only the weakest sort, to the Old Guard’s blunt refusal to pass even a mild resolution of censure on the A.F. of L. officialdom. As we pointed out at the time, so far as the American labor movement and specific American problems are concerned, the trade union question is the test question today. On this the Militants failed, and must fail unless they effect a right-about-face.
The second point that stands out from, an analysis of the part year’s developments in the S.P.U.S. is that a terrific blow has been struck at the conception that the S.P. could be “reformed,” that is, that a majority could be won to a Marxist position and so make this the position of the partly and the basis of Hie party membership, On the contrary, the coarse of those who rejected this road and who worked for the merger of the A.W.P. and C.L.A., established the W.P. as the independent revolutionary party, and raised the banner of the Fourth International, has been justified.
 
The Open Letter
There was a timeliness which was perhaps not altogether an historical accident, and in any case is significant, in the publication here and elsewhere, right upon the heels of the N.C. S.P. meeting, of the Open Letter for the Fourth International. The forces in the United States who have entered the W.P. and have accepted the program of a Fourth International are not entirely insignificant, compared with those of the S.P. Indeed, the number of S.P. members who accept or claim to accept our theoretical position is not small. But even if this were not so, S.P. members, Militants, all who are not reformists in the S.P., must face the challenge of the Open Letter and draw conclusions in the light of it as to which party represents the revolutionary vanguard, the future of hope for the proletariat and not the past of betrayal and defeat.
For the numerous Marxists and militant workers in the U.S. who are at present unattached, there can now, after the developments which have taken place in the S.P. and the revelations of the Comintern Congress now in session in Moscow as to the final capitulation of the Comintern to social patriotism, be no question of going into the S.P. or C.P. The Workers Party is the revolutionary party in the United States. Its doors are open. This is no time for any Marxist or honest militant to stand on the side line. There is no time to lose even in the U.S. in increasing and welding together the party of the vanguard.
We are aware that there are a considerable number of individuals in the S.P. who are not yet ready to accept our program or if they do, to draw the organizational conclusions from it. We never have, and we do not now in the Stalinist manner call them counter-revolutionists and Social Fascists. On the contrary, we expect them to be our comrades in the struggles of the working class today and hope that many, if not all of them, will be not merely fellow-travelers but comrades in the fullest sense of the term in the approaching revolutionary struggle.
 
The Duty of Left Wingers
We do say to them, however, that if they are serious in asserting that they are not reformists or mere Centrists it is, in the first place, their duty to study the program of the W.P. and. the Open Letter, and to see to it that they are discussed in the Socialist Party. If these comrades are not prepared for such discussion of the problems before the revolutionary movement, they have no right to the name of revolutionist. If these issues cannot be discussed in the Socialist Party, there is no use talking of building a revolutionary wing in it.
Secondly, the leftward moving elements in the Socialist Party who still believe that something can he accomplished there must make their own program covering the crucial issues of today, not seeking an escape in generalities, and they must win followers, educate the S.P. membership, and carry on the fight against not only reformism but centrism on the basis of such a program. Thirdly, these comrades cannot expect to be taken seriously if they can make collaboration with the reformists of the Old Guard in the S.P. and collaboration with elements such as Norman Thomas, on the basis of toleration of such a surrender to the Old Guard as the recent “peace pact,” the basis for their procedure, while they hold aloof from or objectively even struggle against revolutionary elements in the S.P. or outside. To say that they have differences with these elements is to say exactly nothing or else to cover up organizational fetishism and cowardly evasion, for they claim to have differences with the Old Guard and the trade union bureaucrats also. Any movement in the S.P. which makes serious pretensions at aiming at the crystallization of a left-wing must make a clear and final break with the organizational horse-trading and maneuvering which have marked the Militant tactics in the past, must stand unequivocally and from the outset on a program of break with all reformists and Centrists and unity with the revolutionary elements on the basis of a revolutionary program. Let the rank and file in the Socialist Party and especially the Socialist youth apply that test rigorously and without delay to every program submitted to them and to every would-be leader who stands up before them.
 



AS THE 1935 Atlantic City convention of the American Federation of Labor approaches, one recalls that a decade ago an AF of L convention of decisive importance was held at the same place. During the year preceding this earlier convention William Green had been chosen president to fill the unexpired term of Samuel Gompers. He was by no means as yet secure in the saddle nor fully trusted by the office-holding elements in the great international unions who dominate the federation conventions. He was, in fact, suspected by many of them of having “radical leanings”. If he were elected to the presidency for a regular one-year term by the delegates at this convention, his position would become relatively secure. The chances were that he would then be elected year after year as Gompers had been. If, on the other hand, Green were defeated it would indicate confusion and instability in the official family and perhaps a number of years of internal strife.
By liberal elements in the labor movement and among its sympathizers Green was generally thought of as the progressive candidate who might inaugurate a new and better era in the AF of L. He was from the fighting (?) industrial United Mine Workers Union, not from the building or printing crafts. He had served in the Ohio legislature and sponsored there a model workmen’s compensation act. He was interested in the workers’ education movement, then largely in the hands of the progressive elements in the unions. If any candidate opposed Green it would probably be Matthew Woll, who had been regarded as Gompers’ choice for his successor, “the crown prince”, closer to the craft unions, more militantly conservative than Green.
Those were the days of the Anglo-Russian Trade Union Committee, the period which in Great Britain culminated in’the General Strike. The leading fraternal delegate from the British Trade Union Congress to the convention was AA Purcell, at that time president of the BTUC and prominent in the activities of the A-RC. Purcell’s speech to the convention was a ringing challenge. He argued for militant unionism, the building of a Labor party in the US, the recognition of the Soviet government by the US government, and close fraternal relations between the trade unionists of the Soviet Union and of the United States. It is the custom for the president of the AF of L to reply to the speeches of fraternal delegates. Frequently these replies furnish an opportunity for important political pronouncements. Purcell’s speech presented Green with his first test.
His reply to Purcell was in substance this:
“The great American Federation of Labor is the most militant trade union movement in the world. As for a Labor party, we don’t need instruction on such subjects from our sister body. A Labor party may be good for the British workers, we don’t need it or want it here. We have just had another illustration [the LaFollette campaign] of the fact that independent political action does not suit the needs of American workers. We are opposed to the recognition by the United States of the Soviet government which does not observe its international obligations, which is out to wreck civilization and morality, etc. As for friendship with the Russian trade unionists, we feel an ardent affection for the Russian people. We hope that some day there will be a real trade union movement in Russia. We are, however, determined to stamp out every vestige of communist influence in the trade union movement and we will have no truck with the CP-dominated trade union movement of the Soviet Union.”
After the session a group of delegates and visitors was discussing the speeches on the boardwalk. John P. Frey, then editor of the Molders’ Journal, now head of the Metal Trades Department of the AF of L, a conservative of conservatives in his philosophy but personally honest, idealistic and well-read, was the center of the group. Frey rubbed his hands in glee:
“That speech,” he said, “elects Green to the presidency. It has made him. The AF of L is safe. We know now that we have a strong man who is worthy to stand in Samuel Gompers’ shoes.”
Thus with appropriate ceremony, so to speak, began the undisputed reign of William Green and the great turn to the Right which characterized the AF of L from that year to 1933. For, of course, Green was not and did not prove to be a progressive though quite possibly he still thinks of himself as a “constructive radical”. The doctrine that workers should be organized by employers who were to be persuaded that their production would be made more efficient if they put their workers into AF of L unions; that strikes were relics of the earlier barbaric era of employer-employee relations; political support of big capital represented by Coolidge and Hoover; the ruthless suppression of even the mildest opposition so that for years no opposition vote was recorded on any resolutions in AF of L conventions, and along with it the degeneration of many of the unions which constituted the backbone of the AF of L into racketeering outfits, marked this period. Monotonously Green was reflected to the presidency each year. Some were boom years, some depression. In any case membership fell consistently. Strikes were consistently lost. Yet they were comfortable years for the bureaucracy. There was enough per capita tax to keep them going; they basked in the sunshine of capitalist favor; internal opposition had been clubbed into submission or with the CP was on the outside pursuing the futile “Third Period” “dual union” tactics.
With the advent of the Roosevelt administration came an increase in union membership and a tremendous stepping up of activity, and with new members and open and bitter labor conflicts came trouble for the bureaucrats in the AF of L. Fundamentally, of course, the crisis developing in the Federation results from the fact that American capitalism is entering on a new phase and that in this phase pure-and-simple, class collaborationist, craft unionism can no longer obtain concessions from the employing class.
Thus Green comes to the 1936 Atlantic City convention having failed to date to compose the conflict which is threatening to tear asunder the important Building Trades Department of the AF of L; with the campaign against “Reds” in the unions on the whole a failure; and having suffered open rebuffs at three successive conventions – automobile workers, teachers and rubber workers – within a month.
It is by no means a foregone conclusion that Green will be faced with an open contest for the presidency at this convention. Undoubtedly the fact that he cannot handle jurisdictional conflicts with the political finesse of a Gompers, that he appears not to be the “strong man” to guard the citadel of craft unionism against the new union members from the big, industries and to put down the “Reds”, greatly disturbs the heads of the craft groups and the reactionary elements in the Federation generally. They are not, however, going to jump from the frying pan into the fire if they can help it. Before they put Green out they must be sure that they have a better man to take his place. The only serious contender who has appeared is John L. Lewis, to whom more than any one else Green has owed his position thus far. It is quite possible that Lewis, who is nothing if not a clever and resourceful politician, on the one hand thinks that he can still use Green, and on the other hand may prefer to see Green further discredited by his failure to dispose of the numerous perplexing problems facing the Federation before he openly runs against him.
For militants and progressives the important point so far is that there is instability and conflict within the AF of L bureaucracy and that the leadership is not now able to dispose of opposition in an off-hand manner. Militants and progressives must take advantage of this condition and press the offensive. In no situation is this a time for retreat or compromise.
Above all, however, it is necessary to understand the real character of the present conflict in the AF of L officialdom. It is not a contest beween reactionaries and genuine progressives, between class collaborationists and advocates of class struggle. Leaders of the “opposition” are Lewis of the miners, Hillman of the Amalgamated Clothing Workers, Dubinsky of the International Ladies Garment Workers and Gorman of the United Textile Workers. Behind them are ranged the lesser officials in the unions led by them and in some of the other unions. These men are led to seek a new course for the Federation, of course, under the pressure of their rank and file who in turn suffer under the impact of the crisis. It does not follow that they are interested in leading the rank and file to victory in genuine struggles against employers; the exact opposite is in fact the case.
Lewis, Hillman and Company stand for efficiency and up-to-dateness in union administration; for “aggressive” organization work and strikes (if strikes are necessary as a “last resort”); for “industrial” or vertical unionism. Some of them openly advocate a Labor party; others are willing to play around with the idea. Their basic concept, however, is that of class collaboration and their strategic aim is to develop a kind of unionism which can effectively, from their and the employers’ point of view, carry on class collaboration under present conditions.
The unions in an earlier period, whether under Gompers’ or Green’s leadership, operated within the framework of the capitalist system. The idea was that unions must be there to bring pressure on the bosses who in the absence of them might take not only a “fair profit” but an unfair share which would result in the workers being deprived of a “fair day’s pay for a fair day’s work”. Strikes might be resorted to on occasion in order to test out the relationship of forces. But eventually, and preferably sooner than later, a “bargain” was struck.
Now Lewis, Hillman and Company want to continue this game. But in the first place employers in the basic industries cannot get any results by dealing with craft unions. These do not “take care” of the mass of unskilled and semi-skilled workers who are most likely to make trouble for the employers. Unless, therefore, they can be provided with “industrial” unions which, having a semblance of independence from the employer, can more effectively keep workers in line than out-and-out company unions, these employers will resort to the latter and root out so-called independent unionism altogether. Lewis, Hillman and Company want the AF of L to build efficient vertical unions which can keep the workers in line and with which employers will make “collective bargains”.
Above all, these leaders are aware that in the present phase of capitalist development the government will intervene more and more extensively in industry, that it is in effect the administration as the agency of the employing class with which, via Labor Relations Boards, etc., the collective bargain must be made. Having no faith in the masses and no concept of class struggle against the government they are convinced that unions in the present period have no chance to exist at all save on government sufferance and indeed with positive government protection. They want to build, therefore, an AF of L which finally abandons the anti-government, “syndicalist” leanings of Gompers and the craft unionists, which makes itself useful to the government in preventing and settling strikes, and which consequently receives administration favors.
It will be recalled that the most enthusiastic defender of the NRA was the Lewis-Hillman outfit, that Lewis has obtained a “little NRA” for the coal industry (in exchange for repeated postponements of a strike struggle) and that Gorman is campaigning for a similar “little NRA” for the textile industry. On the other hand, Roosevelt’s support has been most consistently given to these same elements, a support which the administration could well afford to give in exchange for assistance in keeping down revolt in steel, automobiles, rubber, etc.
So far then from being progressive, the Lewis-Hillman outfit is to be more feared by progressives and militants today than the other elements in the AF of L leadership. The old-timers cannot possibly handle the situation any longer. Their bungling attempts are bound to play into the hands of the militants. Lewis, Hillman and Company are the agents of the capitalist class who might be able to fasten a class collaboration trade unionism on the masses generally and especially the membership of the new unions, for a period. That John L. Lewis in the face of his atrocious record in his own union and his present philosophy should today be thought of by many honest workers as a progressive and as the hope of the workers in the developing crisis is indeed ominous. When the Stalinist party today encourages or permits steel workers, teachers and others to think that in Lewis they may find a real ally who will help them in organizing campaigns or in defending trade union democracy, the CP is simply carrying out its job of undermining and betraying the mass organizations by new means suited to the new conditions.
The same holds good in relation to the Labor party question. Objectively, even when there is not direct collaboration, the CP encourages the Labor party propaganda of such figures as Dubinsky, Gorman, etc. It is represented as an evidence of progressivism in the AF of L. But in the first place, no matter what some of these men may say under the pressure of the restlessness of their own rank and file, they will not only not give real support but they will definitely sabotage any concrete steps for the building of a Labor party so long as the Roosevelt administration gives them any crumbs from its table, in other words, so long as liberal capitalists can make use of them. In the second place, if and when they do support a “Labor party” it will be when it is safely under their own control and on a social-patriotic, social-pacifist basis. Not to see and expose this is to sabotage the building of a genuine revolutionary party and therefore to sabotage political unification of the American workers on the only basis which can possibly lead to the solution of their problems.
Against Lewis-Hillman as much as against Green the progressives and militants in all the unions must build their forces on a program of class struggle, trade union democracy and genuine industrial unionism. As the AF of L convention will demonstrate, only the merest beginning has as yet been made in the building of such a Left wing. The recent developments, however, in the Local 574 situation in Minneapolis, in the automobile, teachers’ and rubber workers’ conventions, etc., demonstrate that a beginning has been made. As the economic crisis deepens and the threat of war draws nearer, the masses will be helpless and the unions will be crushed unless the work goes steadily and rapidly forward.
 



The fortunes of battle ebb and flow at Atlantic City in the most exciting convention of the American Federation of Labor since the war.
While the convention is still in progress as we go to press and a definitive evaluation must wait until its close, certain assertions can safely be made as a result of the events of the last couple of days. The rift in the leadership between the Green-Woll and Lewis-Hillman-Dubinsky, etc. forces is out in the open. There will be a more open and intense struggle between various tendencies in the Federation during the coming year than at any time since the early 1920’s. Thereby genuine progressive and militant elements are given a magnificent opportunity, if they know how to take advantage of it.
The old guard received a stunning blow when John L. Lewis arose in the dramatic fashion he knows so well how to use and asked (alter the regular time for presenting resolutions had expired) tor unanimous consent to introduce two resolutions. Amid electric tension two die-hard old guard leaders, Wharton of the Machinists and Covelski of the Hotel and Restaurant Workers, objected unless the resolutions were first read.
 
The Slam at Woll
Thus the drama was heightened, which undoubtedly was just what Lewis wanted. His first and most important resolution, which after his reading of it was referred to the Resolutions Committee, would forbid any officer of the A.F. of L. from holding membership or office in the National Civic Federation, the peace-between-capital-and-labor organization founded by Mark Hanna, which in recent years, with Matthew Woll as acting president and the notorious Ralph Easley as secretary, has specialized in red-baiting and other forms of extreme Toryism. The Lewis resolution was, of course, aimed primarily at Woll himself, leading spokesman and strategist of the old line craft unionists in the convention. To smear Woll as one primarily identified with an organization outside the labor movement and against which a deep resentment existed at least in many of the unions, and thereby to deprive the craft unionists of their right to claim that they are the only simon-pure pillars of trade unionism, was Lewis’ aim.
That his shot took effect in a vital spot was indicated when only a few hours later Woll announced that he had resigned from the National Civic Federation! Never, at least in the past 30 years has a leader of Woll’s prominence in the A.F. of L. “lost face” so swiftly and thoroughly.
Not only was this a blow at the craft unionists’ position but Lewis’ stroke also served to discredit the “red baiting” proposals of Woll and Company and the indications now are that the two-thirds vote necessary to pass the amendment to the A.F. of L. constitution barring all “Communists” from membership will not be obtained, and that at best the old guard will be able to put over some comparatively mild resolution against the “reds.”
 
Industrial Unionism Edged Out
On the other hand, as the New Militant predicted last week, the advocates of a clear-cut resolution for industrial unionism in the mass production industries proved too optimistic in their expectation that they could get a majority in this convention. The Woll-Frey-Wharton forces rallied by 18,025 to 10,826, the majority report of the Resolutions Committee which reaffirms the San Francisco decision of last year. This decision permits the Executive Council to issue international charters to workers in such industries as rubber and automobiles but specifies that the craft unions of the Federation retain jurisdiction over the skilled craftsmen in these industries. The effect is instead of setting up a genuine industrial union to put the unskilled and semi-skilled into a “restricted industrial union’’ and to separate the skilled workers from them and from each other in a dozen or more craft groups.
Analysis of the role of Lewis and Company in developing government-sponsored unionism on which, incidentally, reactionaries such as Woll and Frey made acute observations in the convention, must wait for our next issue. Suffice it here to make one important point. Lewis is nothing if not a shrewd politician. He seeks power. He does not cast himself in the role of a martyr making a splendid but futile fight for lost causes. When, therefore, Lewis now delivers a bitter and devastating attack on one of the pillars of the Federation, Matthew Woll himself, when he deliberately and publicly widens the breach between the old guard and other elements, when he shouts from the housetop what hitherto has been whispered only behind closed doors by any prominent Federation leader, namely, that the A.F. of L is “a total failure” under its present leadership, when he who was an unswerving supporter of Tory Republicanism under Coolidge and Hoover, flirts with the idea of a labor party, when he who in the past has hounded progressives, not to speak of radicals in his own union more bitterly than any other international president, now protests against one of Matthew Woll’s proposals to protect the Federation from “reds” as simply part of a general movement throughout the country against all “progressive and liberal thought,” it can mean only one thing:
Lewis knows that the sentiment of the rank and file in his own union and among the workers generally is such that anyone who now seeks power and influence among the workers must cast himself in the role of a progressive and fighter, even a “radical”!
The vote on the craft union resolution already referred to indicates that the old guard is far from licked. It would be dangerous for genuine progressives to cherish any illusions about a smooth road ahead. It would be downright suicidal to get a false conception. of the role Lewis himself will play – for them to regard him as basically a friend rather than as a much more subtle and powerful enemy than the mere has-beens, Woll and Green. But the indications which this convention has given of how astute and hard-boiled labor politicians gauge the spirit of insurgency among the workers, plus the fact of a rift in the A.F. of L. leadership such as have never before occurred in all the 55 years of its history, opens wide the door for a mighty advance in building the left wing in the various unions and in the A.F. of L. as a whole.
Take the offensive! Press the fight. Be bold, be bold, be thrice bold. That is what the Atlantic City convention says to the militants.
 



A fist fight between the heads of the two biggest unions in the A.F. of L., Hutcheson of the Carpenters and John L. Lewis of the Miners, featured the closing day of the Atlantic City convention. In more ways than one this affair was symbolic. The boys were actually excited about something and that has not been true of the top leadership of the A.F. of L. for years. These comfortable bureaucrats were not the kind to take life seriously, and they did not need to excite themselves about anything except their golf scores and the stock market. That day is over. The rift in tile-leadership is the most serious that has occurred in the entire fifty-five years history of the Federation. The historic one-round bout of Hutcheson and Lewis took place over Hutcheson’s opposition to letting a Federal Union delegate speak for an industrial union in his industry. Lewis said it was “small potatoes” of Hutcheson not to let the “little fellows” have their say. Hutcheson rose to the full height of his six feet two and said he had been brought up on small potatoes and that’s what made him so little— just like a boy out of a Mark Twain story. He also, it is said, called Lewis a naughty name. With that Lewis sent one to the jaw. Soon the two men were rolling about on the floor. When they had been separated, Lewis brushed back his raven locks and like a nineteenth century Shakespearian actor strode to his seat. Hutcheson, the craft unionist, had to take time out to dress his wounds. That also was symbolic. Meanwhile William Green, face as red as a tomato, looking on at the struggle of personalities and forces too big for him, strove in vain to get order. And that also was symbolic.
 
“Progressives” in a Minority
It must not be inferred that the so-called “progressives” under the leadership of John Lewis constituted a majority in this convention. On the roll call on key questions they were regularly defeated by the Old Guard by a vote of about 18,000 to 10,000. The convention reaffirmed the San Francisco decision for “restricted,” i.e. fake, industrial unions in basic industries, thus favoring the craft unions. The convention is on record for the Roosevelt “social security” program and against the Lundeen bill. Labor Party resolutions were defeated and the A.F. of L.’s stand for “non-partisan” political action reaffirmed, though the Executive Council was instructed to draft an amendment to the U. S. constitution to empower Congress to enact social legislation. The A.F. of L. forces generally can be counted on to support Roosevelt in 1936, unless entirely unforeseen shifts in the economic or political situation occur. After the smashing blow at Matthew Woll for his connection with the red-baiting National Civic Federation, the Executive Council has to withdraw its proposed amendment to the A.F. of L. constitution barring all “reds” from any A.F. of L. union. However. a provision barring them from being delegates to any State Federation of Labor and city central body was adopted, as was a strong resolution against “Communism” in general.
It may be safely predicted that within a year or two the so-called “progressives” of the Lewis-Hillman et al. camp will achieve a majority. Their industrial union resolution e.g. got a bigger vote than resolutions for unemployment insurance at the A.F. of L. convention just preceding the one where it was finally adopted.
 
The Real Program of Lewis
It must again be emphasized that it now becomes of crucial importance for the workers, and especially the active and advanced ones, to understand precisely what forces suffered set-backs at Atlantic City and what is the real character and role of the elements now gaining ascendancy. The chief point that must be made is that Lewis-Hillman et al. do not represent genuine progressivism and labor militancy. They aim to build a more up-to-date model (up-to-date for the U.S., for it is the same type of unionism as that of the British Trade Union Congress for years and the famous German Confederation of Labor before Hitler so easily wiped it out, represented) of class-collaboration unionism. The Gompers craft model with its syndicated slant, its anti-state bias (opposition to social legislation, etc.) designed to bargain with small employers, could meet in some fashion the needs of an earlier period. What Lewis-Hillman stand for is a more efficient type of unionism, structurally adapted to dealing with big corporations and governmental agencies such as labor boards which can “bargain collectively” and thus hold the workers in line in the present period. Both proponents of the new unionism such as Howard of the Typographical Union and opponents such as Matthew Woll put their finger on the real issue in the convention debates. Howard, for example, stated that if members who had come into the new federal unions and the workers in the basic industries generally “were not permitted to organize under the federation’s auspices they would do so under other leadership or under no leaderships at all, and would present the government with a far more serious problem than if they had been taken into the federation.” Matthew Woll put it in his somewhat more theoretical fashion, that he feared the adoption of unrestricted industrial charters would “destroy the basis of voluntarism in the labor movement and work toward diverting control of labor organizations to the jurisdiction of government agencies.”
 
End of Gomperism
It was, in other words, Gomperism which finally died at this A.F. of L. convention at Atlantic City. His physical presence was absent from an A.F. of L convention for the first time in the Federation’s history at the 1925 Atlantic City gathering. His ghost made its exit from the convention this year.
Because there is thus no difference in underlying philosophy but only tactical distinctions between the old guard and the so-called progressives, it was possible, as the New Militant predicted, for Lewis to “attack” Green repeatedly during the convention and then turn around and nominate him for president of the Federation again, an office to which he was unanimously re-elected.
The present set-up, therefore, presents its encouraging and also its ominous aspect. The fact that there is a serious rift in the top leadership of the A.F. of L. which always means freer discussion and more lee-way for dissenting conceptions of all kinds, is one of the encouraging features. The fact that hard-boiled politicians such as Lewis sense an intensifying insurgency in the rank and file which makes it necessary for such labor fakers to step out of their old roles entirely and to pose as fighters and “radicals” also means much. The fact that the insurgent newcomers in automobiles, rubber, etc., who before the convention openly attacked Green in their own conventions have now also seen him attacked, his prestige and Woll’s seriously undermined right on the floor of an A.F. of L. convention, will further encourage the militant elements.
 
Stalinists Trail Lewis
But it is a matter for the deepest concern that no voices were raised for genuine, as against fake industrial unionism and militancy, and that as yet no organized force appeared in an A.F. of L. convention to raise that banner. The Stalinists with their complete turn to the right in every field devote their energies not to building up a real left-wing but actually to playing up Lewis, Hillman, Gorman, et al. as the genuine article, pinning hope upon them for organizing steel and similar industries, carrying on cheap intrigues to get figures such as Gorman to introduce Labor Party resolutions and trying to make the workers believe that this is a triumph for progressivism. Browder and Company are not naive enough to believe this stuff. They are cynical enough, alter years of tutelage in the Stalin school of goose-stepping, to try to make the workers believe it. Thus under their present policy of conciliation toward the A.F. of L., as under their third period policy of “dual unionism,” they confuse the workers, dissipate the progressive forces and betray the labor struggle. And Louis Budenz, has after a few brief weeks in the Stalinist camp also already degenerated to the point where he goes about the country supporting these betraying policies!
“Militant” Socialists, while moving toward a trade union program which abstractly sets forth a Leninist position, have their economic base in their jobs in the needle trades and other unions under the so-called “progressives” Hillman, Dubinsky, Gorman, Lewis himself. The “Militant” Socialists, too, therefore, utterly fail to attack these leaders and their policies and contribute to confusing and misleading the workers.
 
Opportunity for Militants
The line of policy for revolutionists and for all genuinely militant elements in the unions is not that of an alliance with Lewis-Hillman to wage a mock battle against the corpse of Gompers or the non-entity Green or the much deflated Matthew Woll whose ideas, like his oratory, are of nineteenth century vintage. No, the conservative forces in the A.F. of L. today are the Lewis-Hillman forces, the more dangerous because they masquerade as progressive and up-to-date. The strategy of revolutionists is to take full advantage of any opportunity which these elements create for them by their attack on other trade union bureaucrats or by organizing campaigns or strikes on which they may embark under pressure on the one hand from the newer elements in the unions and in order, on the other hand, to show the employers and the Roosevelt administration that the workers will “really” follow them. On the other hand, the philosophy of these men must be combatted relentlessly. They cannot be depended upon to lead any organizing campaign or strike to a conclusion which is in the interests of the workers. In one way or another they will betray them as surely as Claherty betrayed the rubber strike and Dillon the General Motors strike. The militant forces in all of the unions, in every section of the country, in the A.F. of L. generally, must organize on a basis of class struggle, industrial unionism and genuine trade union democracy against the Lewis-Hillman line. The Atlantic City convention brought out the alarming fact that only the merest beginnings have been made with this job and that the would-be political leaders of the trade union movement are in reality sabotaging it. But the convention also made clear that in the coming year the genuine militants, if they are both aggressive and astute, have an unprecedented opportunity for work in the unions.
 

