


The right wing’s attempt at a witch-hunt had its first test last
Friday and it blew up in its face. At the enforced re-run for the
selection of Labour’s prospective Parliamentary candidate in
Bradford North, Militant supporter Pat Wall increased his
majority from 7 last year to 37, defeating the sitting Labour MP Ben
Ford by 49 votes to 12.
When Pat Wall won last year, by 35 votes to 28, the National
Executive ordered a re-run on some farcical technical
‘irregularities’. The right wing’s continued manoeuvres fell
flat when over a hundred attended the annual meeting in Eccleshill
ward it resulted in a left wing majority.
In the re-run no ward nominated Ford, who only gained three
nominations compared to Pat’s 21. After the selection meeting two
of Ford’s supporters came up to Pat and told him that Ford’s
speech had been so bad that they had changed their mind and voted for him.
Bradford North Labour Party members have made clear who they want
to fight the next election for Labour, the National Executive must
respect that right.
 




Workers at Metal Box Shipley are staging a 24-hour-a-day sit in at
the firm in opposition to compulsory redundancies – including those
of long standing shop stewards and leading members of the combine committee.
Meetings with management were called off when the management
insisted that normal working meant acceptance of short time working
without government subsidy. Workers rejected this and both sides are
now digging in for what could be a long drawn out dispute.
Plans are now being drawn up for picketing other Metal Box plants,
as factories at Leicester and Westhoughton DWI in Lancashire are
being faced with closure.
International support is also vital as Metal Box, like many
multinationals, are running down their UK operations to transfer jobs
abroad, especially to countries with little or no trade union
activity such as South Africa, USA, on non-union sites, and a ‘free
development zone’ in India.
Thatcher’s allies in Chile have also benefited from Metal Box’s
search for cheap labour and greater profits. In fact 67% of their
returns are now from abroad.
Workers are also being asked to pick up the tab for management’s
blunder in diversifying into central heating, the collapse of the
market meaning more redundancies.
The cartel arrangement with US firm Continental Can has collapsed,
leaving MB open to American penetration of UK markets, shattering
Metal Box’s long held monopoly of the British open top market.
Meanwhile Metal Box have invested large amounts in high technology
plant in America using non-union labour to reap big profits at the
expense of the UK workforce.
The need for solidarity is essential as Shipley is seen as the
centre of the combine activity, but also international links must be
forged with Metal Box companies in Spain, South Africa, India and
Holland and the USA, if this major multinational is to be beaten and
finally controlled by the workforce. Cheques etc. payable to Metal
Box JSSC Fund, and send to A. Mackin, 14 Westcliffe Road, Shipley, BD18 3EE.
 




For the second year running in Bradford opposition to the
Tory-dictated cuts in public expenditure has led a small group of
Labour councillors into conflict with the leadership of the Labour council.
Three councillors abstained in the budget vote in protest at an
increase in council house rents of £2.27 per week, and a rate
increase of 18.5%. This would have meant an increase for the average
council tenant of £10 per week since Labour gained control in May 1980.
At a special meeting of the District Labour Party, the Labour
group asked for the whip to be withdrawn from the Labour councillors
as they had broken the group’s and district party’s standing orders.
“I was elected by my ward party on the basis of
fighting cuts in workers’ living standards,” Gary Armitage said
in his defence. “Average wage increases in Bradford have been 4%
for those lucky enough to be in work. These rent and rate increases
mean workers will have to cut their living standards to pay the bills.
“The Labour candidate who recently fought the Clayton
bye-election in Bradford on a no cuts platform took the seat off the
Tories for the first time since 1946, forcing the SDP into third
place in a seat they expected to win.
“It is time that Labour councillors stopped donning
tricorn hats, robes and chains and started campaigning for an
improvement in services and workers living standards.”
Gary also pointed out that he had the backing of his ward members
branch and also his AUEW branch. After two hours of excellent debate
the District Labour Party threw out the recommendation to withdraw
the whip by 31 votes to 21.
Public meetings will also be organised around Bradford so that
workers can express their support for the fighting stand of Militant
now and in the future battles against Tory cuts.
 




After pressure from Ben Ford, the present MP for Bradford
North, the TUC have told Bradford Trades Council that their delegates
on Bradford North Labour Party can not vote in the constituency’s
fresh reselection meetings.
Bradford Trades Council has long historic links with the Labour
Party. It was after the Manningham Mills strike in the city that the
Trades Council set up the Independent Labour Party to fight for
parliamentary representation for the working class. Since then the
Trades Council has consistently supported Labour.
Such considerations seem to mean little to Ben Ford. When he first
wanted support for reselection, Ford, along with other Bradford
Labour MPs, wrote to the Trades Council seeking nomination.
It was only after he was defeated by Pat Wall in the first
reselection conference and the Trades Council passed a resolution in
support of their President, Pat Wall, that he wrote to the TUC,
claiming the involvement of the Trades Council was against TUC rules.
Labour Party rules clearly allow for full affiliation and
participation of Trades Councils. Nevertheless, the TUC wrote to
Bradford TC and told them that since 1977, trades councils could
affiliate to Labour Parties, but could neither forward resolutions
nor become involved in selection or reselection battles.
Although trade unionists will doubtless consider such restrictions
incredible in a period when every trade union needs to become
politically active, the Trades Council will not participation in the
reselection procedure. However we will not be disaffiliating from the
Labour Party as was claimed in an article in The Times (22
March). We would also urge trade union branches and trades councils
to fight to change this TUC rule.
There seems to be a move amongst some trade union right-wingers to
loosen the links between the organised trade union movement and the
Labour Party. If there is, it will be firmly opposed.
If Ben Ford had fought as hard to save the 2,000 jobs lost at
Bairds EMI or the 1,000 jobs lost at International Harvesters as he
has fought to save his own he might well have been reselected in the
first place!
 




The city of Bradford is being destroyed.
The dilapidated mills are a grim reminder of the textile wealth on
which Bradford was built. But now growing unemployment figure herald
an even more stark and depressing future for the working people of
the city.
Already, this year has seen record levels of unemployment with
26,706 (15.6% of the population) out of work, and record short-time
working with redundancies in textiles up 48% on last year.
550 jobs have gone from GEC, 600 at International Harvesters, 300
jobs from Mintex, 350 jobs from Rank Wharfedale and now there are
rumours that the Renold operations in Bradford may close with the
loss of over 2,000 jobs.
With a Tory/Liberal/SDP council in charge of a £5½ million cut
in local expenditure the traditional escape valve of a job on the
corporation has disappeared. The old answer of male emigration is now
impossible due to high unemployment right around the country.
This nightmare certainly doesn’t result from years of militancy
or of high wage demands. The last major strike in Bradford was in the
1930s, and wages are between 13% and 18% below the national average.
Workers here have worked long hours for low pay with few
complaints and are now reaping their reward – the sack. Nor can the
Tories blame high spending councils for frightening away jobs because
of extravagant rate demands. The amount spent on school pupils per
head in Bradford is the lowest in the country.
This year, Bradford plans to spend only half as much per pupil as
Inner London. A Department of Education report says that our city has
the most socially deprived school children in West Yorkshire with
more poor, large and badly housed families; more single parent
families, more children receiving free school meals than any other
metropolitan area.
Is it then, any wonder, that more and more are looking towards an
alternative that gives them some hope?
Already, two factories have set up work-place branches of the
Labour Party and over 40 workers have been recruited so far. The
Labour Party, for so long dominated by corrupt right-wing councillors
has now moved dramatically to the left, whilst at the same time the
sleeping giant of the trade union movement is beginning to stir.
The Trades Council and Bradford North Labour Party have called an
emergency conference of the entire labour and trade union movement to
discuss the fight for jobs, on Saturday September 25th at the
Queens Hall, Bradford, commencing at 10.30 a.m.
This will be the launching pad for an all-out campaign in the city
to expose the appalling prospects and consequences of unemployment
and to publicise the socialist alternative.
We must seek to draw together not only the unions and the Labour
Party but the immigrant groups, tenants groups, community groups and
special interest groups. An appeal must also be made to the small
businessmen, many of whom such as publicans and shopkeepers face
bankruptcy as a result of factory closures.
We must show the people of Bradford that there is a future for
themselves and their children – black and white – if they are
prepared to fight for it.
 




JUST AS the Tory government has vandalised Bradford’s
industry, so the Bradford North Tories have resorted to vandalism
against a graphic illustration of their party’s record.
An 8 ft by 12 ft cartoon by Alan Hardman, depicting
Thatcher’s demolition of industry in Bradford North was fixed onto
the side of a Labour member’s house.
It was put up at 7 p.m.; the Tory agent drive past at
7.15 p.m. The occupants returned home at 11 p.m. to find
the cartoon vandalised, with oil, paint and eggs and margarine
splashed all over it.
The culprits were obviously the local Tories. So great is their
fear of socialist ideas that this one sharp cartoon had to be
immediately destroyed before workers could see it. They have posters
all round Bradford North, yet not one been vandalised.
The Tories claim to stand for law and order and private property.
What they mean is their law, their order and their property.
Their actions, while outraging many Labour Party members in
Bradford North, will only strengthen their resolve to work for the
return of a socialist candidate.
“We will not be set back” says cartoonist Alan
Hardman “We’ve got the energy and enthusiasm and we’ll come
straight back and do another one.”
By returning Pat Wall, Bradford North socialists will be
implementing the message inscribed on the cartoon: “Keep the
Tory extremists out – vote Labour for the return of a Labour government”.
 




AFTER THREE years on strike, the number of Hindle strikers has
dwindled to six. But their spirit and determination remains undimmed.
The ‘Dirty Half Dozen’ still meet every Friday in the AUEW
offices to carry on their defiance.
“We’re still fighting, but when is the TUC going to
wake up to the fact that this government is trying to knock us off
one by one, and that the only response has got to be a united fight
... a general strike to get ‘em out?”
“With all these sackings and new laws it’s impossible
to stick to the old ways. They’re saying it’s virtually illegal
to go on strike now, that you can have a union so long as management
run it!”
“What are the TUC and our union leaders doing about it?
Are they fighting? Are they hell, they’re using the Tory laws as an
excuse not to fight”.
All the strikers were agreed that the next Labour government must
start by scrapping the anti-union laws that the Tories had introduced
... “Then maybe we’d get our jobs back ... Aye that’d sicken
Hindle right off ...”
It has been a pleasure and a privilege to have known and worked
with all the Hindles’ strikers and their wives, over the past few
years, and to know that the fighting spirit that they have shown is
present in other layers of our class.
If this spirit and courage were shown by the leaders of our
movement then Thatcher wouldn’t have survived her first term.
Supporters of Militant can feel proud of the support that we
have given to the Hindle pickets, but above all proud of these
magnificent fighters for our class.
 




DESPITE A further letter from management full of lies about a mass
return to work and threatening victimisation of individuals the
strike at IMI Baildon continues into its fifth week.
Massive support is pouring in from the labour movement. Speakers
from the strike are travelling around the country getting a good response.
However this enthusiasm is not matched by the union leadership.
When the strike pay failed to arrive as promised on Friday afternoon
four members of the strike committee went down to AUEW HQ in London
only to be turned away empty handed.
This was a real kick in the stomach and for the rank and file in
Baildon and resulted in a limited return to work which was quenched
by a mass picket on Monday morning.
 




FOLLOWING THE horrific scenes of police violence in Armthorpe (see
issues 713 and 714) the LPYS organised a protest meeting. After
leafletting the entire village, a hundred people turned up to hear
Nick Toms of YTURC, and Guy Bennet of Armthorpe LPYS and Markham Main NUM.
The meeting agreed to hold a demonstration the following Tuesday.
Again the village was leafleted and on the Tuesday a thousand people
joined the march, led by local MP Harold Walker, Yorkshire NUM
vice-president Sammy Thompson and county councillor Bert Whittle.
 




AS WE reported last week the pit village of Armthorpe, Yorkshire,
has been virtually under martial law with 1,000 police occupying the village.
Peter, a part-time park keeper explained what happened to him:
“The police accused me of throwing a bottle – I
pointed to my arms, both arthritic, ‘how could I throw ’owt wi
these? I had to pack up work eight years ago.’ They shoved my arms
up my back – I shouted ‘go steady, I’ve just had a heart
operation, you’re hurting’. They ignored me. They were abusing
and swearing at me all the time. Then in the van they threatened to
beat me up saying ‘work him over, make it look if he’s had a
heart attack’. I was really frightened by now – they were from
the Greater Manchester Police. I was taken to Doncaster and charged
with criminal damage. I was kept in from 4 p.m. on Tuesday till
11.40 a.m. on Wednesday.”
A police wagon reversed into the yard of Mrs Kennedy, 59 years
old, of Charles Crescent. Her son and three other pickets were having
a cup of tea. When they saw the police piling out, the son went to
lock the front door while Mrs Kennedy went to lock the back door, but
found the police already in the lobby. She told them to ‘bugger off
and get away’. Her son heard her scream and ran into the kitchen,
where he saw the policeman had trapped his mother’s head in the
door and were slamming the door repeatedly on her head.
Mrs Kennedy was later treated by a doctor for shock and bruising.
Bob Worthy was approached by a sergeant, No. 246, of the
Greater Manchester force and asked: ‘What do you think you’re
doing’? ‘I live here’, said Bob. The sergeant then shoved him
backwards over a concrete wall. When he stood up he was surrounded by
six constables with drawn truncheons.
As Bob said:
“My kids saw me attacked on my own property today, they
won’t understand yet, but I’ll make sure they do when they’re
older. I won’t let them forget.”
 




The LYPS held a protest picket outside Doncaster Magistrates court
on Thursday 14 September. It was in protest at the vicious jail
sentences imposed on two members of the LPYS in Armthorpe. These
sentences were the first to be imposed by Thatcher’s ‘flying
judges’, the stipendiary magistrates.
The stipendiary magistrate in question is James Barry. He is a
barrister in London, but has been specially selected as one of the 40
to be sent up to the coal fields to deal out ‘justice’ to the miners.
The last time that stipendiary magistrates were used was in the
1930’s, to deal with the unemployed workers. At that time they were
hated by the working class because of the harshness of the sentences
they passed out. Today Thatcher is not only returning to the economic
conditions of the 1930’s, but it returning to the judicial
vengeance of that period.
However, the strength and solidarity of the NUM and the mining
communities must stand out against these sentences.
The LPYS appeal to all branches around the country to send letters
of support to the two young socialists concerned, Guy Bennet and Mark
Camplin, care of Her Majesty’s Prison, Armley, Leeds. It will show
these comrades that they are not isolated and that they have the
support of the Young Socialists and the labour movement.
 




SEVEN YOUNG workers from Armthorpe in Yorkshire were sent to
prison on Tuesday for relatively minor offences.
The five miners and two unemployed – including an LPYS member
and a Militant supporter – received sentences of between 3–6
months after being charged with causing criminal damage and using
insulting words and behaviour.
In what must be a warning for the labour movement, this was one of
the first cases to be heard by a stipendiary magistrate. It is clear
that these ‘flying judges’ are being sent out to inflict judicial
revenge and vindictiveness on the miners on behalf of the government.
The seven were arrested after an incident in the village on a
Saturday night. While the incident itself cannot be condoned – but
the frustration of these young workers well understood – the
severity of the sentences must be fought by the labour movement.
The sentences are totally disproportionate to the charges, which
usually carry a fine or binding over. The local paper carried a
report the day before where the crime was more serious; seven youths
called out a police car and then ambushed it. Two of them received
Â£200 fines while the rest were bound over.
Local people believe the severity of the sentences is revenge for
the political activity and successful demonstration in the village
following an earlier police riot there (see page 3). Indeed, while
the rest were sent into youth custody and Detention Centres, Guy
Bennet, a Markham Main NUM and LPYS member who played a leading part
in the protests, and Militant supporter and unemployed miner
Mark Camplin were sent to prison.
However, the movement is beginning to take up the issue. A picket
was held at Doncaster magistrates court where the cases were heard,
and a protest meeting called for Thursday September 13. Plans for a
mass demonstration outside the prison must be drawn up, involving the
miners, trade unionists and the LPYS.
It is vital that in any settlement of the miners strike, an
amnesty is ensured for all miners who have faced trumped up charges,
and their jobs guaranteed whether the offences took place on the
picket lines or as the result of police activities in their communities.
 




1,000 police, many in full riot gear, turned the Yorkshire pit
village of Armthorpe into a battlefield last week. The trouble
started on Tuesday 22 August after a day of confrontation between
police and pickets at Markham Main colliery, known as one of the most
militant pits in a militant area.
The village had been quiet and trouble free for 24 weeks, until
management that day smuggled three unidentified, masked men into the
pit. Police vans cruised round the village, made arbitrary arrests,
and eventually tried to force their way into the welfare.
The club was full of miners who’d gone there from the picket and
they prevented the police from entering. The police eventually left
at about 4 p.m.
 
24-hour picket
By 6.30 p.m. the welfare was jam packed for a meeting. It was
decided to mount a 24-hour picket from then.
Between 6 and 7 a.m. pickets arrived from all over Doncaster
and a barricade was erected across the pit gates. At 8.30 a.m.
two convoys of police moved in and boxed off the pit.
A pitched battle ensued. Police ran amok through the streets,
truncheons flailing, arresting anybody, chasing people into gardens
and houses.
One young picket was arrested then paraded up and down the
streets, covered in blood, for 45 minutes before being given any
medical aid.
This open terrorism has backfired in Armthorpe and elsewhere. Pubs
and shops have refused to serve police. Signs have gone up saying “No
police”. Housewives abuse them in the streets. More mass pickets
are planned and a newly formed branch of the LPYS is holding meetings
and leafleting campaigns in the village.
Latest reports indicate that the police are now using Armthorpe as
a base of operations, with dozens of vans in the pit yard, curfews on
residents and tapping of telephones. The village is now under virtual
martial law. As one Armthorpe miner said:
“The village is in effect an open prison. Everyone in
it is answerable to these thugs. Our normal police are unable to
patrol the village, because of the damage caused by these vandals.
The end result will be catastrophic unless we stand up to them – as
a whole village – together in the struggle.”
 




BRADFORD MILITANT supporters learned with sadness that
Tommy Hare had died aged 81 of a heart attack on 7 September.

Tommy was a life-long UCATT member; branch president until he was
80; still attending his fortnightly meetings and defending his ideas
with a clarity and vigour lacking in many half his age.
I first met Tommy in the early 70s on the Bradford Trades Council.
He was a member of the Communist Party then, having stood as a
parliamentary candidate for them after the war. But after he had
worked alongside Pat Wall, we were able to persuade him of Militant’s ideas.
He became an active comrade – standing for the local council
when in his 70s, selling papers on the street, always on picket lines
and demonstrations. He often said he wished he had found Militant
earlier, regarding his years in the CP as wasted.
I used to go for a pint with him after paper sales and the
conversations were always lively, sprinkled with Tommy’s dry wit
and passionate arguments.
When the right-wing backlash hit Bradford North after Pat Wall’s
parliamentary victory, Tommy fought tooth and nail to ensure UCATT
supported Pat’s reselection.
In stature he was small but his dedication and courage made him
ten feet tall in my eyes. I dedicated my first play, Union Man,
to him.
He was and remains a shining example and inspiration to us all.
Goodbye Tommy, the fight goes on.
 




The deepening economic crisis, and growing opposition of trade
unionists to cuts, unemployment and falling living standards as shown
by the NUPE demo, provides the background for renewed attempts by the
right wing and the Tory press to launch a witch-hunt in the Labour Party.
In a series of articles in the Times by reporter Neville
Hodgkinson, it is Militant supporters and other left wingers
in Bradford who were put under attack.
Apart from resurrecting allegations already made by The
Observer, The Times so-called revelations concern
unsubstantiated allegations by Mr Robert Hallam, until recently the
secretary of the Allerton West members branch of the Bradford West
Labour Party.
According to The Times Mr Hallam stated that Peter
Whitaker, Chairman of Allerton West branch attempted to recruit him
to a “secret Militant organisation”, aiming to subvert the
Labour Party.
What The Times does not tell Labour Party members is that
Mr Hallam, when a Bradford City Councillor voted for the Tory Housing
Finance Act. He justified his action in the local press by stating
that this hated piece of anti-working class legislation was
“socialist” – truly an extraordinary imagination!
Mr Hallam states “Peter was paying £1.50 a week, (to this
organisation), a fairly hefty subscription for someone on a low
wage.” The Militant fighting fund is published every week in
the paper. How terrible that a corporation gardener should donate
part of his own money to support the paper of his choice?
 
Conspiracy
Another Hallam statement: “Members of foreign groups had stayed
in Bradford and Mr Whitaker had gone to Poland for a month earlier
this year as a guest of ‘one of the comrades’.” Even Peter’s
ordinary holidays are turned into an international conspiracy!
Peter Whitaker did have three foreign guests in his modest semi
who stayed for several weeks. They were Chilean refugees.
The “Trotskyist dominated Bradford Trades Council” has brought
over sixth Chilean refugees to Bradford, men, women and children,
with very little help from Mr Edward Lyons or the right wing of
Bradford West Labour Party.
Peter Whitaker is Chairman of NUPE No. 1 branch and a shop
steward of several years standing. He has occupied several positions
in the Labour Party.
He has worked hard and consistently for the Labour Party despite
the need for continual medical treatment, a fact of which Mr Hallam
is well aware, which makes one wonder if that is the reason Peter was
selected for the most vicious attacks.
The main purpose of the Tory press campaign has been to prove the
existence of a plot to oust Mr Edward Lyons MP. Mr Lyons has had his
problems with the constituency party. In 1971 following his action as
one of the Labour MPs who voted with the Tories on the Common Market
and kept the Heath government in office, opposition arose to Mr Lyons
in the Party. By a narrow margin he obtained a vote of confidence.
It is interesting to note that only two members of the GMC
supported the political viewpoint of the Militant at that time.
Edward Lyons is well known as an extreme “Moderate”. He
refused to support the TUC and Labour Party in seeking the release of
the Shrewsbury pickets, and more recently he abstained from voting in
the House of Commons in the motion to lift the bans on the Clay Cross
Councillors taking local government office in future.
However no resolution to unseat Mr Lyons has been discussed by any
branch or affiliated organisation in the recent period. The ‘plot’
is entirely a figment of the imagination of the right wing and the press.
The evidence consists, believe it or not, in the enthusiastic way
supporters of the Militant express their views and recruit
members to the Labour Party.
Four of the people named in The Times article live in the
Manningham ward of the constituency. They rented a house there in
1975 when three of them were at university together. All were already
members of the Labour Party.
They found the Manningham branch in the doldrums, financially weak
and demoralised by election defeats. Meetings had ceased, only a
handful of individuals carrying the branch.
Two of the student newcomers were elected Chairman and Secretary
with Edward Lyons counting the votes, and recruitment was
started. Political discussions were revived and a Council candidate
elected to fight one of the three sitting Tories.
An enthusiastic campaign committee went out to the voters, won the
Asian support and took the ward from the Tories with a swing of over
a thousand votes, against the national trend.
Today the ward has money in the bank, regular meetings in premises
supplied free by the Asian members, lively debate to which members of
other branches come, and an ever increasing membership.
Through the efforts of the County Councillor for Manningham,
Councillor Manawar Hussein, a large Bengali membership has been built.
This is in sharp contrast to the situation that Manawar Hussein
described existed before, as quoted in the Times article
itself: “When he tried to join the party in 1962 and 1963 his
applications were twice mislaid, he said, and he was given an
indication that it was not an accident.”
We are told in the Times’that on one day in October
eleven new applications for membership from students were received.
This is supposed to imply a “bed-sitter” takeover of the Party.
The day was the day of freshers conference when the Labour Club at
the University organised a big display at the conference and signed
up over a hundred students, eleven of which joined the Party itself.
Eight students also transferred their membership from their home
constituencies or to different members branches if they had moved
house in the summer. So much for the insinuation that students had
been “forced to live in University ward”, when most of the
students concerned live in halls of residence which happens to be in
University ward.
When these students leave halls, as most do during the first year,
will we then hear that they are being forced out to other wards to
unseat the MP there?
Why indeed were these issues raised in the Tory press instead of
inside the Party. The Times has never been a champion of the
working class and must be delighted to be the instrument of it’s
discomfort. The fact that names and addresses were printed in full
seems to be an open invitation to groups like the National Front to
harass or intimidate those named.
Two weeks ago the Social Democratic Alliance held a meeting in
Bradford Labour Party rooms, yet no murmurs to the press about
organised factions were heard.
The tissue of lies, smears, innuendo and sheer nonsense must be
exposed for what it is: The cringing and whining of people beaten by
the political ideas and approach of the Militant supporters,
which is why their support has grown.
We are not ashamed to be seen as the hardest workers in the Party
or as those with the most viable political programme or the most
realistic in our analysis and ideas.
If these people are afraid of our ideas but lack ideas of their
own, let them listen to the workers and their problems. That should
make them realise that only the Marxist solutions of the Militant
can point the way forward, the alternative to capitalism and crisis
lies in moving towards a socialist transformation of society and not
in hypocritical, bitter witch-hunts against other members of the
Labour Party.
 




Fines totalling £740 were imposed on ten defendants when they
came up before Bradford magistrates last Thursday following
disturbances during the recent demonstration of the National Front in
the town (see Militant, no. 303). Most were charged with
‘insulting or threatening behaviour’. According to eyewitnesses,
they claimed that the police had just pulled many of the accused at
random out of the crowd.
Bradford Trades Council has expressed its dismay at the vicious
fines while not fully agreeing with the actions of some of the
demonstrators in being involved with incidents with the police at the time.
The Trades Council compared the charging of those demonstrating
against fascism with the failure to charge two youths who destroyed
the Trades Council banner on a previous anti-racialist march
organised by the Labour Party Young Socialists. The Trades Council is
to support all the defendants with finance. A collection fund is
being organised to pay the fines. (See letters page 10)
The irony is that the size of the fines per person is larger than
fines imposed by magistrates on firms contravening the Health and
Safety Act when failing to supply respirators or protective clothing
to workers using asbestos. The fine then was only £10.
 




Militant has highlighted the struggles of different public sector workers and explained the alternative to cuts by posing a planned economy and an increase in the public works programme. After reading the paper regularly members of Bradford Trades Council successfully moved the formation of a Public Services Sub-Committee to fight cuts.



 


Keith Narey
(Bradford NUPE)



 




A meeting of the Bradford Tribune Group unanimously passed a
resolution condemning the attacks on supporters of the Militant
by the Tory press and the right wing of the party.
The meeting, which was attended by 40 people, also criticised the
actions of the National Union of Labour Organisers in boycotting Andy
Bevan and called upon them to substitute these McCarthyite tactics
with open and democratic discussion in the party of their differences.
In a subsequent resolution unanimous support was again given to a
call for the nationalisation of the 200 monopolies and banks and
finance houses, as the only solution to the present crisis and cuts
in working class living standards.
An appeal was also made to the delegates to support letters which
have been sent out to several trade union branches and Labour Party
members’ branches in the area explaining Militant’s
position and asking the branches to invite a speaker along to explain
what Militant stands for. Several branches promised to do this.
 




Over 500 people attended a protest march and rally at Aire Valley Yarns last Saturday, 18 June, to protest about the dismissal of 21 Asian workers for trying to join a trade union.
Peter Booth, full-time official of the Transport and General Workers Union, Dyers and Bleachers section, said that these workers were only fighting for the right to belong to a union and that action such as these on behalf of unscrupulous employers never came to the notice of the public. He appealed for support for the 24-hour picket and demanded support from the entire labour and trade union movement.
The shop steward who had been sacked for refusing to take his members out of the union, Liaquat Ali, spoke about the sweat-shop conditions in Aire Valley.
There had been fear of making any complaint and the fear of starting a union, because workers twice before had been sacked for starting a union, but eventually the conditions in Aire Valley forced the men to start a union.
There were no guards on the machines. Workers had to stop spindles by hand. These barbaric conditions resulted in many injuries and in fact these conditions were worse than in factories in Pakistan where some of the workers had previously worked. Workers also, were forced to do a seven-day week or be sacked. The standard flat rate pay was only £1.02 an hour.
 
On Sunday 12 March Liaquat Ali had given out union cards. On Monday Mr Bedford, the managing director, said that if he didn’t stop he would sack him. Liaquat was told that he had the hour to collect the union cards from his workmates.
Every one of his workmates refused, saying that union was the only right the working class had. The manager responded by saying “it’s my mill, my plant, I’ll run it how I want.” Management refused to see a full-time trade union official.
Bedford then went on to sack Liaquat Ali, immediately overturning a week’s notice that he had been given an hour before. When trying to retrieve his possessions Liaquat was offered £200 to leave the premises immediately but refused. Again, Bedford said. “I don’t have to give reasons for sacking you. I’m the boss. I have the money and the power,” and then threatened to call the police.
When workers turned up for work the next day they were locked out. When they asked management through the office window the management merely sneered back, “no dogs allowed”.
“We are not animals”, said Liaquat Ali. “We must show that we have the power. If we don;t stand up and fight for our rights then we’ll have slave labour in Britain. White and black get together and fight to beat Tebbit’s law.
“We’re here to work – not to strike. But fight for a future or our future generation will ask, ‘why did you leave this mess for us’. Our fathers and grandfathers fought for a union. Support us today. We will support you tomorrow.”
The full-time official then read out messages of support from Rodney Bickerstaffe of NUPE and from local Labour Parties and trade unions.
Pat Wall, introduced to the meeting as the “MP in waiting” for Bradford North received a tremendous round of applause when he said that, “this struggle is not only about the workers at Aire Valley on £1.02 an hour, but also about the thousands of low-paid workers, mainly women and Asians, and about institutionalised racism inside our society.”
He stressed that the trade union movement had not done enough and that we must support the picket every week, with unions taking weeks for their particular union to turn out in support.
He called for mass mobilisation by the TUC to cut off all the supplies and services to this factory and said that as in the case of Grunwicks if gas, electricity, water and telephones were cut-off then the strike would be over in 48-hours. The alternative to such action was all the hours on the picket line, the misery that brought about the poverty of the workers.
The rally ended with a call that we must force our leaders to mobilise. Pat stressed that over the last six years the working class had been hammered, but that we shouldn’t be despondent, that we can still win, if we show a quarter as much grit as the twenty-one strikers who have been out for fourteen weeks.
 




DESPITE a “red-scare” campaign by the Liberal/SDP Alliance, Labour won five out of the six wards in Bradford North in the local council elections.
SDP/Liberal Alliance leaflets headed “Militant controls Bradford North Labour Party”, announced that “Militants from all over the country were summoned” into the various wards to work for the General Election to “help a candidate who supports Marx and Trotsky.” This only resulted in the Labour vote increasing by 3,700 while the SDP vote decreased by over 1,000.
In a general election this would mean that Labour would be returned with over 50% of the vote. The SDP are desperate and having no policies have resorted to smears. The Labour Party are confident that Pat Wall will increase the Labour vote in a general election and the red scares will rebound on the groups that use them.
 




THE ENGINEERING industry in Bradford district came to a standstill for one hour on 19 May, in support of 45 workers sacked by Hindles engineering company.
Hundreds of workers turned up to a solidarity rally at the factory gate.
Both Hindle and the Engineering Employers Federation, confident of victory, chose to make an example of this small group of workers in dispute over a pay claim, but the plan backfired.
Since 13 March, a constant picket has been maintained.
Ray Andrews, AUEW Divisional Secretary, explained to the rally:
“... this dispute has been deliberately and carefully planned, not just by Hindle but by the Engineering Employers Federation.
“Over the years we have made concessions to the bosses but now they’re trying to screw us into the ground. We can’t afford to lose.”
In the words of Henry Wilkinson, Regional Officer, “A district of this size can beat a company the size of Hindles.”
Pat Wall, Labour candidate, Bradford North, addressed the rally on behalf of Bradford Trades Council.
“This company should be called Swindles not Hindles. What we’re talking about here is not a group of striking militants but a small group of ordinary decent workers who went through the normal industrial procedure over a just pay claim. Because they dared to disagree with the dictates of the boss they’ve been flung on to the dole.
“The bosses are using the fact we have 30,000 unemployed in Bradford to intimidate and threaten workers. ‘Either accept our orders or you’re out, and we’ll give your jobs to someone else.’ This struggle is not just one for trade union rights but one against blackmail, not just an industrial struggle but also a political one.
“These dismissal notices were issued with the full backing of the Tory government thanks to Tebbit’s legislation. We must stand firm, we must win, you have my full support and that of the Trades Council.”
The rally ended with a suggestion by chairman Peter Walker that the workers shouldn’t dash off but wait to say “how do” to the scabs still at work!
 




WORKERS AT the Carter Gear Works, Bradford, part of the Renold
combine, walked out a week last Tuesday in protest at staff defying
overtime bans.
A claim was made for a £10 increase in May this year. Management
refused to offer any money and said instead that a new incentive
scheme was being proposed. This scheme would have meant cuts in wages
of up to 25% per week.
The overtime ban was imposed over the question of the wages, it
being decided to keep this low key, understanding that the main
battle would be against the new so-called incentive proposals.
Management gave an undertaking that the overtime would not be
breached over the weekend by staff doing the work of hourly paid
employees. However, on Saturday morning, one staff member came in and
was instructed to do some fitting work.
When the workers found out on Monday morning, management said that
it was a mistake, and would not happen again. However, a mass meeting
of the workers refused to believe the management, and a motion from
the shop floor for an immediate one-day walk out was carried
unanimously. It was decided to return to work on the following day,
and to use this action as a shot across the bows of the management,
but any further breaches of the overtime ban would have similar consequences.
 




WORKERS at Kraft Foods, Kirkby, intend to resist the company’s 930 planned redundancies by every means in their power.
Stewards representing all unions, thirteen in all, on the site have reported 100% backing from their members. They are refusing to talk to the company about redundancy terms and are mounting an opposition campaign on trade union and political fronts.
The Action Committee is determined firstly to discover the real reasons for the company decision. The great bulk of Kirkby production is for the UK market yet the company is planning to transfer production to Namur in Belgium (they had a trial production run on Dairylea, sold only in Britain there on 14 April) to be imported back into Britain.
Another thing to investigate will be the role of the company Acatos and Hutchinson, rumoured to have at least one Kraft director on their board. This company has recently bought three edible oil refineries, one of them from Kraft. All the unions are to play their part in investigating the background to the company’s strategy in Britain and internationally so the company’s arguments can be countered openly and politically.
The ruling Labour group in Knowsley and the Merseyside County Council are giving full support, as is Merseyside group of Labour MPs. The workers realise the support of fellow trade unionists will probably be a decisive factor and are making plans accordingly.
Messages of support to Dick Caton, union convenor Kraft Foods, Moorgate Road, Kirkby, Merseyside.
 







KEITH NAREY, Trade Union Liaison Officer for Bradford North Labour Party reports on three local battles.



*
HALIFAX HEALTH workers are in court again! A not guilty verdict on six pickets charged with obstruction during the health service dispute in Halifax last year has been reversed by the High Court in London.
These workers have been under pressure for a year, and are now to be sentenced by the same magistrates who earlier found them innocent!
The health workers are calling for a mass support picket on Tuesday 22 August at 9.30 am at the Main Magistrates Court, behind the Police Station in Harrison Road, Halifax.
 
HINDLES WORKERS and their wives remain defiant after twenty-two weeks on strike in pursuit of a pay claim and to halt redundancies.
Mass pickets take place twice a week, on Fridays at 3.30 p.m. and Wednesdays when the wives picket between 4 and 6 p4m.
The strikers now have a caravan parked outside the front gate – to show this reactionary employer they’re here to stay. The sacking of these workers is the first taste of Tebbit’s reactionary law in action. Yet the AUEW Executive has ordered its members not to break the law by picketing Hindle’s subsidiary a few yards away!
Under fear of losing official backing the men have to watch as jobs are brought in which keep Hindle going! One solution may be members of other unions doing the secondary picketing.
The strikers are preparing to lobby the annual conference of the TUC demanding support to beat Hindle and his Tory backers. It is hoped to take a coach full of pickets and wives to Blackpool to lobhy and leaflet for support.
If the union leaders showed a fraction of the courage and determination of these workers, this dispute would have been won months ago.
All support and donations should be sent to Hindles Gears Strike Fund, AUEW Offices, 2 Claremont, Bradford BD7 1BQ.
 
THE OCCUPATION and work-in is continuing (Militant 663) at Thornton View Psycho-geriatric Hospital in Bradford. All major health unions are now supporting it.
One elderly patient said “why do they want to move us? This is my home, these are my friends”.
The brutal closing 10% of Bradford’s geriatric care, is the answer the Tories have for people whose working life is over.
So much for Thatcher’s promise that “the health service is safe with us”!
Many of the people in Thornton View would not survive the disruption of closure and removal to a strange environment. 30,000 people have signed a petition against the closure.
Send messages of support and donations to the Occupation Committee, c/o Thornton View Hospital, Thornton View Road, Clayton, Bradford.
 




KEITH NAREY has tragically died aged 50. While Keith might not be
so well known to newer members of our party, he was certainly
unmissable to anyone around in the 1970s and 1980s.
He was a first-class public speaker. He had the ability to see
what was in an audience’s hearts and then the power to express it.
He had a razor sharp wit. Many a right-wing Labour councillor would
cross the road rather than be confronted with Keith’s tongue.
His political contribution lay in being one of the founders of
Militant [the Socialist Party’s predecessor] in the Bradford
area. His abilities at rallies and demonstrations meant that Militant
maintained a high public profile. Eventually our growing support led
to the election of Pat Wall as MP for Bradford North in 1987. Keith
had an important hand in this historic breakthrough.
Keith was a larger than life character. He was the organiser of
the first (and only) Yorkshire pudding eating competition in aid of
Militant’s fighting fund. On one occasion he took to wearing
a full North African Tuareg outfit around the pubs claiming that he
had swapped it for some Old Holborn rolling tobacco while on holiday
in Morocco. Whether his stories were true didn’t really matter –
the art was in the telling and listening.
He eventually took to writing plays, getting some staged in the
Bradford area. Keith was an important figure in the earlier years of
our party. What we have now is partly up to him. He will be badly
missed both by his family and his comrades.
 







Labour’s landslide victory at the general election was
tainted by the accidental death the following day of lifelong
activist Keith Narey. A long-time member of the far-left Militant
Tendency, he nevertheless had friends from across the political
spectrum. He was, in the end, an old-fashioned, tub-thumping
socialist, and his death marked the passing of a generation of
campaigners who fought tooth and nail to shape Britain’s
post-war politics. By Andy Beckett




The night in May after the general election, Keith Narey was so
happy he fell over a wall. It was just tall enough to catch him:
about knee height, smooth with new bricks, topped by a sharp red
ridge that ran its entire length beside the path to his front door.
He did not need much help in falling. He was thickly drunk –
thrilled to be drunk, in fact, his head roaring with beer and
after-hours whiskies and cheers to the Labour victory.
He tripped quickly. Though 50, Narey was not a heavy man; but as
the wall lurched towards him, and its ridge jabbed into his right
knee, his momentum and his big talker’s head and his beginning of a
belly cast him firmly forward. The grey paving rushed up from the
darkness.
Narey almost saved himself with his arms. As he fell, his right
shoulder glanced off the wall, and his knee was bruising, but the
rest of him thudded unscathed to the concrete. Except that he began
to vomit, his stomach rebelling at the jarring, and as he lay,
surprised and winded and suddenly unconscious, he breathed it in. He
began to die.
He was being watched: nearby, high on the side of his tower block,
a security camera perched. Bradford City Council had positioned it
there to stare protectively down at the estate’s tenants and their
visitors, and record them. Around 12.15 that night, the camera caught
Narey’s stagger and fall, and fed it back – a small, flailing
blur – to one of four screens in the security office. Each screen
was split seven ways, one grainy postcard for each camera on the
estate; a single security guard, marooned out of sight in another
tower block up the hill, watched them all.
About 25 minutes after Narey fell, the guard phoned the police. He
did not call an ambulance. Sixty-five minutes after that, a van of
officers arrived – they only came to this estate in numbers – and
quickly found Narey, beached behind the wall. The police’s
telephone operator had just speculated that he “had fallen asleep
under the stars”. But Narey had been dead for quite a while.
It seemed a parochial tragedy. “Man found dead after election
celebration,” as the Bradford Telegraph and Argus first
reported. It was a cautionary tale: or, at most, a dab of sourness in
the great, sweet stew of public happiness since the election. It
meant rather more to Narey’s family and friends, of course – and
their sadness was stiffened with anger, which seemed justified, at
the way he had been left to choke – yet all that was for the
inquest to come and, afterwards perhaps, for local recriminations
against the council and police. Men had died neglected on estates before.
Not many of them, however, have had a funeral like Keith Narey’s.
The crematorium chapel became so crammed that the crowd burst into
the room next door. In turn, that grew so squeezed that it spilled
eager mourners out into the cemetery. The whole city seemed in these
three places: as a jazz band parped away, and the literary agents
circled around Narey’s brother Brian, there stood Bradford’s Lord
Mayor and it’s Labour MPs, its besieged Conservative councillors
and entrenched union leaders, its keen new Liberal Democrats and City
Hall veterans, socialists still. The surprise was red in their faces:
that Narey was abruptly dead, but also for many of them, so opposed
for so long, in so many curt West Yorkshire ways, were all there together.
Narey was on benefits when he died. He lived alone. Yet after his
funeral, his commemoration echoed on: his ashes would be contested in
an annual cricket match; there would be a memorial stone near his
flat; a kind of shrine, with glass front and side lighting, in the
wall of his favourite pub. And this all began to spread beyond a
local matter. Narey’s death was mentioned on Radio 4’s Today
programme and on Radio 5 and at length in the London Evening
Standard, usually less than concerned with events in the Pennines.
Each of these tributes recorded one particular thing about Keith
Narey: he had been a member of the extreme left Militant Tendency. In
fact, he had been rather more than that. During the late Seventies
and throughout the Eighties, Bradford, after Liverpool, was
Militant’s second city. And Narey was the movements’s heart and
lungs there: organising, energising, fundraising and frightening
councillors, securing the election of a Militant MP. Twice he
battered his way past the Labour establishment to be nominated for
office in City Hall; twice he was blocked by the party’s National
Executive Committee (NEC). Neil Kinnock personally had him investigated.
Yet this alone cannot explain Narey’s funeral, with its rude
fondness for every political quarter, or its wider aftermath. Nor, in
its broadest context, his death: why was this Militant, unrepentant
and scornful of New Labour, so thrilled at the final victory of his
party enemies? The answers are in his life, and in the grand ruin of
a city he lived it in.
Bradford, in its broken saucer of hills, was where the Independent
Labour Party (ILP) was founded in 1893. The history of this gusty
place since then is, in its way, the history of British socialism. In
the 1890s, Bradford was already the quintessential Victorian
industrial city: close-packed, tumbling with terraces, brutal in its
economics. And for the next 80 years, as the thick-walled textile
mills clanked away, their chimneys like fortress towers on the high
ground, the ILP – and the unions and the Labour Party it helped to
lead to – strove to alleviate that brutality.
Then, in the Seventies and Eighties, the mills began to empty and
quieten. Dead land opened up in the city centre with buddleia growing
instead of jobs; and Bradford’s socialists and self-helpers and
self-appointed saviours had to struggle all the harder. In the
litter-strewn city, with its racial tensions and its Yorkshire Ripper
and its terrible fire at its ancient football stadium – the city
taken, this time, as Britain’s emblem of fraught, post-industrial
decline – Keith Narey was the noisiest activist, the most
controversial, the most liked.
At his funeral, some sensed more than his passing. A Labour Party
far to the right of Neil Kinnock’s was in government now.
Socialism, like Militant, seemed to be slipping back, ever faster,
into distant history. But Narey, for all the dramas of his political
career, for all his dogmatic beliefs, did not live only to defend and
symbolise a fading faith. He joined Militant in his late 20s, and
effectively left it seven years before his death. These early and
late parts of his life were as different from street-corner
Trotskyism as it is possible to imagine. The West-Yorkshire
rabble-rouser had already been, variously, a west-London bohemian, a
would-be Beatnik and a world-girdling hippie traveller. After
Militant, he wrote plays and fought causes without a banner in sight.
Narey’s funeral guests knew him only in fragments.
Keith Anthony Narey was born in Bradford in January 1947. His
family were Catholics from Sligo in the west of Ireland, who had come
to Yorkshire to sweat in the mills at the end of the 19th century.
Narey’s father was a monumental mason, his mother swept factory
floors. They lived on the Canterbury Estate, south of the centre of
Bradford, in a maze of council brick. When residents went away on
holiday, they took their gas meters with them for safe-keeping.
Narey was one of five children. His father read Jack London, and
remembered the Thirties as an era of great socialist struggle. Narey
absorbed these enthusiasms – not so much for their content as for
the wider horizons of thought and deed they suggested. He studied
hard enough at school to pass the 11-plus, and became a rare
Canterbury boy at the local grammar. Rarer still, he was reading Jack Kerouac.
In the summer of 1963, aged 16, Narey disappeared to Yugoslavia.
For the next three months, he picked through the rubble of the Skopje
earthquake as a relief worker. When he came back to West Yorkshire,
he had a purpose – to earn the money to get away again. This was a
common enough instinct in the Narey family: “We’re always off to
the next port of call,” says Brian Narey, Keith’s elder brother.
And Brian, who was eight years older but close to Keith in more than
appearance – both were thin and almost tall, with thick bearskins
of hair – already personified the price of staying put. He was
working in the mills.
Keith chose a different routine. For the first few months of the
year, he took jobs in shops and offices in Bradford. “He wasn’t
right fond of hard manual graft,” says Brian. In the summer, Keith
and Brian shipped off to the Isle of Man to make cocktails in hotel
bars. And at the end of August, when Brian went back to the mill,
Keith went to Kathmandu and India. Narey was intoxicated, appalled
and drawn back to the subcontinent, and in 1965 he applied for
Voluntary Service Overseas. He spent the year in Bihar, north-east
India, teaching children history and, more convincingly, football. At
the end, he was given a pound of cannabis. Narey carried it through Gatwick.
At 20, Keith moved with Brian to London. By now, he had grown into
someone rather different. “We’d go to Petticoat Lane, and he’d
wear a blue mac, blue denim shirt and blue knitted tie,” says
Brian. “I’d say, ‘Why’s everyone calling you guv?’ Then the
penny dropped: they thought he was the law.”
It was 1967, and London seemed an infinite stage for the likes of
Narey. The two brothers went to see Mannfred Mann and the Rolling
Stones; they lived in Notting Hill with the head of the British
Witches as their landlord (“Keith tried that stuff out,” says
Brian); and Keith , on his own this time, brassed his way into a
certain pub called The Blind Beggar. The Kray’s milieu
didn’t bother him: “The challenge,” says Brian, “was to go
somewhere he wasn’t known and strike up a conversation.” And
Keith Narey could do that. His voice seemed flat Bradford at first,
but it had a cheeky curl to its “r”s. Deadpan, Narey could say
things directly that others didn’t dare; after a few drinks – and
he rarely bought them – he could take over the bar with his
put-downs. He stayed in London for more than a year.
By the end of the Sixties, Narey knew how to get almost anywhere.
He could be forward in French, Spanish, German and Italian. He knew
his Greek poetry and the work of Allen Ginsberg. He decided he would
be a writer. His bohemian American heroes were the obvious models,
writing what they had seen and lived, and seeing and living with that
end in mind. In 1972, he flew to Calcutta to become a beggar. On good
days, he earned enough for a bowl of rice. Narey lasted into 1973
among the lepers and the beds in boxes, then developed jaundice and
yellow fever. He had no money, and had lost his passport; the Indian
Government had to fly him home. Convalescing in Bradford, Narey had
the material he wanted, and he was already writing – vivid,
untutored unspoolings of his travels and speculations – but the
experience of begging had stung him. Narey joined a union.
He was working as a council keeper in Lister Park, the city’s
stately triangle of Victorian planting that sloped down from the
great, grand mill complex of the same name. In 1973, the council
decided to “rationalise” its parks workforce. A union meeting was
called at Bradford’s central library.
“I saw him on the back of a lorry, heading down,” remembers
Allan Brack, then a fellow union member. At the meeting, Narey spoke,
less than clearly, in a very loud voice. That night, Brack took him
to a meeting of the Bradford West Labour Party and signed him up.
Narey joined the local trades council too, but here a realisation
rapidly occurred to him about Bradford’s ruling Labour
establishment. It was dominated by cautious unions such as the
transport workers’ and, despite the decades of post-war Asian
immigration to the city, overwhelmingly white. Narey’s excited
notion of socialism was not to be satisfied here.
There was, however, another Left at work in the city. Allan Brack
was a member of Militant. The group had started as a Trotskyist
micro-faction in 1964; by the early Seventies, Militant’s
membership was still in the hundreds. But it had momentum: as Edward
Heath’s government wobbled, and picket lines seemed to wrap the
country, Militant’s apocalyptic predictions about workers battling
bosses grew persuasive. In 1974, a new, more confident strategy was
unfurled from headquarters in London: “We must dig roots in the
wards and constituencies ... Many are still shells dominated by
politically dead old men and women.” Bradford looked a good target.
Militant’s main tactic was infiltration, or “entryism”:
members were to join Labour Party organisations and take unofficial
control of them. The political life Narey had chosen was hard – a
ceaseless round of canvassing and weekend conferences and
paper-selling on raw Pennine afternoons – and made doubly so by the
need to live for two masters, officially for the Labour Party and,
more surreptitiously, for his true cause.
Yet Narey was good at it. On voters’ doorsteps, he was easy and
natural, just striking up another conversation with a stranger.
Selling papers was the same: every Saturday morning, at the bottom of
Bradford’s main shopping street, lightening his bundle by asides
and nerveless button-holing. People soon knew his anorak.
 
Narey made more eccentric contributions too. He organised a
Yorkshire pudding-eating contest to raise money. “He was unusual in
Militant circles,” says Tim Moon, now a DJ on Bradford’s
community radio station, then a Militant too. “The real world
didn’t touch a lot of those people, but Keith wasn’t always in
meetings.” Quite a lot of the time, in fact, Narey was in the pub.
He wasn’t a big drinker – three pints usually carried the evening
– but he knew his ales. He became the first Bradford chairman of
the Campaign For Real Ale (Camra), using good beer as a battering ram
against the local brewers. This was more than a happy convergence of
his appetites and politics, however. At Camra meetings, he had to
persuade and befriend members who were mainstream Labour men,
Liberals, Conservatives, even. Despite his new, dogmatic politics,
Narey kept his pragmatist’s twinkle; it would serve him beyond Militant.
In Bradford in 1974, though, confrontation was more their norm.
The issue Militant hoped to mobilise around was race. Immigrants had
been arriving in the city for a century – Irish, Poles and Germans
– but many of Bradford’s white residents remained far from
reconciled to incomers of more obviously different skin tones and
customs. On the steep streets of the Asian inner city, the National
Front was at work. Militant saw this as an outrage, and an
opportunity to win Asian allies. Narey and Allan Brack and the
president of the trades council, another Militant called Pat Wall,
attended an anti-racism conference in Birmingham, organised by the
TUC. The National Front was planning to march in Bradford; Narey and
his colleagues were instructed to march against them.
In Birmingham, the Bradford Militants had met a young Indian
communist called Raghvir Virdee. He had settled in Bradford, and been
disappointed by the Labour Party’s racial make-up. Narey, however,
impressed him: “He was a natural commander.” Virdee joined
Militant. On the day of the march, he walked alongside his new
comrades, and trades unionists, and families with pushchairs, along
Manningham Lane, the wide and straight main road that rises through
the middle of Asian Bradford. Narey strode along, carrying an ancient
union banner brought out for the occasion. The National Front’s
supporters boiled alongside. As the march was passing the trades
council building, the National Front attacked him.
Narey was beaten with knotted tree branches. Brack was assaulted
too, the banner thrown on the road, urinated on and burnt. Gary
Armitage, another Militant member on the march, saw it happen: “All
Keith said was, ‘The problem is the banner is battered.’”
Narey, and Bradford Militant, had made their public statement. In
the north of the city in particular, recruiting strengthened. But
Narey was still a park keeper; he was tired of the rest of his life.
In 1975, he decided to go to university. That year, Bradford
University was starting a new course, the first in the country, in
peace studies. A hundred students would examine economics and
politics and internationals relations, not in the traditional way,
but as areas of struggle for ordinary people. The students could
range about and read almost what they wanted. Narey could not have
invented a better degree himself.
“You had the sense of a person who was genuinely trying to keep
his mind open,” says Tom Woodhouse, a senior peace studies lecturer
at Bradford, who taught Narey from 1975 to 1978. The new department,
although politically neutral, was noisy with internal debates. Narey
was “always at the forefront of things ... very good on his feet.”
His thesis, which came with less facility, was about the birth of the
Labour Party in Bradford’s Victorian textile trade. Narey was
learning his own family’s history.
At the same time, he was trying to change it. The Monday before he
graduated, Keith was interviewed on Panorama as a major
Militant activist. The same television presenter welcomed Narey
onstage for his graduation. Narey made a weak joke of it, but
Militant was about to absorb him much further. In 1978, he became a
paid-up Militant “full-timer”.
As the Callaghan government disintegrated, Militant members were
winning council seats in Labour colours. In West Yorkshire, Pat Wall
and Gary Armitage were both elected. They gave Narey direct points of
influence: “He’d come to me,” says Armitage, “and say,
‘Number 39 down the street needs their trees cutting. I’ve
guaranteed that you’ll see to it.’” But Narey and his
colleagues wanted a Bradford Militant MP. In 1981, the Bradford North
Labour Party, now busy with Militant members, dropped the
constituency’s MP, a right-wing Labour man called Ben Ford, in
favour of Pat Wall as its candidate at the next general election.
Narey began running Wall’s campaign.
Like Narey, Wall was a fierce speaker, fond of jazz and a pint.
Unlike Narey, he had been in Militant from the beginning. Narey
admired him, worked endless hours for him, and regularly visited the
Wall family home. Then, in 1982, Narey’s boss became infamous. The
Sunday Times secretly taped Wall debating against the
Socialist Workers’ Party (SWP); at one point, he laid out what a
Militant government might mean: “The abolition of the monarchy, the
House of Lords, the sacking of the generals, the admirals, the air
marshal, the senior civil servants ... and people of that character
... We [Militant] will face bloodshed. We will face the possibility
of civil war ...”
No matter that Wall had been warning of, not welcoming, national
unrest; soon Wall and Narey were being filmed as they ate their
cornflakes. And their notoriety, while good for national publicity,
was less appealing to Bradford’s more conservative Labour voters.
For the 1983 general election, Ben Ford put himself forward as an
Independent Labour candidate and drew away 4,000 votes. Wall lost to
the Conservatives by 1,600.
Militant’s enemies could celebrate: the faction and its
fanatics, it could be imagined, would retreat back into their rooms
in pub, their lonely paper-selling, their back-burner domestic lives.
Narey, at 36, was still sharing a messy house with a bunch of
students. But order at home, like easy political victories, had never
been his priority or expectation. Narey lived for different rewards.
They came most easily, perhaps, in the Jacob’s Well, a
small, whitewashed pub marooned between the Leeds Road and a
roundabout. On the outside, it was just an old inn with a few picnic
tables, greying steadily. Yet inside, in the gloom, was all the
city’s political life. Saturday afternoon was a good time, after
the Militants had sold all their papers, or their fingers and toes
had grown too cold, and they had come in for a drink and a row with
the SWP. Evenings during the week were good too: City Hall was just
across the road, spiked with Victorian spires and perennial
intrigues, and councillors got thirsty. The Jacob’s Well had
good beer, board games and dark panelling. Narey, in his own mind at
least, was the ruler of this low-ceilinged kingdom. And, over time –
time when, outside the Jacob’s Well, Militant was fighting
the sourest battles – Narey’s bar quirks had a serious bearing on
his reputation. Here was the Trotskyist, the sectarian, who would
have a drink with anyone. “Keith was never part of the macho
Militant culture,” says Jeanette Sunderland, a Liberal Democrat
councillor. As Narey put it, “You don’t allow political
differences to interfere in your relations with people. We’re all
human, we eat, we bleed.”
When Narey needed to eat, he would go round to Raghvir Virdee’s.
“He would knock any time,” says Virdee, “And say: ‘Raghvir!
What have you got in the fridge?’ My wife used to cook for him ...
He was part of the family.” Women liked Narey, too: invited first
to parties, propping up someone’s fireplace with a beer, eyes
flocking around beneath his fringe. But nothing lasting seemed to
come of it; long term, Narey appeared attached only to the struggle.
Beyond Bradford, Militant had done well in the 1983 elections. It
gained its first two MPs, Dave Nellist and Terry Fields, when most of
the country was moving to the right. Both men retained their
popularity; in the mid-Eighties, with the Labour Party becalmed in
the polls despite its nascent “modernisation”, a return to
fundamentalist socialism had its appeal. In Bradford, as in most
cities, the beggars were living in boxes now, just as they had in
Narey’s Calcutta. Pat Wall put himself forward for Bradford North
again. There was only one problem: at party headquarters in London,
they had noticed what Militant was up to.
 
By 1986, the Labour leadership’s view of Militant had darkened:
the irrelevancy of the Seventies and the irritant of the early
Eighties had become the irreconcilable enemy within. In Liverpool,
Derek Hatton led a council in open conflict with Neil Kinnock. In
Bradford, at this point, the reprimands from headquarters were milder
– Liverpool was enough to deal with – but they were growing. In
the spring, the NEC halted Wall’s candidacy and examined his
selection. Wall survived. With Narey commanding his Militant cadre
again, Wall won at the 1987 election by almost the same margin that
he had lost by in 1983.
But Wall was not the NEC’s real target. To secure its approval,
he had stopped appearing on Militant platforms or writing for its
newspaper; once elected, he joined Labour’s respectable Left. The
unrepentant Narey made a better target. In August 1987, a regional
party inquiry began, then a national investigation. In December, it
reported: Militant, it claimed, had set up its own parallel party
apparatus in Bradford North, complete with a separate headquarters.
The Bradford North Labour Party was suspended.
Narey was thrilled at the prospect of battle. In January 1988, as
the NEC met to consider his expulsion from the party, Narey decided
to stand for the council. Challenging the city’s chairman of
education, John Ryan, he won selection by a single vote. Ryan accused
Militant of intimidating local members and, almost immediately, the
NEC declared “procedural irregularities”; Narey’s candidacy was
vetoed. He picked another ward and stood again. In March, he was once
more, again by a single vote against a council grandee, this time
Marilyn Beeley, the wife of the city’s Labour leader.
To Labour’s national hierarchy, Narey at his apogee was beyond
infuriating. His disloyal antics with the “Bradford North Seven”,
as the Militants were excited to be known, threatened the loss of the
council. Meanwhile, Narey gave great, mocking interviews: “if Neil
Kinnock and Roy Hattersley have got a strategy for achieving
socialism,” he would say, “they are keeping it bloody quiet.”
Even the allegations of Militant bullying would not stick to him:
“Violence is an admission of failure,” Narey would reply without a blink.
Then, quite quickly, it was all over. By 22 votes to four, the NEC
barred him from standing for the council. Narey threatened a High
Court challenge; it never came. In May 1988, the Conservatives took
control of Bradford on the mayor’s casting vote. And in September
1989, barely two years since his boss’s triumph, Narey was expelled
from the Labour Party. He had been waiting for it: he had booked a
bar to mark the occasion. That night, Narey held court attached to a
plastic ball and chain. But his life’s main channel had been
blocked. A year later, the blockage became permanent: Pat Wall died,
aged 57. “It put the light out of Keith’s life,” says Brian Narey.
This time, Narey did retreat. During his selection struggles, he
had already moved away from the middle of Bradford, to an isolated
northern suburb called Idle. Here, on the far slope of a tall hill,
facing away from City Hall and towards the forest-green depths of the
Aire Valley, he had set up a quieter kingdom. Narey had his own flat
now, with two bedrooms, on the fifth floor of a beige brick tower
block at the centre of the Thorpe Edge estate. He had made the second
bedroom a study and filled it with books: Marx and Trotsky, of
course, but a Thomas Hardy collection too, and Oscar Wilde and Paul
Theroux, and C.P. Cafavy, the Alexandrian Greek poet. Then there was
the kitchen, Narey kept it clean, unusually for him, and cooked
pheasant in brandy, and bacon and eggs with the same knowingness. He
marinaded, he drank port, he listened to his folk records – and not
always alone: Brian came round for supper, and there was Kirsty
MacLean. Narey had had his girlfriends, but Kirsty was allowed to
move into his dusty lair. She stayed.
Narey did not miss the city too much. He had the moors above
Thorpe Edge and the bluebell woods below, and would walk off into
them for hours in his leather jacket and unsuitable shoes. He would
go to Scotland to sight a rare bird. And he had a new pub.
The Brewery Tap was small, dark and careful with its ales.
Narey began working behind the bar three evenings a week. Sunday
nights drew him too: his quiz team, Academic Ali, always won –
Narey’s reading and real-world wanderings overwhelmed a pub full of
rugby league fans. And on summer afternoons, there was the cricket.
The Brewery Tap played Camra, and Narey umpired.
Yet he was barely 40; he couldn’t just retire with his
anecdotes. From the toppling paper stacks in his flat, he pulled out
his old manuscripts. During 1990, he wrote a play. Union Man
was not Chekhov; it was autobiography and family history, tersely
bolted together, presented as the story of a politicised and
victimised textile worker called Alan McCarthy. But Narey wanted it
performed. A professional company took up the play, then collapsed
for lack of cash, so in 1991 he set up his own, the Phoenix
Theatre Group. Narey got his friends to stand in for actors. Then
he turned director.
It worked. Narey’s cast, in truth, had no more need to act than
he had to make things up: he and they – old Militant comrades, his
brother Brian, local trades unionists – shared the same language
and world-view. Surprisingly, other people wanted to hear it. During
1991 and 1992, three Narey plays were put on at Bradford University’s
Theatre in the Mill. “They brought a totally new audience,”
says Tony Liddington, who was running it. “The local white working
class.” Narey’s plays began to be booked at working men’s
clubs. Some seats filled up with his former enemies. Labour and
Conservative councillors came, and moderate unions took block bookings.
Partly, they were relieved to see Narey busy in a different arena;
but all these no-politics drinks in the Jacob’s Well were
paying off as well. Not that Narey let on that he knew; his plays
were partisan to a fault, spiced with scorn for feeble unions,
councillors in the pockets of businessmen, compromised “moderates”.
His characters were either bosses, plotting and paring back wages, or
workers, gruffly ecstatic at the power of collective action.
If there was an element of wish-fulfilment about all this – The
Promised Land, for example, featured Neil Kinnock losing his seat
in a Militant landslide – there was also a deepening tint of
nostalgia. In 1993, Narey finished A Party That Will, a play
about the foundation of the ILP. It dramatised the Manningham Mill
strike of 1891 and its escalation, in Bradford and then beyond, into
a demand for a political party to challenge capitalism. Narey himself
played Keir Hardie, one of the ILP’s co-founders. The play was
potently done, fast and short and clear in its exposition of the
reasons for socialism. Like Narey, it switched engagingly from fond
and earthy banter to an informal didacticism: you could learn how to
strike by watching it.
Yet there was a sadness about the play, too, a sense that the
contours of an old optimistic struggle were being lovingly gazed over
from a less hopeful age. “To a certain extent, it was a world we
had lost,” says Kevin Wilson, then a Militant, who played one of
the strikers’ leaders, “where everybody had a job, had
solidarity, had the possibility of progress.” By 1993, Lister’s
Mill in Manningham, the towering Italianate backdrop for so much of
Narey’s politics, was a weed-colonised shell.
Militant had emptied of potency, too. By concentrating on
particular places rather than a more general infiltration, it had
made itself vulnerable to city-by-city suppression. Meanwhile, its
brazen occupation of Bradford and Liverpool, in particular, had
angered Kinnock into action. Narey’s removal from the party was
just one, rather public expulsion in a thorough campaign. By the
mid-Nineties, Militant’s hold on Bradford had shrunk to memories
and a few hundred defiant members, marooned on the estates – the
Canterbury in particular.
Narey settled for a more muted and diffuse struggle. He would
campaign culturally: remember and celebrate the workers’ cause
rather than seek to impose it on the political system. Some of his
Militant comrades had made the same decision. Allan Brack helped set
up the Bradford Festival, and sought to unite the city by marquees
instead of marches. Tim Moon began working at Bradford Community Broadcasting.
In 1995, these old colleagues gave Narey his next platform. As a
local literary figure of steadily rippling reputation, he had been
interviewed a couple of times on BCB; now, in the autumn, he joined
the station as an unpaid volunteer and, soon, was a presenter. BCB
was hardly the big time – broadcasting to a few thousand people in
Bradford and a scatter of villages – but Narey found radio quite
bewitching. Here was a chance to charm and teach on a large scale.
He quickly settled in among the old posters and coffee cups. At
first, he just had five minutes on a show called The Write Stuff,
to chat about play-writing, or literature in general, or growl out a
poem or two of his. Soon, “the biggest problem was getting him to
shut up again”, says Lucy Robbins, who presented the programme with
him.
Narey was given another show, Under The Clock, a political
phone-in. From the small, dark studio at the back of BCB, spectacles
perched near the end of his nose, he co-hosted with abrasive zest.
Councillors and community leaders were invited on, and questioned
until they gave clear answers. Narey’s background spiced the
encounters, but it did not overpower them – an unyielding sharpness
towards official opinion seemed to satisfy him. When, in 1995,
several hundred young Asians rioted through Manningham after
perceiving police harassment, Narey was quick to link the words
“Bradford” and “racist”.
Yet for all the surprised admiration his stances drew – with
Militant no longer a threat, his intransigence began to look like
integrity – he was saying rather than doing. Meanwhile, the city’s
struggles were all around. Narey’s own estate, Thorpe Edge,
exemplified the worst of them: heroin addiction, condemned housing,
whole crumbling concrete streets without work, young men indoors all
day with their droning televisions. Once, the tower blocks had had
their own High Rise Tenants’ Association, but it had dissolved
away. Narey saw the opportunity: in 1995, he gathered the tenants
together and took them to a council meeting. “He’d say, ‘I want
them to come forward’,” remembers Gary Armitage. “’The
buggers are sitting on their arses.’” Narey quickly began a
general campaign for refurbishment: the blocks got new radiators, an
intercom system, a new coat of paint that wouldn’t take graffiti.
They even got closed-circuit TV cameras.
For the first time, perhaps, Narey’s politics had found a
simple, symbol-free aim: the tangible transformation of ordinary
lives. Some of his projects were small and specific – he founded
the Friends of Haigh Beck to clean up a beech-lined stream that ran
through the estate and that had become a ravine choked with rubbish;
others were grand and city-wide – he joined a committee bidding for
money for all Bradford’s estates from the Government’s Single
Regeneration Budget.
Nevertheless, by the start of this year, Narey had settled into a
middle age of routines and niggling ambitions. “A lot of people saw
Keith in the pub, and they thought, ‘Keith’s in the pub again,’”
says Brack. “But I always saw him as coming into town with a
mission: to drop off some papers, go to a union office, go to the
library to research local labour history – and then be in the pub
looking like he’d been there all day.”
Narey was dreaming of television. BBC2 had shown an interest in
Union Man. Then there was a new play, The Day They Shot
Martin Offiah, about an assassination plot by the National Front
against the rugby league player. And an autobiography, Rainy Day
City, full of India and remembered sex and rushes of
Kerouac-style rumination. Narey wanted to expand beyond populist,
barely fictional dramas. Not everyone saw this as wise: “You
could’ve wall-papered his flat with rejection slips,” says Brian.
When Allen Ginsberg died in April, Narey was moved to make a
special broadcast on BCB. It was his best: carefully weighted and
slow, his thick vowels delicately wrapping the dramas of the poet’s
life – his “mad chase across America”, his “smashing into
pieces” of conservative icons, his “leading role in the peace
movement”. As Narey’s voice steadily rose, it was not hard to
hear the words as autobiography. At the end, he declared it so: “With
the death of Allen Ginsberg, I suppose a part of me dies as well.
Certainly that part of my footloose, adverturesome youth.”
Kirsty McLean had moved out. “She said he was a very mucky
person,” says Raghvir Virdee. But Narey kept talking about her,
even as he started going to singles’ nights. He wanted a wife, and
children. His only paid work was in the pub. Yet Narey was not all
melancholy. For one things, the weeks were melting away towards
election day. Narey liked to bash on about “Tory Blair”, but he
was thrilled to see the Conservatives imploding. Brian remembers: “He
said to me before the election, ‘I can’t wait for Blair to be in
power ... then I can attack him!’”
 
On election night he worked at the Brewery Tap as usual. It
closed noisy and late. The next day was giddier still. In the
Pennington Midland Hotel in the city centre, the jazz night, a
favourite of Narey’s, was given over to victory marches. He stayed
until the last bus, swallowing down his bitter like champagne. Then
it was on to the Brewery Tap. Harry Parkin, one of Narey’s activist
allies on Thorpe Edge, saw him walking from the bus stop: “He was
overjoyed ... I was off to the British Legion, and he said, ‘Aren’t
you coming for a drink?’ I said, ‘No, I’m going to sell raffle
tickets.’ He said, ‘I’m going to celebrate.’”
There were two inches of whisky left in the bottle when Narey left
the Brewery Tap, just before midnight. He lurched towards home
by his usual route: across the road that bordered Thorpe Edge, along
the path through the trees and past his tower block’s garages. The
wall running up to his front door, in this light, was the same colour
as the rest of the building. Narey wasn’t feeling careful.
Years before, when their father was dying of cancer, Keith and
Brian had agreed to help each other avoid the same fate. “If either
of us ended up like that,” says Brian, “The other would sneak in
a Lucozade bottle of whisky and 200 aspirins.”
Actually, though, he died rapidly. His lungs were fatally flooded,
most likely, within three or four minutes of his fall. This
information was not well received at the inquest. Brian Narey stood
up from his seat for much of the proceedings, the ceiling tiles of
the coroner’s court low over his fury of red hair. He blurted
despairing questions. Why had the security guard called the police so
late? Why hadn’t the security cameras, as it turned out, recorded
what it saw? Why hadn’t he gone to help?
The answers were saddening and routine as the beige courtroom
walls. Security guards were not permitted to leave their posts: they
might be attacked, or deliberately distracted. An ambulance had not
been called because drunks had abused ambulancemen. The police had
not arrived for an hour because they had been dealing with an armed
robbery, and an intruder on someone’s premises, and a sprawl of
drunk drivers, and a scatter of “domestics”. The kinder city that
Keith Narey had lived to create seemed to recede, palpably, as the
witnesses mumbled on. The council couldn’t even maintain the
security cameras he had lobbied for.
For his verdict, the coroner said a few stern sentences about a
lack of “good Samaritans” and “a reflection on our society”,
and concluded that “Mr Narey was the author of his own downfall”.
Brian Narey walked rigid from the court, promising “further action”.
Brian is 58, and still works in a mill warehouse. He lives in a
box of a council house, with broken bottle glass on the pavement
outside. There are big gaps in his neighbours’ garden fences, only
tabloids are on sale behind the heavy shutters of his estate’s one
shop. In a sense, his brother’s life was a series of labours to
escape all this. More generously, it was about aiding others to do
the same. In both tasks, it can be argued, he failed. Militant
fizzled, Haigh Beck still fills with litter, Narey met with a prosaic
and neglected end.
Yet his worth can be felt, perhaps, in the changes to those once
around him. Brian talks about Kerouac now, and seems a little
reluctant to distribute Keith’s book collection. To relax at
weekends, he tries an Indian remedy his brother taught him. The
Phoenix Theatre Group has renamed itself the Keith Narey
Players and has just put on a performance of A Party That Will
at the Alhambra. The profits are to be spent on a Keith Narey
playwrighting scholarship.
Raghvir Virdee, in the meantime, has gone from ethnic agitator to
Bradford city councillor. He has a semi with coriander waving behind,
and a photograph on his mantelpiece, of white and brown Bradford
faces holding a banner reading “Labour Conquers All”. These days,
the city he helps govern seems a little cleaner, more bustling, more
hopeful. Keith Narey, Virdee says, was “a very practical and
romantic socialist”.
Narey also left an excuse for a cricket match. The first one, in
mid-May, was rained off. It was attempted again, a month later, on a
cool Pennine day of racing clouds and lowering grey. Water had to be
brushed off the wicket. Then someone said a few gruff words over the
wind about “our Keith”. A buttery sun slid out, and stayed for an
innings. And the Brewery Tap, who always lost against Camra,
clunked the winning run as the first fat drops hit the wicket.
 




Conference meets at a time when Thatcher’s reactionary Tory
government is threatening the right to picket, the right to a closed
shop, and for some workers even the right to strike.
The recent case involving the Dyers and Bleachers and Joe Thompson
has been used by the Tories and their friends in the press as an
example of the evils of trade unionism and particularly the closed shop.
The silence of the union leadership, who passed responsibility to
the TUC, has only given encouragement to the Tory MPs who are backing Thompson.
The membership have a right to a clear explanation. The
decision to restore Thompson’s union card goes against the decision
of the conference in 1976 not to lift the blacking of Denby’s.
The executive have a clear duty to carry out conference
decisions, not refer them to other bodies for action.
The Dyers and Bleachers have one of the longest and proudest
democratic traditions of trade unions anywhere.
It was they who won the fight for the nine-hour day in Bradford
nearly one hundred years ago, as well as securing a minimum wage and
establishing the practice of union control over the employment of new labour.
All the improvements in conditions, however, do not compensate for
the scandalously low wage levels in the industry or the long hours of
overtime and anti-social shifts.
In unison with the rest of the labour and trade union movement,
the union will have to fight to defend the gains of the past, and to
challenge the threatened redundancies.
The incoming General Secretary, Bill Maddocks, is regarded as a
militant trade unionist and socialist.
If we are to be successful in the coming struggles with the
employers, backed by the Tory government, the entire membership will
need to rally around a fighting leadership.
 




The Bradford Telegraph and Argus reported last November that one Joseph Thompson had been sacked from his job as a dyeworker in Yeadon, near Bradford – all because he had ‘disobeyed a union rule 14 years ago.’
The National Union of Dyers, Bleachers and Textile workers had discovered that Mr Thompson had worked at “a local dyeworks blacked by the union”, for a couple of months after leaving school when 16.
The union’s officials confiscated his union card and because the firm, Naylor and Jennings, was a closed shop, they had to sack Mr Thompson.
Mr Thompson is quoted as saying:
“I don’t know whose fault this is, but I am left with no job just before Christmas and a wife and three children to support.”
The report insinuated that here was another poor innocent victim of high-handed bureaucratic abuse of union power, and was taken up by television, radio and several Tory MPs.
The union refused to comment, adding to the impression that here was an unanswerable example of faceless bureaucracy unaccountable to no-one, over-reacting to a trivial breach of the rules.
These distortions become clearer, however, when the background was investigated.
The firm that Mr Thompson worked for, “briefly as a fill-in job”, turns out to be William Denby & Son of Basildon, near Bradford.
It was here in 1963 that a dispute began which was to develop into Britain’s longest running strike at the time, lasting 14 months.
The dispute arose on the 30 October 1963 when Dyers and Bleachers members walked out in protest at a member of management breaking a working agreement by operating a machine during the lunch-break.
Everyone who walked out was summarily dismissed. After talks broke down – because Denby refused to take back certain men he regarded as ‘troublemakers’ – the strike was made official on the 2 November.
Twenty-four hour picketing was maintained, but with the recruitment of scab labour under police protection Denby’s was able to maintain production. As both sides dug in, feelings ran high in the locality, with neighbours, friends and families being split over the issue.
 
Boycott
The more advanced workers realised Denby was out to smash the union. The less conscious layers, influenced by the press and the media, saw Denby as the underdog taking on the might of the union.
The former view was vindicated when Denby’s circulated a letter offering re-employment at the same rates of pay providing the employee agree not to join the union.
This led to the union in March 1964, declaring Denby’s ‘black’ and appealing for a boycott of his products. Local textile workers responded in a tremendous show of solidarity.
But the owners also showed their class loyalties and supported Denby both financially and by accepting his products and putting their labels on them.
The struggle continued with Denby’s demanding an open shop, and the union demanding a return to the status quo.
Denby’s compromise of partial reinstatement was rejected out of hand by the men at one of their weekly meetings.
The men faced public hostility, police intimidation and insults from the scabs.
One picket described how on Fridays the scabs drive in cars and vans through the lines, escorted by police, and toss at the dejected pickets wage packets with their earnings total written on the outside and halfpennies and abusive letters inside.
The dispute dragged on towards the pickets’ second Christmas on the line: the second time their kids had no toys, the second time there were no festivities or relief from the poverty and deprivation of the breadline the workers had to endure in fighting for their principles, their rights and their survival.
The tremendous pressures of 14 months on strike had led to the break-up of marriages, physical and mental illnesses, and a bitterness which is still present today in the area.
This was shown at the 1976 conference of the Dyers and Bleachers union, when a motion calling for the lifting of the ban on anyone who had either crossed the picket line or worked at Denby’s since the dispute being members of the union was overwhelmingly defeated.
More recently, in 1978, a man took up a management job with another Yeadon firm, Scott and Rhodes, and when the members found out he was an ex-Denby man they threatened strike action rather than work with him, forcing management to pay him up and give him his cards.
Why wasn’t this reported in the press in terms of shocked indignation? The man was not a union member, so the union leadership could not be blamed.
But more important, at that time there was still a chance of the union leaders persuading their members to agree to a 5% limit on wage claims, especially the more ‘moderate’ unions like the Dyers’ and Bleachers’.
However, with the massive rejection of wage restraint by the working class the gloves are off. Now as bitter disputes with the organised labour movement loom there is a need to discredit the leadership of the movement and divide and weaken it, thereby ensuring defeat.
Hence the distortions about Joe Thompson’s “disobeying of a union rule 14 years ago” and the attempt to portray the union’s action as a blinkered heavy-handed judgement by one trade union official.
The facts are simple. In the irreconcilable conflict between capital and labour, the working class have only their own solidarity to rely on. The first rule of solidarity is; never cross a picket line.
The ruling class have their wealth, the media, the police and the armed forces. But as we have seen in Iran, this counts for nothing in the face of united working class solidarity in action.
The scab strikes a blow for the bosses and against his own class every time he crosses a picket line.
The working class have every right to remind such people that they have a long memory, and that workers who line up with the bosses now will share their fate in the future.
 




Review by Keith Narey (Chairman, Manningham Labour Party)
of Room at the Bottom by Harry Goldthorpe
[published by Square One pamphlets, price 20p]

When John Braine was the Secretary of Keighley Communist Party,
he published his famous novel, Room At the Top, in which he
showed how an ambitious young man could escape from the working class
by marrying the boss’s daughter.
Following the book’s success Braine escaped to Dorking and
recently spoke on Tory platforms during the general election campaign.
However, a more unsung local hero published his own answer to
Braine in 1959 entitled Room at the Bottom. His name was Harry
Goldthorpe and he was the first secretary and founder of the Bradford
Unemployed Association in the 1920s.
Harry maintained that the Joe Lampton’s of this world were one
in a hundred thousand and that the great majority of the working
classes are doomed by the system under which they live ‘to stay
down at this level on which they were born.’
He makes the point that for those who prefer to speak the truth
about the system, rather than cheat and lie, there is no ‘room at
the top’ but plenty of room at the bottom.
 
Lifetime of rebellion
He describes his early youth in Manningham in Bradford, then tells
of his first encounter with the dole queue in 1926.
Whilst grumbling about the lack of breakfast in the queue, he was
told by the clerk to shut up or he’d punch his nose!
When they picked the clerk up off the floor Goldthorpe was
escorted off the premises by the two policemen.
Thus began a life-time of rebellion against authority, and
subsequent persecution by the authorities. The first step was to
organise a club for the unemployed in Quebec Street. Open air
meetings were held to explain the plight of the unemployed and demand
maintenance or work.
Goldthorpe was sent on ‘test work’ where four men took turns
to sit on and chop firewood. As he says “all that was done in a
week by this idiotic method could have been done in one day by one
man using a power saw!”
After almost burning the depot down, he was ejected again and this
time was sent to an institution for mental defectives, to help feed
chickens, which were ‘dispatched to certain prominent gentlemen in
the city whose right to have them I very much doubt.’
Goldthorpe decided to re-route some of these to the unemployed
club where they would do more good.
After four months he was summoned to the office and given a cup of
tea. The officer then asked him ‘Do you tell lies, Goldthorpe?’
‘Not where the truth will fit. Why?’ answered Harry. ‘How many
chickens have you stolen from this establishment?’
‘As near as I have counted 965’ answered Harry.
After a ‘vivid’ silence the officer asked ‘What else have
you had from here?’, ‘About three tons of meal and thousands of eggs’
‘What have you done with all this stuff?’
‘I gave it to where it would do most good – the unemployed’
answered Harry.
On being told that he would hear more of this Harry laughed, and
invited the officer to come down to the unemployed club, bringing the
police with him, to watch the hens laying eggs for the unemployed.
That night the officer turned up and when he saw the hens was
speechless. The local papers, the Telegraph and Argus,
were given the story but refused to publish, and nothing more was
heard of the chickens.
Goldthorpe’s refusal to accept the system led him to the
workhouse where he developed a healthy contempt for patronising
‘social workers’ from the middle classes who had no experience of
poverty and whose only solution consisted of sending able bodied men
to the workhouse.
He was refused dole and jailed for six weeks for being unable to
pay his rates! Instead of breaking his spirit this only confirmed his
suspicions of the rottenness of the system and determined him to
fight its injustice harder than before.
The unemployed club produced its own newspaper to circulate its
ideas, and also employed men who had run out of benefit, stamping
their cards though unable to pay wages, but thus enabling the men to
qualify for benefit again.
One member who informed on this activity was tarred and feathered,
leading to an outcry in the press.
But as Goldthorpe says in defence of the unemployed:
“‘Informing’ was the sort of thing that struck at
the very roots of our attempts to organise ourselves against those
who inflicted poverty on us. Our handicaps were big enough without
the burden of rats in our midst.
“If we sinned against society, the pillars of society
were ready enough to make examples of us: our might have been a rough
sort of justice, but we were equally entitled to make examples of our sinners.”
 
Refusing to silently starve
Amongst the activities of the club were the provision of free
meals and children’s outings to the seaside, but as Goldthorpe says
they refused to do other workers out of jobs by working at low rates
and ‘their greatest crime’ was refusing to starve silently and
respectably but instead making everyone aware that they were starving.
It was very interesting to note at this time that the Communist
Party published a letter in the Telegraph & Argus
disassociating themselves from Goldthorpe and his comrades.
The tragedy of the activities of the unemployed is that they were
not reflected in political activity inside the mass organisations.
Coming after the betrayal of the General Strike of 1926, and the
sell out of the national government of 1931 many workers were left
demoralised and disillusioned, a prey to cynicism or worse, Fascism.
The courageous struggles of people like Goldthorpe and his
comrades deserved far better leaders than those who then masqueraded
as the leaders of the labour and trade union movement.
The lessons of this isolation and weakness must be learned by
today’s generation. With the threat of a return to mass
unemployment it is essential that the fight is not left to ‘gut’
socialists and individuals no matter how sincere and brave.
 
Link unemployed to trade unions
The rank-and-file of the labour movement, especially the youth,
must campaign to recruit all the unemployed into the trade unions at
a nominal subscription of a couple of pence a week; into the Labour
Party for a minimum donation of say 15p, as for pensioners.
In this way the struggles of the unemployed can be linked to the
struggles of workers to transform society along socialist lines –
the army of the unemployed could become an army of the unemployed
could become an army working for socialism – to develop a society
where the persecution of people like Goldthorpe, the indignities of
the dole queue, the desperation of a future without work for school
leavers, will be impossible.
The wealth exists to provide such a society, and the development
of computer technology offers its rapid spread throughout the world,
so that workers everywhere can share that ‘room at the top’, and
ensure that the struggles of individuals like Harry Goldthorpe were
not in vain.
 




An important victory has been won in the fight against redundancy
by workers at Renold Fluid Power in Bradford.
Following recent re-organisation it was obviously decided by the
top management that the recession could be used to implement a cost
cutting exercise. When the workers at Bradford exhausted procedure in
pursuance of their wage claim, they were faced with a demand for 35 redundancies.
The decision of the workforce was to occupy the plant. The dispute
was made official by the AUEW district committee, and support was
canvassed from the joint site committee and the Renold combine committee.
Support was promised from outside factories and the appeal sheets
were just about to be distributed when management caved in and
offered an improved pay offer of between 7 and 9%.
This is the first victory against a company which has low wages, a
Victorian outlook and extensive overseas outlets. Already, following
the recent one-hour strike in support of Croft Gears wage claim, the
company has hinted at shifting jobs abroad. Favourite must be the
South African subsidiary of Renold, where unions are banned and wages
on the poverty line.
But this victory has demonstrated that once the workers take
possession of the machines on which the wealth is created, with
support of the workforce and the labour movement, the bosses are
helpless.



 


Keith Narey
(Secretary, Joint Union Committee, Renold)



 







It is over a year now since the Tory press took up its
campaign against Marxism in the British labour movement. At that
time right wing Labour MPs and cabinet ministers such as Shirley
Williams argued that socialists who believed in the existence of a
class struggle – labelled by Harold Wilson as “comers-in” –
had no place in the tradition of the British labour movement and
should somehow be removed from the Labour Party.
This view is consistent with the “official” history
taught to each new generation – that the trade unions and Labour
Party have always been “moderate” organisations of
“responsible” people who rejected such foreign notions of
class conflict and mass struggle. But the real traditions of the
British working class are light years removed from this one-sided
view. Those mighty organisations of labour were built up by the
mass movement of the workers themselves in times of bitter
conflict and upheaval, always in the face of the ruthless and
openly biased intervention of the state on the side of the
employers.
It was out of a huge wave of militant industrial struggles
involving dockers, gasworkers, match girls and many others in the
1890s that the Labour Party was created. In this article Keith
Narey, Chairman of Manningham Branch Labour Party, who was last
year picked out for attack by the Tory press as a Marxist, gives
an account of how one such battle led to the formation of the
Independent Labour Party, a forerunner of the Labour Party.






The Manningham Mills strike of 1890 in Bradford was a turning
point in the history of working class struggle, not only for the
local movement but also having repercussions nationally.
It clearly showed the basic class conflict between labour and
capital, exposing the sham paternalism of many mill owners, and
furthermore highlighted the true class loyalties of the Liberal party.
The owner of Manningham Mills was one of the archetypal
‘entrepreneurial’ capitalists who had built the wool trade in
Bradford, mainly by purchasing patents of all combing machines so
that he could monopolise the trade with his own Lister-Donnisthorpe machine.
His name was Samuel Cunliffe Lister, later to become Lord Masham
after spending £800,000 of his profits on buying country estates at
Swinton Park and Jervaulx Abbey.
He had amassed his fortune by building up his mill in Manningham
to a massive complex employing 5,000 operatives. Due to the lack of
trade union organisation among his largely female workforce, he was
able to cut wages during the 1880s.
The workers grumbled that the 30% reductions during this period
were never restored in boom years. The last straw came when, in
response to the McKinlay tariff, Lister announced wage cuts of up to
35% in certain departments.
 
Low wages
The managing director has the cheek to describe wages of 14/– per
week as “unnaturally high” and pleaded for reduced wages to
defeat foreign competition. Those words have a similar ring today and
the argument was proved just as fallacious the when it was pointed
out that most of the competition came from Germany where wages were
almost double those at Lister’s!
The workers angrily drew attention to the previous year’s profit
of £138,000 and the dividend of 10%, the feeling being that past
profits should help to bolster present losses.
Lister’s attitude to the workers and that of his managers
contributed to the tension and one of the operatives remarked that:
“... the opinion of the work people with whom I am
acquainted is that there are too many gentlemen to maintain who wear
collars and cuffs: also petty under managers strutting about with
pencils and notebooks who might be better employed ...”
Despite the lack of union organisation, after negotiations with
the directors had failed, on the 16th December 1890, the operatives
walked out in protest – in the middle of winter and just before
Christmas. They called on the Weavers’ Association and Bradford
Trades Council to help them organise. The result was widespread
working class support for the strike.
 
Appeal
The Weavers’ Association circulated 25,000 copies of a manifesto
calling for trade union support, outlining the significance of this
dispute for the working class. An excerpt reads:
“In the face of these low wages we are of the opinion
that we should be doing not only an injustice to ourselves but to the
whole of the textile industry in the West Riding of Yorkshire by
accepting the proposed reduction ... help us fight against this
enormous reduction. Our battle may be your battle in the immediate
future. We trust, therefore, that in our present state of need and
disorganisation you will liberally support us.”
This special appeal raised a magnificent total of £11,000 mainly
from trade unions, and a large amount from the Yorkshire Miners’ Association.
The strike united many diverse political elements in the trade
unions, and brought to the fore many radicals in previously moderate
trade unions. The support of socialists such as Fred Jowett of the
Bradford power loom overlookers, Ben Turner and W.H. Drew of the
Weavers, as well as Ben Tillett and Tom Mann, helped to politicise
the strike and pave the way for future developments.
The Bradford Trades Council was also politicised, with the
radicals gaining control against the liberals, and organising street
collections, public meetings and concerts to support the strikers.
 
Mass meetings
Lister aroused the anger of the strikers by accusing the women of
walking around in fine furs while the men drank the profits from the
begging bowl. He also threatened to close the Manningham Mills
altogether as ‘uneconomic’, but these arguments, again familiar
to workers today, were exposed by the strike leaders, with reference
to the wages paid in other concerns in the area which were higher.
The ranks of the strikers were swelled by other departments of
Manningham Mills walking out in sympathy, especially the overlookers
who refused to train blackleg labour and were subsequently locked out
and then fired.
The meetings called by the strike committee rapidly broadened into
mass public sympathy meetings, and began to debate the political
issues involved. The Tory council, dominated by the wool merchants
and mill owners, reacted by sending in the police to intimidate and
harass pickets and members of the public attending the meetings.
Public protest meetings against these tactics, organised by the
Bradford Trades Council, reached massive proportions. At several
open air meetings attendances reached between 60,000 and 90,000.
The watch committee responded by banning all open meetings except
under licence.
This led to a massive outcry against suppression of free speech.
Demands were made to liberal councillors but they sided with the
authorities. The police replied with arbitrary arrests, and in one
case a seventeen year old girl was charged with ‘intimidation’
against two burly male blacklegs!
The dispute now attained national prominence and underlined the
political, as well as industrial, struggle between capital and
labour, adding to the socialists demand for an independent political party.
In defiance of the ban on public meetings, the strike committee
and the Trades Council organised a meeting on Sunday April 12th 1891.
The vast crowds overflowed into the public square by the Town Hall,
and after arresting Ben Turner and Councillor Harry Saunders from
Rotherham, the police cleared the square.
The following day large crowds gathered in the town centre,
determined to fight the council’s ban on public assembly and free
speech. Extra police were called in, along with 106 members of the
Durham Light Infantry.
The mayor read the Riot Act, and the streets were cleared,
first by police with batons, then by the soldiers with fixed bayonets.
The ensuing street battles, which raged from the afternoon until
midnight, with the crowds hurling knives and stones at the troops,
became something of a legend in Bradford labour history, and were
described by some as being ‘like scenes from the French revolution’.
 
Starved
This was followed by a meeting on the following Saturday of 90,000
people in the town centre. The crowd was so vast that five
platforms of speakers were required simultaneously in order to
address the audience.
The strike, however, was being starved to an end. With a
hard-faced attitude similar to that of the Tory Party today, the Poor
Law guardians refused relief to strikers and anyone who refused to
blackleg, local traders were forced to withdraw credit and after
nineteen heroic weeks the workers were forced back.
But from this defeat came some great victories. Trade union
organisation was boosted by thousands of new members and new unions
sprang up to take in unskilled and casual workers. The Bradford
Trades Council shed its liberal leadership and became committed to
independent, working class politics.
One of the strike leaders, Charlie Glyde, later to be secretary of
the Gas Workers’ Union, said at one of the mass meetings: “We
have had two parties in the past; the ‘can’ts’ and the ‘won’ts’
and it’s time we had a party that will.”
The ‘party that will’ was formed a month later at Firth’s
Temperance Hotel in East Parade, Bradford. This was the Independent
Labour Party [1], which was to have its
national founding conference two years later in Bradford. The leaders
stated: “The Labour Party intended to have labour representation in
the Town council and to take the whip out of the hands of those who
have been flogging them ...”
The first Independent Labour councillor was elected in Manningham
in November 1891 and the next year Manningham returned two ILP
councillors, one of whom was Fred Jowett, later destined to be the
first ILP MP for Bradford in 1906. His words in the 1982 election
form a fitting conclusion to this episode of Labour history.
First on the strike itself:
“In the Lister strike, the people of Bradford saw
plainly, as they had never seen before, that whether their rulers are
Liberal or Tory, they are capitalists first and politicians afterwards.”
And finally to the Liberals and Tories:
“You have run this machine too long, we see the
prejudicial results of your management – starvation, misery, crime
and a state of general unwashedness, body and soul, and we mean to
take the matter in hand and try to make a better thing of it ourselves.”
The climate was ripe for change, Manningham provided the catalyst
and the opportunity.


Footnote
1. This was actually the
founding of the Bradford Labour Union, it was renamed Bradford ILP
the following year.
 




The Labour Club at Bradford College, formed only last year, has
got off to a good start this year, with several students signing up
at a hurriedly organised freshers’ exhibition, including the
President, Vice-President and an executive member of the students’ union.
Over 200 of the Labour Students’ Bulletin were
distributed, and a leafleting campaign around the halls of residence,
followed by a canvass for members is taking place this week. A
successful freshers’ meeting was addressed by Gary Armitage,
National President of the textile unions. Further meetings with the
apprentices of the college are planned.
 




One of the hardest things about coming to university is the
unreality of the environment.
While outside storms rage about wages and conditions, inflation
and unemployment, inside these well-upholstered walls, beautiful
thoughts are mounted into high sounding concepts and academic debate
replaces class conflict.
Under the evasive, ambiguous leadership of the Broad Left at the
head of the NUS, student politics seem vague, disconnected and
irrelevant.
It is therefore easy to become bemused and retreat to study, or
seek refuge in beer, sport or whatever else is going on.
Among the confusion and apathy, the Labour Clubs stand out like
beacons of light, attracting the disoriented students and guiding
them back towards reality.
Starting with an honest, down-to-earth attitude to the political
problems of the day, inviting open, free debate with all sections of
the labour movement, they can draw serious students into political
activity and direct them towards the local Labour Party, and in
particular the Labour Party Young Socialists. This contrasts sharply
with the impetuous, off-putting approach of some student groups on
the left.
Through the labour movement students can play a part in the
various campaigns, especially the Youth Campaign Against Unemployment.
The respect and influence the LYPS has in the labour movement will
ensure the student a welcome among the local activists.
Here are tremendous lessons to be learnt, of the necessity for
organisation, control over the leadership by the rank and file, and
unity of all workers.
Students have more to learn from workers than to teach. Yet the
students, with their energy, idealism and time to read and interpret,
have a tremendous amount to contribute to the organised labour
movement, provided they are prepared to take their share of the hard,
routine work. Involvement in the Labour Party keeps a student’s
feet on the ground.
 

