

The Amsterdam Congress came to an end on August 29 with the vote for a scandalous manifesto which is to serve as the “charter” of action for those who adopted it. The fourth of September, that is, a week afterwards, this manifesto has not yet been published anywhere, (in the United States, it has not yet been published! – Ed.). Why?
L’Humanité (central organ of the French Communist Party) of September 4 speaks of the “putting into effect of the Congress decisions”. Which decisions? It is eight days since the reports of the Congress have been made, but the essential part of them – the “charter”, the manifesto, the “decisions” – has not been made public.
Can it be that the text, after the vote, is still being retouched?
However that may be, a text was submitted to the Congress (in four languages: French, German, English and Dutch). A few changes of detail were made in the text distributed through the Congress, changes known from the reading of the final text bv Barbusse.
On the vote the floor was refused to us in spite of our vehement insistence. It was accorded, however, to Mr. Patel, the former president of the Indian National Congress, who explained his objections at length even though he had voted, for the “charter”. The presidium refused to put our text, regularly proposed, to a vote. It even refused to take the negative, to ask who was opposed to the Barbusse manifesto. We had to intervene violently to record our vote Against.
In l’Humanité of September 1, Cachin, speaking of the manifesto, writes: “On this program of revolutionary action, so capital for us, no reservations were formulated by a single Congress delegate. Quite the contrary.” He lied deliberately. The delegates of the Left Opposition refused to make themselves accomplices in the criminal confusion of this manifesto, they refused to grant their confidence for the permanent struggle against war to a committee composed of Gandhists, Barbussists, Pacifists and Stalinists. The Official Bulletin of the Congress records our vote as follows: “The manifesto is adopted amid delirious enthusiasm of the Congress by more than 2,100 votes against 6 votes of the French Trotskyists.” And further: “In the same way, the list of the members for the Permanent Committee of the Congress against War was adopted by more than 2,000 votes against the 6 votes of the French Trotskyists.”
Let us now examine briefly this character on which the Centrists at least made no reservations.
The idea of class is totally absent from this manifesto. In our view, in the view of the Marxists, the question of war is a class question, and the role of the proletariat in war is determined by the class character of this war. We are against the imperialist war, for the civil war. We support certain national wars. Each case requires a specific analysis. In the manifesto, nothing of the sort is to be found. Its language is vulgarly democratic.
The Congress, it says there, “does not deny the existence of ideological and political nuances which may divide the elements composing it” ... Thus, between the Indian bourgeoisie, between the Western petty bourgeoisie and the revolutionary proletariat (all represented at the Congress), there are nothing but ... ideological nuances! After that, nothing stands in the way of unanimity for hollow generalities, devoid of any class sense.
Precisely, the whole of the manifesto is a laborious assembling of paragraphs carefully doctored to give satisfaction to everybody, and they bear the indelible mark of Centrism.
 
The Indelible Stamp of Centrism
One finds a very vague analysis of capitalist disorder and of the way in which it engenders war, which concludes as follows:
“The Congress proclaims that out of this whole state of affairs it is the human (?) masses who are and who will be its victims. By the effect of the crisis of over-production and the defective (!) distribution of production, derived by the action of an increasing unemployment, etc. ... the multitudes of labor are crushed, those who were cut down by the last war and who for the last fourteen years still bear the sorrows and wounds of it.”
Then the manifesto comes out against “the maintenance of artificial (sic) frontiers imposed by the peace treaties”, it asserts that “article 217 of the Treaty of Versailles incriminating Germany with the sole responsibility, constitutes a crying untruth (sic) which, exploited by a play of demagogic mysticism has in part provoked the Fascist reactions of Germany” ...
It is not possible for us to dwell upon each of these phrases. They contain a whole world of confusion. Let us mark out simply the passage that for the Congress the frontiers of Versailles are “artificial”. Are there, then, “natural” frontiers? According to the manifesto, there are; that is it sinks fully into petty bourgeois nationalism which simply reproaches the Versailles negotiators with having “badly cut up” the map of Europe!
Finally, the manifesto takes up its tactic of struggle against an imperialist war. Here is literally what it says on the subject: “Determined to stand up as much as it is humanly possible against this march to the abyss which involves all living beings, the Congress sees salvation only in the concerted action of the workers, the peasants and all the exploited and oppressed of the world.” And that is all. Immediately afterwards, is added: the Congress “declares that no other means of struggle against war is sufficient.”
What does this mean to say? We defy any sincere comrade, whoever he may be, to explain this paragraph. Is there in it the slightest serious explanation of the methods of struggle against war? Isn’t it a purely social democratic hollow phrase? “Concerted action”? – What action? Concerted among whom and whom? By means of which organizations and to what end? etc. ... All these questions must be answered!
After this, the manifesto adjures the “conscientious objectors” to renounce their tactics. It speaks of “noble dreams”, of “unfortunately useless sacrifice”, of “splendid moral attitude”, of “heroic methods”. Who can explain the meaning of this phrase:
“To the men of character and courage who preach heroic methods and by accepting for themselves the very grave consequences, it asks to be also (!) with the others (?) in order to build up, stone by stone, from the bottom, a massive and collective barrier”? ...
Finally, the last paragraphs must be quoted:
“The Congress turns towards the innumerable proletariat whose sovereignty depends only upon conscious organization (and not upon the overthrow of the bourgeoisie – a purely social democratic thesis).
“Strong with the mandate confided to it by a multitude of persons risen from all the horizons of the universe and different tendencies, but united in the sincere and ardent desire for peace: strong with the profound conviction that the struggle against war is not upright except to the extent that it is effective -and weighs down on affairs.
“It urges the mass, the only invincible power in the tragical disorder of our times, to enter with disciplined ranks into this disorder and make its voice heard there loudly!”
And right after that, is added:
“It is in this sense (but what sense? has any of it any sense?) that it intends to have the Committee of Struggle against War, which it has formed, work: to extend this labor front throughout the world.”
Here comes the grandiloquent oath that was taken in common, without the least reservation, by the Patels, the Fontenys, the Monnets and Bergerys, the General von Schoenaichs, the Muenzenbergs and the Cachins:
Cachin’s Pledge and ... Patel’s
“Each of us here takes a pledge and we take it all together:
“We pledge that we will never allow the formidable unity which has been established here among the exploited and victimized multitudes to be broken up.
“We pledge to fight with all our force and with all our resources against capitalism, purveyor to slaughter-houses.
“We pledge to dedicate ourselves with all our strength and all our resources to the immediate and urgent tasks, standing up against ...”
Here follow the general slogans:
Against armaments, against the preparation of war by the “public powers which rule us”, against chauvinism, against Fascism “which organizes the civil war”, against war budgets and loans to Fascist states, against the campaign of incitement against the U.S.S.R., against the dismemberment of China, against the exploitation and oppression of the masses of colonial peoples, for the struggle for national and social liberation, for the support of the Japanese workers, for the support of the transport and munitions workers, for the struggle by “all means” against the “impending cataclysm.”
This is the substance of the manifesto which was adopted unanimously save for 6 votes, amidst general confusion and without a SINGLE COMMUNIST SPEAKER HAVING EXPRESSED THE SLIGHTEST RESERVATION OR AMENDMENT ON THE SUBJECT:
And now, let us put these questions:

Why hasn’t this manifesto, this “charter”, this “basis for action”, which is to “orient” the struggle of the party against war, been published to this day? What does this silence conceal? What alterations, after the fact, are being prepared for it?
 
What organizations, what Communist meetings, gave a mandate to and authorized the Communist leaders to vote for such a text without reservations? How should the vote without reservations for the Barbusse platform be designated except as a swindle against the ranks of the party?
 
This confused text was adopted by the licensed representatives of the big bourgeoisie, of the “social Fascist” LEADERS, of the petty bourgeois pacifists, etc., who find nothing in it different from the resolutions of their own parties. To vote jointly with them without reservations, doesn’t that mean to make an UNPRINCIPLED BLOC from above, in the dark of the moon?

In the whole manifesto, one single paragraph makes allusion to revolutionary methods of struggle. It is the following: the Congress “asserts that the Japanese workers have already showed by heroic examples how the struggle against the imperialist war should be conducted, by standing up against their own bourgeoisie, by endeavoring to oppose the production and transportation of munitions, and by opening the eyes of the soldiers themselves as to the rapacious character of this war.” Naturally, this paragraph was inserted to “satisfy” the Communists. But in spite of this, it sows confusion for it does not say that it is a question of utilizing the war to beat the bourgeoisie, to overthrow the capitalist regime, to substitute the proletarian dictatorship for the bourgeois dictatorship. As it stands, the paragraph may lead to the belief that it is simply a matter of a “pressure” upon the national bourgeoisie to bring the war to a halt. And it is just for that reason that Monnet and Planche, who vote for the war budget of Herriot-Boncour, also voted for this resolution in all tranquility!
Take the text of the recent resolutions of the Second International in Zurich. Do we not also find there the slogan of the defense of the U.S.S.R., of the sabotage of munitions transportation, etc.? ... Don’t we know that those are hollow phrases which only serve, in the last analysis to dupe the masses?
How could the Communist party rally to these hollow phrases without a word of reservation, of amendment, of criticism! At the inevitable moment when the Patels, the Fontenys, the Monnets, etc. will show that they stand in the long run for the interests of bourgeois democracy rather than those of the proletarian, revolutionary struggle against war, what will be the attitude of the Centrists who united with them on the same platform?
The bloc, without conditions or limitations, without clarity, serves only confusion, opportunism, that is, in the last analysis, the social democratic and treacherous petty bourgeois leadership.
Against that, the party must be warned, as well as the revolutionary vanguard who have been caught in the snare of ambiguity and confusion.
It must be asserted loudly; this manifesto, this “charter”, this platform, will be an obstacle to the struggle against war. The party, the trade unions, the various committees, will be unable to engage in a real struggle against war except by trampling upon this text, by rejecting the advice of the International Committee, by fighting fiercely to put through in every meeting a precise, limited program of action of the united front with all the workers’ organizations. There is no other way.
For where in this “charter” is there anything precise and serious about the methods of struggle, on the revolutionary struggle, on the tactic and strategy of the struggle against imperialism? Now-where. You find nothing but badly bloated literature!
The party leaders refuse the honest united front, that is, one based upon limited, precise proposals, made by the party with full independence, discussed by the party and responsibly adopted by it, addressed to the responsible reformist organizations which embrace hundreds of thousands of workers. Instead of this, they camouflage themselves behind pseudo-united front committees, in confusion, and they are led to make a bloc from above with the enemies of Communism! These are the facts which no insults, no quibbling, will conceal from the eyes of the vanguard. And the inevitable conclusion is this: for the moment, Centrism profits by this indefinite current started and exploited by it; but in the long run, it is opportunism, the social democracy, which will profit by it, in the hour when the proletarian Communist wing will be obliged to extricate itself from the morass of the Patels and the Monnets, and when the social democrats will exclaim: “There you see how insincere they were; they are now breaking up a bloc which they made without expressing any reservations, without outlining the limitations, without foreseeing the future!” And at that moment, the workers will feel the brutal effects of Centrist confusion. They will see that the Left Opposition was right.
Still another feature of the manifesto should be emphasized. The text reviews the international situation and the war danger spots, but NOTHING IS SAID ABOUT THE GERMAN SITUATION! You do find this enormity, that it is Article 217 of the Versailles Treaty which is responsible for the rise of German Fascism, but not a line can be read which denounces the Hitlerite Fascist reaction as the greatest war menace to the U.S.S.R. The whole manifesto is vague in this respect. In spite of the war which is tearing up the Far East, the decisive threat, the knife which is being wielded over the throat of the German, Russian and international proletariat, is the Fascism of Hitler, the crushing boot of bloody capitalism which is writhing in convulsions. The mute Stalin compels his international apparatus to remain silent about this fact. That is why the Congress directed by Münzenberg, one of the leaders of the German Communist Party, was able to adopt a manifesto which passes over in silence the critical hour through which the capitalist universe and the international proletariat are passing in the class struggle in Germany, a struggle which today entirely dominates the problem of peace and war.
Not a minute was granted the Opposition to say this. And yet, we do not want to see socialist deputies, who vote the war budgets of Boncour, who approve the tactic of treachery of Severing and Braun, applaud Münzenberg when he evokes the sacrifices of the proletarians of Germany – we want positions to be taken on this point, clear engagements, so that everyone knows where he is going and how he will get there.
Such a manifesto we rejected with indignation. We deposited with the presidium our own declaration, demanding that it be put to the vote. They refused. Yet it substituted for the pacifist-Centrist hotch-potch the clear thoughts of Marxism. It concretized the limited, definite program upon which a temporary united front (and not a permanent bloc) could be offered and pressed before the responsible reformist workers’ organizations.
Let every party comrade reflect upon it. Let those who greeted the speech of the social democrat, Nicole, with cries of “Unity”!, who acclaimed Rolland, Barbusse, Fonteny, Patel and Co. as their leaders in the struggle against war, ponder again: the facts will open their eyes. They must demand in the party the repudiation of this manifesto. They must force the apparatus to uncover its double game. They must demand an independent declaration of the party. Let them adopt the position of the Left Opposition, contained in our manifesto. Right now, the best elements will understand us. And tomorrow, it is the whole party that we will succeed in snatching out of the Centrist combinations which ruin the Marxian doctrine of the proletariat in the vital question of war and peace.
Paris, September 1932
 



The International Left Communist Opposition has extended its struggle to one more sector. This is in connection with the revolutionary movement in Indo-China against the sanguinary acts of repression of French Imperialism.
The official Communist Party in France is non-existent so far as Indo-China is concerned where the proletariat is being ferociously exploited and where imperialism maintains its police dictatorship over the native proletarian population by fire and sword, torture and death. This atrocious misery has already evoked movements of spontaneous revolt that the young native bourgeoisie more or less independent of French capital, has sought to direct to its own ends. In consequence of the revolts of Yen Bay, of Vinh, etc., 39 Indo-Chinese revolutionaries have been sentenced to death and four of these have already been executed. The Criminal Commission of Phu Tho is about to condemn ten other revolutionaries to death, one to life long imprisonment, twenty-six to hard labor for the rest of their lives, thirty-eight to deportation, etc.
The Indo-Chinese workers in France and the French proletarians have under the leadership of the Communist League of France (Opposition) embarked on an energetic protest action to prevent these sentences from being carried out any further and this campaign must strike an echo in the hearts of the workers of all countries.
In front of the Elysée in Paris a strong demonstration took place on the call of the Communist League following which several comrades were imprisoned. Despite all the attention this demonstration stirred up in the bourgeois press, despite the fury of the attack of the government against the Left Opposition, the leadership of the French Communist Party and the Humanité have MAINTAINED COMPLETE SILENCE because our Indo-Chinese comrades fought under the flag of the Communist League (Opposition). It was only after direct protests and by way of leaflets and public notices that the Humanité finally made up its mind to, defend our Indo-Chinese comrades.
But the opportunist leadership of the Party and the Humanité, even while defending our comrades, betrayed them. In the articles of the Humanité they were represented as being the adherents of the official policies of the Communist Party and the Stalinist policy in the colonies for “the right of self-determination for their complete independence” (Humanité, May 28th, 1930). Nothing could be more false.
The Indo-Chinese comrades have condemned the Stalinist colonial policy applied by the Comintern regime throughout the world and particularly in Asia. The Indo-Chinese comrades are an integral part of the International Opposition.
Together with the Left Opposition, the Indo-Chinese comrades are not satisfied to fight for “self-determination up to complete independence” after the fashion of Chiang Kai-Shek but call for the formation of an independent revolutionary party of the working class to wage the struggle for the social revolution against both French imperialism and native bourgeois exploitation equally and in closest contact with the French working class. “Proletarians of all countries, unite” must become more than a mere slogan. It must be carried into life.
 



We have not hurried to give our opinion on the journal of Henri Barbusse, Monde, the darling of l’Humanité in France as well as the Daily Worker and New Masses in the United States. We wanted to wait serenely to see this journal adopt a fairly clear line of conduct Now it seems that we have waited in vain, and that Monde continues to be what it always was, that is, a literary publication of the democratic, whining phrase-mongering petty bourgeoisie who are so well personified by Barbusse. There is no doubt that Monde is not a journal of the Communist Party, neither is it a social democratic publication; it is something worse and more inoffensive at the same time, that is, a miscellany of the swampiest, the most confused, in short, the most anti-proletarian slops produced by the politico-literary circles of the petty bourgeoisie.
The quality of the principal editors already tells a good deal. Of course, the Directing Committee which appears under the head is only a pure front. The director, Barbusse, is already known as a notorious anti-Marxist. For some time his lucrative literary activity has been divided between works of a Christian mysticism (novels, criticisms, plays on Jesus) and crude plagiarisms from the official Soviet economic press in praise of Stalin. The politics of the journal are directed by Paul Louis a veritable living statue to the glory of “democracy”, a scribbler at the service of every political sheet which offers a trough, be they republican, radical, socialist or Communist, from Soir to Monde, traversing a multitude of sheets of every species. This venerable leader of the Socialist-Communist Party spins out a vaguely radicalizing and pacifist prose every week in Monde on international politics.
The economic questions are dealt with in the pedantic manner by Delaisi and Laurat. The first of these two authors is notoriously ignorant of the ABC of Marxist economic science. In his recent works, like The Two Europes, amiably commented upon by Monde, he shows himself a complacent critic of some “imperfections” of imperialism, which according to him, the trusts and alliances between the capitalists can remedy. Monde publishes from time to time comic, economic controversies between Delaisi and Laurat, the one explaining himself in the liberal and free-trader’s tone, and the other replying with extracts from Das Kapital purged of any catastrophic consequences. If we add that the other collaborators are people like Habarau, Berl, Alrand Bernard, etc., etc. ... the question arises as to how, why, in what respect and in what manner Monde can really be a journal which speaks, if not to the revolutionary proletariat, at least simply to the proletariat.
The real face of Monde, its pseudo-theoretical countenance, appeared at the time it undertook a so-called inquiry On the Doctrinal Crisis of Socialism. The manner in which this inquiry was presented and the replies that were made to it, put Monde in its precise place. In the introduction, one could read: “In speaking of the doctrinal crisis of socialism, we understand the term in its vastest conception, detaching it from the daily struggles to which the various proletarian organizations devote themselves in the name of their respective doctrine”. This phrase has only one meaning: The doctrinal crisis of socialism is above the class struggle. We are therefore not wrong in saying that Monde placed itself outside of revolutionary Marxism, outside of the proletarian struggle, in order to take refuge in the nebulous world of literary discussions. This does not prevent the editor of the introduction to the inquiry, who is no longer a Marxist – if he ever was one – from writing: “The doctrine (socialist) is passing through a crisis because it is in fact or in appearance – our inquiry will enable us to judge – in conflict with reality on a goodly number of points:” What reality? We ask because it is not a question of the reality of political parties, nor consequently of classes, nor, finally, of the principal elements of capitalist society in which we are now living. That is to say that we, the Marxists and Communists, who ask it, for evidently the editor of Monde, lost in his abstractions, does not. Doesn’t he write further that he intended to submit to his readers “the opinions of the most qualified representatives of the tendencies confronting each other in contemporaneous socialism, right as well as left, in the second and third international”?
For Monde, then, the only difference between social democracy and Communism is that of being the right and left wings of “socialism”. This statement would be quite in place from the pen of an editor of Temps. But one wonders what it is doing in the pages of a journal which speaks in the name of Communism and the teachings of the Russian revolution. Moreover Monde has not been able up to now to publish anything but propaganda texts from Vandervelde, De Man, Renner, Deat and a few others, that is, of the theoretical screens for the bankruptcy of the second international and its irrevocable passage to the side of the democratic bourgeoisie. The opinions of the theoreticians of the Communist movement are still forthcoming. This could only be the consequence of the fact that the best leaders and theoreticians of the Communist movement are today expelled from the International by the Stalinist apparatus, in which M. Barbusse participates directly, while only the perverters of Marxist thought have the right to speak there today. But such is not the case, for no Communist belonging to the Left Opposition movement would want to soil himself in the Barbussian pot. It is in reality the result of another fact whose developments we shall soon see: it is that the bureaucracy of the International is beginning to tire of the lucubrations of M. Barbusse, of the hotch-potch of slops of the revolutionary movement which he has made of Monde, and that it has begun the rupture with this journal. We are not afraid of any denial. The Soviet bureaucracy of the C.I. has despised Barbusse for a long time. This contempt re-arose at the time when Lenin was astounded because the French Communist Party distributed so idiotic a pamphlet as The Knife between the Teeth. But now this contempt for the man it utilized has taken on a new form.
In the Viestnik Inostranoy Literaturi (No. 5, December 1929), Bruno Jazhinsky administers a superb bureaucratic reproof to the director of Monde. This reproof is naturally accompanied by organizational measures: The sale of Monde is prohibited on the news-stands and the book-stores in Russia and the journal no longer comes to the subscribers in the U.S.S.R. Mezhrapom has even offered to reimburse the subscribers for their money. This time it is clear: Molotov has had enough of the journal of Paul Locis and Delaisi. With the same gracefulness he exercized in supporting Monde when it was first established he is preparing today to issue a bull against it.
It is likely that our new Christ Barbusse will suddenly cry out at dictatorship, bureaucracy, dogmatism. After having held his tongue till 1930, he will denounce the sectarian spirit of the leaders of the Communist Party, etc. Under such conditions, it is also likely that Monatte will be astounded that we are repulsing an eventual ally, an “Opposition to the Party”. But for us the matter stands differently. We are not with everyone who is against the Party or against the International and the Soviet Union. We are not with those who desert the sinking ship, with those who abandon a freely embraced cause when it no longer profits them. We repulse and fight against those who, after having wholly approved up till now the methods and the action of the C.I., turn sharply upon it without seriously founded political reason. For we know that this type of capers always conceals a retreat fixed long ago, and a more or less bashful return into the petty bourgeois democratic ring. We know that the whole evolution in this sense of Barbusse and his journal will not signify an evolution beyond the domain of the C.I. apparatus towards a more consistent revolutionary activity, but quite simply the removal of a veil which concealed from the eyes of a pretty numerous public the essentially retrogressive, petty bourgeois and confusionist nature of Barbusse and his enterprises. Today only one mask gives them a proletarian revolutionary aspect and that is the Stalinist bureaucracy which itself is about to undertake the unmasking.
Unfortunately, a certain working class public lets itself be taken in by the phrases and the literary jargon of Monde. Doubtlessly this corresponds to their very comprehensible need to read something besides, their ordinary political press, to educate themselves while being amused. A journal with such a goal cannot be a bad thing. But it must be realized seriously and with sincerity. It is these two qualities that are lacking in Monde. At present it is necessary that the revolutionary workers know that Monde is an organ of petty bourgeois literature and education and that, if it can sometimes divert them, it can aid and support them in no wise in their struggle. The bureaucrats of the Party who supported and encouraged Monde know this as well as we. And perhaps they are now preparing to say so. For they must certainly answer this question: Why is Monde, prohibited in the U.S.S.R. and therefore poor reading for the Soviet citizenry, recommended in France by the same bureaucracy which leads the Russian and French Communist Parties?



 
Paris, April 10, 1930


Pierre F. Naville



 



The Revolution Proletarienne [1] has just changed its label. Its first number of the year calls itself revolutionary syndicalist and no longer syndicalist-Communist. That makes for clarity. The editors of the R.P. consider moreover “that there can exist no more genuine proletarian revolutionaries, no more real Communists than the genuine revolutionary syndicalists”. The formula would have been correct enough had there been added: before the war. But today, the substitution of the revolutionary-syndicalist label for that of the syndicalist-Communist, implies a very plain retreat, acomplished progressively, and materializing only today.
In the first number, Loriot takes it upon himself to show us that it is not a question of an external formality but rather of a new content, of a final rupture with Communism, that is, with the revolutionary experience of the last fifteen years. The article of Loriot, entitled The Bankruptcy of the Communist International and the Independence of the Trade Union Movement adds nothing essential to the arguments expounded two years ago in his pamphlet on The Problems of the Proletarian Revolution. One finds developed there the same utopia of a single trade union gathering, one class party of the proletariat (of the type of English Laborism). One finds there the same absence of political perspectives (does Loriot trust to the wholly false analyses of Chambelland?) the same errors concerning the course of the Russian revolution and the same appeal to the “politically enlightened” elements of the proletariat opposed to the “social elements whom ignorance and misery bring to consider violence more as an end than a means”. In the meantime, there are in France many C.G.T. members to whom the newly organized minority of the C.G.T.U. has just been added, there is a Communist party and there is also the Communist Opposition. But Loriot does not dwell on these details. At any rate, he does not point out by what processes, thanks to what circumstances, there will issue from all this a single mass trade unionism supplanting all the parties in the accomplishment of the revolution.
However, Loriot has added something to his previous attitude: it is a criticism of the role of the Left Communist faction. He does not believe that “the present position of comrade Trotsky and the small groups of the Communist Opposition, which like him, are devoted to the task of regenerating the C.I., is correct.” He gives only empirical reasons: few Communists come to us, for five years no substantial Communist nucleus has been able to organize outside the C.I., no influence has been obtained over the party from the outside, etc. ... The healthy elements are leaving the party and will be replaced by others “only to the extent that the Opposition groups will entertain the idea of the possible regeneration of the C.I.” Finally, here is the peremptory conclusion:
“The French workers are not content with being liberated from the command of the bureaucrats, who do not think that the party which generates the Communist bureaucracy is capable of ridding itself of this institution, who see the salvation of the proletariat and its revolution in a class and not a sectarian trade union organization, controlling its internal political formations and independent of parties on the outside, will leave the Leninist Opposition to pursue the chimera of the resurrection of a dead past.”
We think quite the contrary, because for us “the resurrection of the dead past” is the resurrection impetus of the proletarian under the new capitalist crisis – and not the perspective or thirty or forty years of relative peace between the classes. The party or the trade union are not, for us, instruments of the working class created by the whim of a few individuals; they are the result of certain class relations in struggle. They arise in certain circumstances against which one cannot act, and live in the same manner. Like the trade unions, the Communist party corresponds to certain needs of the class struggle. In the present epoch, it corresponds to the necessity of accomplishing the proletarian revolution, of working immediately on the basis of the revolutionary post-war struggles in Russia, Germany, Austria and elsewhere.
We are entirely disinterested in the academic character of the discussion: which is the “better” proletarian organization to accomplish the revolution? We do not deny the importance and the role of the trade union. That would be foolish. We know that the reformist trade unions often play an important role in the orientation of the mass. But we also know that the reformist trade unions often play the role of a brake in revolutionary action. We want to base ourselves on the experience resulting from the development and the crisis of the Comunist parties, that is, from the development of the class struggle itself.
The “degeneration” of the parties plays pretty nearly the same role for the pure syndicalists as “petty bourgeois opportunism” for the leadership of the party and the C.G.T.U. It is a hollow phrase. The Left Opposition gives it a precise and concrete sense. It designates by that a false policy. It is not a formal decrepitude, due to old age or disillusions. It is perseverance in a false political line, whose consequences can be fatal, and have in fact been fatal, notably in England and in China. Those who have only disillusions cannot profit by experience; they call everything into question again and admit having deceived themselves in the past. Those who assimilate the objective and subjective reasons that determine this false political line work to reconstitute the nuclei around which will be gathered subsequently the correctly orientated party.
Loriot and the R.P. turn their backs to Communism. That is a fact. They justify those who expelled them. Monatte has written that Sellier was right to expel him from the party. Thus, they also have no interest at all in the fate of the C.I., and consequently of the Russian revolution. It will be said that they have in mind to justify (if not to legitimatize) the attacks of Monmousseau. At the same time, they abandon all political perspective, no matter how small. The speech of Chambelland at the last congress of the C.G.T.U. is lamentably weak in this respect. Louzon recommends the surrender of the Chinese Eastern Railway by Russia at the same time that he underlines the great success of Stalin in the collectivization of agriculture. Repelled by “Russian” Bolshevism, the R.P. retreats into a narrowly “French” attitude. It hardly seems to suspect the existence of millions of foreign-born workers in France and the unity of the international struggle, even with the scattered organizations.
Obviously, we fight on a different path. We do not speak of “regenerating” the C.I. as one re-infuses blood into an old organism. But we have no reason to abandon the general principles of the C.I. We want to make up for it in the revolutionary struggle which it is less and less capable of conducting properly, but which only an organization of its type can conduct. We do not prejudge its developments. It may be, and so far as France is concerned, it is probable, that the Communist organization as it exists today is incapable of recovery. But what is essential is to take a correct position under present circumstances.
The fact that the present cadres of official Communists are not susceptible to regeneration does not at all mean that we are not capable of development. Or development is not bound to the retrogression of the party or to its regeneration. It is bound to a correct revolutionary political line, different from that of the party. We do not address ourselves only to the healthy “nuclei” still existing in the party (they are few) but also and above all to the mass, that stands outside the party. Our activity is bound to that of the workers who are not satisfied by the policy of the party, but who remain Communists, inside or outside the party. Loriot and his friends bind their fate to those who cannot be satisfied by the policy of the party, but who abandon Communism. There is every reason to think that their position will become still plainer in this sense.



 
Paris, January 17, 1930


PIERRE NAVILLE





Footnote
1. Organ of the Syndicalist League of France, whose leaders include Monatte, Chambelland, Loriot, Louzon, etc., etc.
 



Tardieu is master of the situation. His appetite for power can be satisfied. And through him, the bourgeoisie will also be able to handle systematically the great ventures that world competition now imposes upon it.
Tardieu has succeeded in making himself appear as the candidate of the country and no longer only as the candidate of a majority of the deputies. There has been renewed for him the “mystery of confidence” with which Poincaré was surrounded in his day. The press, big industry, the whole bourgeoisie proclaims him: Tardieu is the man of the situation.
Back in 1926, Poincaré, the honest and ferocious accountant of the bourgeoisie, was the man of the situation. Since then he stabilized the franc. He balanced the budget, he realized the important budgetary surpluses. Now capitalism wants a builder and a spender man who knows how to undertake work, to invest capital, to develop and to coordinate – in a word, to rationalize. There he is: Tardieu! The press is burning incense, the economic groups caress him: he is their figure-head. The situation now demands a directing crew that attends actively to the business of capitalism. The Hague Conference, the Young Plan have changed international positions. The ever smaller field of markets necessitates an ever more violent struggle to conquer them. But the foreign markets are already so disputed that the home market must be arranged for the greatest absorptive capacity. The whole policy of the Tardieu cabinet, as far as it is defined in his declaration, is orientated in this spirit.
Here is the situation. Tardieu and his crew are not the only ones who would have to come through. It must be made clear that a Paul Boncour would have been unable to do otherwise. He would have imitated his colleague Snowden. The illusions of the petty bourgeoisie, of the “people” in power, through the Daladiers or the Blums, have vanished forever. The governments of French imperialism can only carry out one policy, that of big capital, of production, of finance capital. It is dictatorial policy that Tardieu will carry on and which Boncour would have carried on. Only the revolutionary policy of the proletariat can be set against it.
The declaration of the Tardieu government is addressed to the “country”, over the heads of the deputies. It puts the government under the control of the country, that is, of the capitalists. It promises “prosperity” to the country and considers itself responsible for it to the whole nation. Tardieu denotes, timidly enough as yet, his contempt for parties and parliamentary formations. He addresses himself to the producers, to the manufacturers, to the tradesmen, to the peasants. He brings them his program of endowments and reductions. He announces without a smile the lowest decreases in taxes on the transportation of manure or on pharmaceutical products. He makes it clear that all the communes in France will know how much the government will give to the country for technical education to give them an appetite, for tourists, to entice the dollars – three billions in all.
But the cynical demagogue does not speak of the tens of billions which are the share of the War and Naval departments!
There is the program that the situation requires. It upsets the “democratic” prerogative. It passes over the representatives of the people; it addresses itself to the country, but speaks only for the bourgeoisie, for the pillars of capitalism. Produce, trade; the State, which is your instrument, will help you; we will free it from the petty bourgeois obstructors, from the pusillanimous defenders of the artisans, etc.
For the working class, the program of Tardieu is the muzzle and the police, because it is the very program of the employers. The government cannot have or allow towards the working class any other policy than that of the capitalists. The declaration promises but one thing to the workers, the application of the law of social insurance. Insurance being carried out on the backs of the workers and by a withholding of their wages; Tardieu can do nothing but have it applied. But as to the rest, his declaration does not speak of a “social program”, as the bourgeois parties “of the Left” know so well to do, as Poincaré himself knew so well to do. And after all why should he speak of a social program. His social program springs clearly from his economic program. The economic program is that of the big employers and consequently, his “social program” is also that of the big employers: rationalization, squeezing of wages, repression of the labor movement and tormenting the revolutionary organizations.
The employers, encouraged by the State, will have all the latitude to reinforce its exploitation. “Order,” to whose rebirth Tardieu has already contributed, will be still more consolidated.
Under such conditions, the Communist party would have to revise its attitude. On the contrary, however, it continues to be rent asunder by persisting in all its errors. The day of the opening of the Chamber, Cachin delivered a wholly insipid speech from the tribune in which he limited himself to saying that Tardieu was not qualified to lead the “honest” working people. Wherein is Tardieu’s cast more scandalous for a Communist than that of most of the bourgeois “statesmen”? Aren’t they all accustomed to carry on their own business at the same time as that of the State? Aren’t they all in the service of economic groups of interests? It is evidence that when one speaks of a “dishonest” bourgeois statesman, he assumes that there are others who are honest; but this opposition does not exist. Honesty or dishonesty have a class meaning. Capitalist honesty is to despoil of the workers, to dispute over imperialist booty, to fatten at the same time as the State. Tardieu has not abstained from acting as in the past.
Precisely one of the myths of bourgeois democracy is to have the people believe in the “integrity” of their representatives, in their independence and their personal probity. But this myth must be unmasked by the Communists who show that these people are the beneficiaries of capitalist profit, on account of which they dupe the workers.
The honest Cachin is taking the wrong road in clinging to the dishonesty of Tardieu. He should, on the contrary have declared that Tardieu was the worthy representative of capitalist democracy, the proper executor of imperialist piracies.
Cachln also limited himself to saying the program of the Tardieu government is translated for the working class by a redoubling of the repression. It is true. But this repression arises at a time when the working class is disunited, when the Communist party gives it an example of confusion and corruption.
Tardieu governs all the surer for the revolutionary movement being misled and its perspectives wrong. The leadership of the party thinks that the strengthening of repression is a reply to the broadening of labor struggles. But on the contrary, the less violent these struggles are and the more the party separates itself from the masses, the more the government hastens to ransack the revolutionary organizations, to corrupt and weaken them.
The most pressing need of the Communist party is to find normal relations with the working class again, so as to be able to establish a front against the governmental attack. But it is clear that the party of Cachin or Bernard, bound to its international bureaucracy and entirely corrupted in its cadres, is incapable of it. The pressure of the conscious workers is needed, devotion and patient work are needed to create cadres .new, nuclei with clear ideas, – in a word, to recreate a Communist party.



 
Paris, November 15, 1929


P. NAVILLE



 



À l’americaine is the slogan of the Tardieuse bourgeoisie. It has launched its good fellow like a new moving picture is launched, with the most modern methods of commercial advertising. All over the front pages of the newspapers, in shop fronts, across the screen of passing events is displayed the optimistic smile of Tardieu, succeeding the surly countenance of Poincaré. Big posters on all the walls of Paris vaunt the merits of the new product and rail at the unhappy rivalry of Daladier and company. The citizen standardized by advertising has let the new popular heroes be imposed upon him like Cadum soap. Scientific methods are being tested for manufacturing popularity. À l’americaine, the new government is making interchangeable parts, without worrying about the old party labels, which put the old, outmoded and slow machines on the scrapheap in order to set the traditional political parties in motion. Tardieu is beating the speed record in establishing his government. He does not spare expense to get a better and quicker yield. He takes men from here, from there, from the Right and the Left, in the largest possible number in order to satisfy the largest possible amount of appetites and to assure himself of the largest clientele.
The old political parties of democracy are indignant at these new methods of competition which disarm and beat them on a ground that isn’t their own, like the petty tradesmen protests against the methods of big stores. This ministry of confusion, composed of anomalous and unprincipled personages, is gravely denounced. It is gravely demonstrated that it cannot last because it violates the traditional rules of the game of the parties in a democracy. It is predicted that the unprincipled ministry will not last, that it will succumb to the joint assault of the Right, discontented with the foreign policy, and the Left, discontented with the domestic policy, and then they will see how they deluded themselves.
The success of Tardieu is stirring up a fever of political Americanism. The Right wing of the Socialist Party has not borne the torment of Tantalus inflicted upon it for many weeks in order to lead it to the final deception – it also hoists the banner of political rationalization inside the Party, of autonomy for the parliamentary group, of the revision of the statutes, of the struggle of the young against the old. Like Tardieu speaks to the “country” above the heads of the deputies, it threatens to speak to the voters over the heads of the militants and the regularly constituted organs. The struggle between the Right and the Left in the S.P. appears more and more as the struggle between the moderators and the mossbacks. While the Left remains attached to the old revolutionary forms, devoid of all content, which petrify and demobilize it into a grandiloquent dogmatism, the Right wants to arm itself with the methods of the most modern political technique so as to make its way along the new pathways of the bankers’ democracy.
With American methods, American results. Prosperity! Tardieu cries after Hoover. Optimism is on the order of the day. After the period of the lean kine, the period of the fat; after the days of penitence, great merriment. The economy of the speculator succeeds that of the father of the family. New days, new people. The countenance of Poincaré, draped in “the old honesty of a republican in the days of the empire”, watching at the bedside of his sick mother, the bourgeoisie, and his little franc, has given way to the broad smile of the cynical and corrupted Tardieu, the man of N’Goko Sangha and Homs Bagdad, who is leading the dance of the five billions and the reduction of taxes. Poincaré and the other republicans are in the discard, Tardieu triumphs with the methods of efficiency. And the political parties beaten in the competition, like the radical party and the socialist party, raise a loud outcry by accusing him of having stolen their program. But Tardieu moves fast and well ... This proves only one thing: all the bourgeois political parties (including the S.P.) are in accord on the general policy to be carried out. Their estimations of the kind of merchandize fit to pour upon the political market, converge for the moment but they are more or less well stocked up for the competition and all of them have let themselves be outdone by the “unprincipled” crew of Tardieu.
This fever of Americanism, of rationalization and of efficiency in every field, is not peculiar to France. It reaches right into the U.S.S.R. where the International Press Correspondence informs us of the manufacture in series of young “Soviet Americans” (sic!). And that is normal, inasmuch as American capitalism is the firmest, the best equipped with the most modern methods. But wait! The moment that! Tardieu chooses to tire our ears with his standardized screechings about prosperity is the same time that the colossal crash in New York bares the underside of this renowned prosperity. We learn of the formidable inflation of credit that lay at its base and which, all of a sudden, gives way, reducing it to its real and doubtless respectable, proportions. The electoral myth of Hoover gives way before the reality of the crisis that they sought to hold back. It is the law of the capitalist regime that all prosperity is unstable. By the American reality can be judged the value of Tardieu’s American myths!
In the language of the coarse mountebank, Tardieu promises prosperity precisely at the moment when events make the very possibility of this prosperity questionable, at the moment when the Bourse, in spite of the flattery and encouragement of power, is seriously weakening.
To be sure, French capitalism no longer suffers from post-war agonies; it lives and grows. But the harbingers of the international crisis which it will have to undergo are already apparent. The workers most take cognizance of them and gather together their forces. No decade will pass before Tardieu’s prosperity shows its real face: the furious efforts of capitalism to assure a stable rule, which allow of [word missing]ing, ruins everything, and which the workers will batter down.



 
Paris, November 1929


PIERRE NAVILLE



 

rre Naville: Marxism in France Today (January 1967)



Pierre Naville Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Pierre Naville
Marxism in France Today
(January 1967)

Source: Survey, No. 62, January 1967.
Scanned and prepared for the Marxist Internet Archive by Paul Flewers.

George Lichtheim
Marxism in Modern France
Columbia University Press, 1966, pp. 198
Marxism in Modern France is an interesting attempt to interpret the crisis of Marxism in France or, better, the new system of social problems deriving from the revision of Marxism since 1950. (Unfortunately the author never uses the word ‘problem’, commonly employed by French writers and more characteristic than words such as ‘crisis’ or ‘revision’.) According to Mr Lichtheim the main cause of this crisis is the recent industrial metamorphosis in France: state intervention in all sectors of social life, state planning, the diminished hostility between theoretical classes (wage-earning proletariat and private capitalists) in favour of the ill-balanced hierarchies of functions over which technocracy now dominates. It is in this context that he places the philosophical and even literary arguments, political debate, the attempt to work out theory and to re-examine history. On the whole Mr Lichtheim is well informed and his book is a useful introduction to the evolution of social thought in France. But there are some mistakes that make us uneasy. On page 158 he says:
When Lenin in 1920 defined communism as ‘electrification plus soviets’ he was unconsciously reverting to Saint-Simon ... The Stalinist dictatorship, with its exaltation of the engineer, was Saint-Simonian to the hilt, and quite properly gained the applause of numerous polytechniciens, some of whom in their enthusiasm even joined the communist party.
Lenin put it in reverse order: the soviets, plus electrification ... the soviets coming first! And could Mr Lichtheim name a single polytechnicien who praised the Stalinist dictatorship and joined the French Communist Party? On page 197 he writes that Marx did not share Engels’s ‘illusions’ on the dialectics of nature and that he would not ‘have wasted his time on an attempt to construct an all-embracing system to take the place of Hegel’s’. Of course he had no ambition to build a philosophical system on Hegel’s model. But neither had Engels. Moreover, their correspondence bears witness to the fact that Marx and Engels (in 1858, 1860, 1870, 1873 ...) often discussed the elaboration of a natural, experimental and synthetic dialectics of nature. I clearly brought out these discussions in my preface to Dialectique de la Nature (Paris, 1950).
These remarks, to which I could add many others of the same sort, show the difficulties of the method chosen by Mr Lichtheim for expounding his ideas. In the first part of his book he defines the tendencies of French socialism and syndicalism in terms of their principal theoreticians, before going on to define the big rift between communists (Soviet style) and socialists (bourgeois-democratic style) in the years 1918 to 1939. In the second part he presents a picture of the transformation of Marxist theory (philosophical debates), and of the relations between the state and society (industrial and political mutation) on the basis of books and articles that interpret these in a conservative or innovating sense. This method has a number of disadvantages. First, it leads to overestimating literary publications that have left hardly any trace, and this gives rise to a certain lack of balance in the importance attached to the subjects under review. Secondly, events and the real labour and socialist movement take second place and it is no longer easy to understand why certain problems arose at the moment they did. By taking a series of publications as his guiding thread the author gives the impression of not always understanding the exact sort of determinism that lies beneath the reclassification of the political and social (and even philosophical) ideas he is studying. The French reader will supplement them by instinct, but the foreign reader runs the risk of being misled. It would have been preferable to describe the wide historical framework of the new system of French social problems since 1940–45, then to examine how the socialist, Marxist and syndicalist traditions created an obstacle to it and how it has brought with it new tendencies which in fact today allow us to single out the early symptoms of a neo-Marxism, or of a renovated socialism.
In this way many of the ideas here outlined with a discriminating and perspicacious eye could have been given deeper development. In particular the author would have noted that outside influences have played an essential and possibly central part in today’s crisis in French Marxism. Mr Lichtheim writes that France is still Europe’s political laboratory. This judgement is very flattering for the French but it is rather too traditional. It would be better to say that the French of today are very clever at assimilating and recasting the social and political ideas that have come from abroad. This is all the more true now that, despite all Gaullism’s grandiloquence, France (both bourgeois and working-class) no longer has the place she once held in the world. Mr Lichtheim notes the revival of French interest in the Hegelian tradition, including the Hegelianism of Marx’s young days – not to mention the persistent interest in Nietzsche and the more recent influence of Husserl and Heidegger. But emphasis should have been put on many other influences, possibly less literary and aesthetic, but bound up with the most important social and political upheavals in Europe and the world. From this point of view Mr Lichtheim’s thesis, or at least the impression he has formed of the kernel of Marxism’s new preoccupations in France, seems rather narrow. He sees in the French evolution since 1950 an originality which to me seems debatable, at least up to the present time. Possibly it is the freedom of political arguments in France and the conjunction between literature and politics which is deep-rooted in this country’s tradition that urge the author on to underline this originality. But if we put the crisis and evolution of French Marxism back into the framework of international transformations, we shall soon see that the latter have at least as much definitive influence as the domestic metamorphoses in the political and economic system of metropolitan France.
So it seems to me that the import and significance of Mr Lichtheim’s conclusions, which in themselves are interesting, would be widened if we added – to the subjects he has dealt with in the second part of his book – a study of events which he merely touches on, if he takes them into account at all. These events can be viewed in terms of the French crisis itself. The following points should be examined – I merely provide a list: the end of French traditional colonialist and imperialist power, both overseas and in eastern Europe, after the loss of a number of wars and the success of a number of revolutions; the attempt at integration into a united Europe, at least western Europe; the new relations embarked on with the United States and the formidable impact of that power on French industrial, scientific, economic and even literary life; the crisis in the Soviet system since Stalin’s death and the return of post-Stalinism to a kind of bureaucratic empiricism; the emancipation of Asia and the forms assumed by the Chinese revolution, including the growing antagonism between China and the Soviet Union. Here I am only mentioning the principal changes. The positive side of the crisis in French Marxism, above all since 1960, lies in the sort of enthusiasm and youthful spirit in which it has welcomed these events and used them as elements for its own renewal. From this point of view Mr Lichtheim does not seem to be quite accurate when he ascribes to the evolution of the French Communist Party a sterility, impotence and conformism which merely reflect the present state of the ‘Soviet model’. Similarly the ‘leftist’ tendencies, which go so far as to deny the role of parties if not trade unions, can hardly be put in direct relationship with the ‘Chinese’ tendencies in the workers’ movement. And yet again one cannot help wondering whether the ‘revisionists’ (notably those of the Parti Socialiste Unifié) with whom Mr Lichtheim seems to sympathise, do not derive as large a part of their ideas from the Americanisation (industrialisation) of economic life as from purely French attempts at planning. In this sense it could be said that the crisis of Marxism in France expresses to a large extent the sudden awareness on the part of the labour and socialist movement of its backwardness in relation to world evolution. It is from an awareness of this time-lag that the various sorts of contemporary ‘revisionists’ draw their main strength. In the last few years the subject of ‘autogestion’ has come up and needs to be added to those Mr Lichtheim examines – it has taken the place of the old philosophical discussion on ‘alienation’. But as is all too plain, this subject received a powerful impetus in France from the crises of 1956 in Poland and Hungary, and subsequently from the Yugoslav and Algerian experiences in the same field.
Thanks to his careful documentation on the polemics of recent years, Mr Lichtheim’s book has the merit of allowing us to reflect usefully on these different points. One of the conclusions I draw from it, while bearing in mind the observations above, is that the renewed Marxism whose form is now beginning to appear in France will gain its full strength when it spreads over the French frontiers and joins up with efforts at further political and social discoveries that are being made throughout Europe, not to mention new, world-scale movements. The crisis in Marxism can be called an international phenomenon. It will not be resolved in France by French efforts alone, even though it may take special forms there; and the same can be said of every single other European country.
 



PARIS. – The recent trials stemming from the revelation of ex-Premier André Tardieu that he had paid out secret funds to de la Rocque have strikingly confirmed the repeated warnings of the P.O.I. (Workers’ Internationalist Party) concerning the preparation of a fascist coup under the cover of the administration, the police and the army.
While de la Rocque was pleading not guilty in the affair of the secret funds, Pozzo di Borgo and his followers were arrested on charges of plotting “the re-establishment of the monarchy.” A number of arms depots were uncovered. A third trial was meanwhile going on against the French Social Party on the charge that it was guilty of “reconstituting a dissolved league” (the Croix de Feu).
The witnesses who came to these trials to justify and glorify their plans for massacring the workers, fully confirmed our accusations. The official communique issued by Marx Dormoy, socialist Minister of the Interior, spoke of a “monarchial plot.” But it also revealed something far more substantial than a threatened resurrection of the Orleans family. The plotters “modelled their organization on that of the army.” This little phrase really means that the plot was organized by the army chiefs themselves.
 
Army Chiefs Involved
General Duseigneur, Capt. Le Maresquier and a number of business men who are reserve officers, were arrested. These officers are not on active service, any more than Gen. Weygand who, along with Tardieu, was probably at the head of the movement. But their activity would be inexplicable without the support and cooperation of officers on active service, of the higher-ranking officers. Who prepared the training of cadres, the armaments, the connection with aviation centers the arsenals and artillery bases? It was the same group of men whom M. Thorez describes daily as the “elite of the Republican army.”
Daladier, the minister of “national defence,” in reality covered up the preparations of which he could not have been ignorant. Under the debonair gaze of the People’s Front Government the plans for the barbarous assault ripened. Thorez and Guyot preached discipline and “pride in being a soldier”; and the minister of the soldiers encouraged his General Staff to prepare bloody repression against the workers.
At the de la Rocque trial, Pozzo, addressing the Croix de Feu chief, said: “When we spoke to you about arms, you adopted a modest air and said: ‘Don’t worry about that – in any case I have many acquaintances in the army. All that will be arranged.’” Pozzo thus quite cynically revealed the liaison between the army and the mercenaries of capitalism. The plot of the “Cagoulards” (Hooded Ones) is the plot of the General Staff!
By the same blow, the role of the bourgeois army in civil war became plain to the blindest, despite the camouflage of Humanité and Populaire, who on this point are no different from the rightist press. When the minister of the Interior admitted that the plotters “modelled their organization on that of the army,” he was obliged thereby to admit that the army functions and is organized for combat against the workers. The myth of the army as an instrument of external defence of the “fatherland” vanished to give way to reality.
The trial of the French Social Party also revealed what we knew quite well: that Roger Salengro, the late socialist minister of the Interior, and Leon Blum themselves legalized and covered the organization of the French Social Party when the Coix de Feu was dissolved. The testimony of Ybarnegaray and Ottavi, both leaders of the F.S.P. established this beyond question.
 
Helped Found Party
Ybarnegaray told how Salengro and Blum together approved the creation of the F.S.P. as successor to the Croix de Feu and assured him that “we have neither the intention nor the desire to make your party subject to the decree of dissolution,” even though admittedly, it was “born of the Croix de Feu.”
Ottavi related that he had two interviews at the ministry of the Interior with Magny, director of the Sureté Generale (police), Langeron, prefect of police, and Verlomme, chief of Salengro’s staff. They were discussing the methods of dissolving the Croix de Feu and Ottavi raised the question of the so-called “benevolent” organizations of the Croix de Feu: “‘Why don’t you attach them to the party you are going to establish?’ they said to me,” related Ottavi.
These are two statements that ought to go down in history. The French Social Party was an incontestable advance for Fascism. While preserving intact its secret military organizations and its connections with the General Staff, it developed more broadly under the cover of “legality” its propaganda among the masses. The disagreements inside its putschist wing do not change anything: in the regroupment of fascism under the People’s Front Government, Blum and Salengro held the baptismal font for the new infant.
 



PARIS, France. – The clandestine arming of the French fascist parties has never been a secret for anyone. The participation of the heads of the army in this enterprise has also been quite obvious. As to the complicity of the “People’s Front” government in this conspiracy against the working masses, that has been just as patent, if not quite as avowed. Patent, because the arms depots have been exposed many times for more than a year (particularly by the Socialist Populaire and the Communist L’Humanité) without any government action; because the Sureté National (the federal police) has been kept well-informed in the matter, thanks to its stoolpigeons, spies and provocateurs – without any intervention, on the part of the ministry; because fascist propaganda and organization have been developing in the army with the support of Daladier, the Minister of Defense.
 
Government Complicity
Pozzo di Borgo, Duseigneur, La Rocque and the others have been and still are preparing their forces without any restraint behind the backs of Daladier, Blum, Dormoy and Co. just as Franco, Mola and the others prepared themselves under the , benevolent eyes of Companys, Azana, Caballero and Co.
All the “revelations” about the conspiracy show that the government, with the knowledge of the Socialist and Communist leaders, has tried to canalize fascist activity in continuing to play off one force against another as a balance for itself, a sort of game which can only result in the worst kind of catastrophe for the working class. At the same time, the Pozzo di Borgo-LaRocque trial has displayed before the eyes of the public some Punch-and-Judy secrets: the Radicals secretly subsidized La Rocque; Blum and Salengro (the Socialist Minister of Interior who committed suicide about a year ago) negotiated with La Rocque regarding the organization of the P.S.F. (French Social Party – the newly formed fascist party of La Rocque) subsequent to the pseudo-dissolution of the Croix de Feu (La Rocque’s military organization) etc.
 
Role of G.P.U.
However, there is one organization which holds that these forced revelations about fascist conspiracy are of interest only if they can be made to compromise the revolutionary organizations of the proletariat: that’s the G.P.U. It is obvious that the facts revealed on different occasions by L’Humanité were brought to its attention, partially at least, by the G.P.U. But there is only one thing that interests the G.P.U. and its French lackeys: how to compromise, the Fourth International.
In spite of all their strong desires, the agents of Stalin have not succeeded in linking the P.O.I. (the French party of the Fourth International) either to the “Etoile” bombings or to the first investigation of the “Cagoulards,” the so-called “Hooded Ones.” The provocateurs are now once more taking up the charge in two articles which must be immediately unmasked.
 
Attempt to Smear 4th International
Their first attempt: In L’Humanite of November 21, one of its editors writes: “One finds (in the conspiracy) the Trotskyist provocateurs, headed by Trotsky”. This sheet writes thus without the slightest attempt to justify such a statement. Pure calumny! In what role are they found? On what occasion? Under which circumstances?
In reality, although no Trotskyists are to be found mixed up in the fascist conspiracies, the agents of the G.P.U., on the other hand, are not, probably, entirely absent from such a framework. It has already been proven that the leaders of the White Russians (Skobline, Kondratiev) and some elements in the Gestapo, as well as in the French and Czechoslovakian police, are members of the counter-revolutionary police of Stalin. Why shouldn’t it have its men among the French fascists?
Their second attempt: Ce Soir (the Stalinist evening paper in Paris) of November 30 writes:
“The aim of this military organization (fascist groups in the South-West of France) thus appears to be very clear. It was a matter of provoking an armed uprising in South-Western France in support of an uprising prepared in Catalonia by the ‘Fifth Column’ as well as by the P.O.U.M. elements and the anarchists.”
For the G.P.U., the P.O.U.M. represents the “Spanish Trotskyists.” Ce Soir launches forth with this dastardly calumny of the P.O.U.M. at the very moment when the attempt to implicate the P.O.U.M. in an espionage trial in Spain has entirely collapsed. The G.P.U. does not give up its aim very easily. To implicate revolutionists in counter-revolutionary enterprises controlled and fostered by the government – with the classic police technique of the bourgeoisie – there is the aim!
 
La Rocque Agrees
It must also be remarked that Stalin’s agents find themselves in good company with La Rocque, in pursuing this aim. Here is a statement made by the latter at the Lyons Congress of the P.S.F. (Petit Journal, November 29):
“If the safety of the country and the defense of the republican institutions (!!) demand it, he together with his collaborators will unmask the enterprises of the anarchists and the Trotskyists, associated with others, for the purpose of making France the charnel-house of their savagery.”
Once more, by denouncing the enterprises of the provocateurs in advance, their failure will be assured.
 

