


Richard Seymour
The Liberal Defence of Murder
Verso, 2008, £16.99
As I write this review, Gaza lies in ruins after the Israeli government’s most recent exercise in collective punishment. This latest atrocity has excited massive opposition in Britain (not least the widespread student occupations). But the concern of the “liberal establishment” remains, quite incredibly, how to protect Israel from further Hamas attacks and so prevent the need for any more embarrassing Israeli reprisals. We have even seen Gordon Brown offer British warships to help maintain the naval blockade of Gaza, but, we are assured, only in the interests of the Palestinians! Without any doubt, defending Zionism is going to become increasingly difficult.
At the same time, however, liberal apologists have been offered some relief. The election of Barack Obama as US president has undoubtedly bolstered the ideological standing of American imperialism. A veneer of liberalism will be painted over the US Empire as it attempts to recover from the disaster that was the Bush-Cheney presidency. Whatever Obama’s rhetoric (overrated in my opinion anyway), the American state will continue to defend the interests of US imperialism by whatever means necessary.
For the liberal apologists of empire, Obama must surely be a welcome relief, however. Swallowing Bush-Cheney must have been an unpleasant experience, with at least some of them having to fight down a continual urge to throw up. It is one thing to ignore or cover up the use of torture, but Bush-Cheney actually required that their liberal apologists actively condone it. Thankfully for the apologists, those days are over, though there are still likely to be some embarrassing revelations, not least regarding the complicity of the New Labour government in general and David Miliband in particular. What is astonishing, of course, is how much these people were able to swallow while still continuing to identify themselves as liberals, as radicals, as part of the left.
All is made clear in Richard Seymour’s excellent The Liberal Defence of Murder. Here he provides us with a relentless forensic account of the sophistries of the “pro-war left”, of that “loose coalition of liberals, former radicals and ex-socialists” who have rallied to American imperialism in its hour of need. Immensely enjoyable though this is, even more important is his excavation of “the origins of these liberal apologists of empire”, his careful tracking of “their development over the course of three centuries, on both sides of the Atlantic”. As Seymour points out, the same John Locke who “devised the principles that would underpin the British polity and property relations ... also formulated the principles justifying the British Empire”. Locke, the intellectual fountainhead of British liberalism, not only defended colonial slavery, but also personally profited from it.
There have always been liberals, radicals and reformist socialists who have embraced empire as a progressive cause. They have condemned the abuses committed by other people’s empires but extolled the virtues of their own. For these people the imperial project brought progress, good government and economic development to the colonies. Seymour draws together a remarkable amount of material that leaves these apologists naked in the storm.
In India, for example, in the period from 1876 to 1900, “the pinnacle of colonial good governance”, famine deaths when averaged out probably totalled at least one million a year. This would constitute a crime of some enormity in the history of any other empire. It would absolutely discredit the regime that presided over such slaughter. But not in the history of Britain’s liberal Empire. Indeed, Seymour could have brought the discussion more up to date with a consideration of the 1942 Bengal Famine. This horror took place while there was a Conservative-Labour coalition government in power in London and the Labour leader, Clement Attlee, was deputy prime minister. It is a huge embarrassment for liberal apologists and accordingly either disappears from the history books altogether or, at best, gets cursory treatment.
Among many other good things, Seymour also provides a very useful account of the development of Karl Marx’s thinking on empire and imperialism, a discussion that he cuts too short for my money. He provides a history of liberal apologetics for US imperialism: the First World War saw an intrepid band of renegade American socialists embrace the slaughter on the Western Front and the repression of their former comrades.
Eugene Debs, the Socialist Party leader, was sentenced to ten years in prison for his opposition to the war – and he was not alone. Seymour identifies John Spargo, one of the leaders of the Socialist Party, as providing a sort of template for betrayal at this time. It is worth noticing that Debs had Spargo’s measure as early as 1912. Seymour is also outstanding in his discussion of Bernard Henri Levy’s apologies for the Contra counter-revolutionaries in Nicaragua and his account of the pro-war left’s performance during the recent Balkan Wars is required reading. Altogether an outstanding book. My only criticism is that there are so many areas where you wish he had written more.
 




There was a great strike wave in the US in the aftermath of the First World War. It was beaten back with the decisive defeat of a rank and file driven campaign to organise the steel industry. [1] Brutal repression was compounded by, at best, only half-hearted support from the American Federation of Labour (AFL).
Once the unions had been contained the employers prepared for what has been described as “a war of extermination against organised labour”. [2] An open shop drive was launched across the country to smash the unions once and for all. Taking advantage of the sharp recession of 1921&nd[3] convinced the AFL leadership that the only hope for the survival of the trade union movement was for them to throw themselves on the mercy of the employers [4], to proclaim their conservatism, hail the virtues of the capitalist system, expel militants and “reds”, and embrace class collaboration. Symbolising all this was the expulsion of the veteran militant and socialist William Dunne from the 1923 AFL convention for his membership of the Workers Party (the then incarnation of American communism). The vote to expel him was carried by 27,837 to 198. [5]
But class collaboration required a collaborator and the American employers were not interested. Union membership continued to fall in the 1920s. In 1920 16.7 percent of American workers had been union members; by 1929 the figure was only 9.3 percent – less than one in ten. The unions had retreated into their craft strongholds, although even these were shaken. In 1920 the Machinists (metalworking and engineering workers) had 282,000 members, but this had fallen to only 148,000 in 1922 in the face of the employers’ offensive and was down to only 70,000 by 1929. And in the mass production industries trade unionism had been almost exterminated so that in 1929, in the car industry, the Carriage, Wagon and Automobile Workers Union had only 1,500 members out of a workforce of 450,000. [6]
Over four million workers had taken part in some 3,600 strikes in the United States in 1919. By 1929 the number of strikers had fallen to 289,000 and the number of strikes to 900. For many commentators, it seemed that the class war was over and that industrial peace and harmony were within reach.
 
Repression and secret police
The weakness of American unions was not due to any “exceptionalism” on the part of American workers, but rather the “exceptionalism” of the American capitalist class. “Unionisation rates did not differ substantially from those in Great Britain and Germany around 1900. The gap ... widened between the early 1900s and the 1920s” because “American employers have opposed trade unions with a vehemence unequalled in other OECD nations”. [7]
On 23 March 1928 Richard Mellon, the brother of the Secretary of the Treasury, appeared before a congressional committee in Washington. He was questioned by the United Mine Workers’ attorney about his family’s extensive Pittsburgh mining interests and was asked about the use of machine guns. When the attorney asked, “Would you approve of that?”, he replied, “It is necessary. You could not do without them.”
This was not the testimony of some renegade backwoods employer, but of one of the pillars of the American establishment, the brother of the man widely regarded as the architect of the 1920s boom, talking about the family business. [8] It testifies to a dimension of class conflict in the United States that is usually not given enough weight of class: repression was a vital factor in the defeat of the unions after the First World War and in the subsequent maintenance of the open shop.
Trade unions operated in conditions of “semi-outlawry”. [9] The readiness of the courts to grant injunctions against the unions seriously curtailed the right to strike, on occasions removing it altogether. Instead of a strike involving a confrontation with an employer, who might well be armed to the teeth anyway, it often also involved a confrontation with the courts. [10] Unions were also hobbled by the legal recognition given to “yellow dog” contracts. (The name supposedly derives from an employer saying he would rather employ a yellow dog than a union man.) In 1917 the Supreme Court had upheld the legality of contracts whereby workers agreed not to join a union. For a union organiser to ask a worker who had signed such a contract to join a union was illegal.
Among the organisers imprisoned for contempt in the 1917 trial was Fannie Sellins, whose career provides a useful case study on the role of repression. Later, in 1919, she was shot down in cold blood by company guards while picketing the Allegheny Coal and Coke Company mine, western Pennsylvania. Her skull was crushed with a blow from a club while she lay dead or dying. A coroner’s jury returned a verdict that her killing was “justifiable and in self-defence”, and went on to condemn “anarchy and Bolshevism”. [11]
Finally, trade unionists were the victims of a secret police regime. There were 230 private detective agencies engaged in spying on the unions, providing armed guards or strike-breakers, with an absolute minimum number of undercover agents at work in industry at some 40,000. [12] Such, labour spies were part of everyday experience for union militants and activists. Abraham Muste, when looking back over his own time as a militant trade unionist, remembered that he “soon learned that on any strike committee or union executive board there would be one or more labour spies”. Indeed, when he was one of the leaders of the 1919 textile workers’ strike in Lawrence, he was taken aside by one of the other strike leaders, John Mach, the man in charge of relief operations, who revealed that he was a private detective. [13] Another self-confessed spy was the president of the Philadelphia Central Labour Union, a key body in the struggles of the time, and yet another was the Machinists’ own district organiser. [14]
The decision to fight for the union was a much bigger decision for American workers than for those in Britain, a decision that often required an uncommon degree of anger and resolve. Once that decision was made they fought all the harder. In the 1920s, however, with wages rising, most workers were not prepared to make that decision. Then in 1929 came the Great Crash and the start of the Great Depression.
 
The Great Depression
The Great Depression was a catastrophe. US GNP fell from $104.4 billion in 1929 to $94.4 billion in 1930, a less dramatic fall than in the depression of 1921–2, but on this occasion the collapse continued, reaching a low point of $72.7 billion early in 1933. For American workers the consequences were disastrous. The unemployment figures tell the story. They rose from 1,550,000 in 1929 to 12,830,000 in 1933. [15] The real figures were certainly higher than these “official” figures with Sidney Lens, for example, arguing that in 1933 unemployment “was probably 16 or 17 million, with just about the same number working part-time”. [16] By 1931 employers began cutting wages across the board and by 1933 some 87 percent of firms “had lowered wage rates at least once, and some several times for an average reduction of 18 percent”. [17]
The depression doomed the presidency of Herbert Hoover. His administration was swept away in the 1932 presidential election and the Democrat Franklin Roosevelt was elected by a popular landslide (Roosevelt received 22,821,857 votes to Hoover’s 15,761,841). Roosevelt took office in March 1933.
While this is not the place to discuss the politics of Roosevelt’s New Deal in any detail, some points are worth making. Roosevelt had fought the election on a programme that was in many respects to the right of Hoover. He condemned Hoover’s “reckless and extravagant spending” and promised “to reduce the cost of the current federal government operations by 25 percent”. He was, as his Secretary of Labour, Frances Perkins, observed, “no political or economic radical” and took “the status quo in the economic system for granted”. As for his promised New Deal, in 1933 it “was not a plan with form and content. It was a happy phrase he had coined during the campaign, and its value was psychological. It made people feel better”. [18]
Roosevelt had been a New York State senator before the First World War. He had shown no enthusiasm for reform except insofar as it advanced his career. Most telling was his response, or lack of it, to the 1911 Triangle factory fire that cost the lives of 146 workers, overwhelmingly young women. The fire raised a storm of protest but Roosevelt’s “copious correspondence did not even mention the Triangle fire”. At this time Roosevelt showed no sympathy for the labour movement, supporting judicial decisions that were intended to cripple the union, “taking for granted the use of force to suppress disturbances during strikes”. [19] By the time he became president his attitude towards the working class had not markedly changed. He was, as David Kennedy observes, “a rather diffident champion of labour, and especially of organised labour unions…his fundamental attitude toward labour was somewhat patronising”. [20] It was his commitment to save American capitalism that drove him forward and saw him adopt policies never even entertained in 1933. This was to involve concessions to the unions, concessions that Roosevelt had little sympathy for and that had to be extracted by rank and file revolt.
 
“A virtual uprising of workers for union membership”
In June 1933 Congress passed the National Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA), a cornerstone of the so-called “First New Deal”. It provided state sponsorship for firms to form trade associations charged with the regulation of their particular industry, including common standards that included pay, hours and conditions for the workforce. As one contemporary critic observed, the administration had adopted a corporatist strategy “to restore industrial stability by guaranteeing the status quo of worker and employer, one in possession of little, the other in possession of much”. [21]
The NIRA included what Sidney Lens described as “a sop to the working class” – section 7(a). [22] This gave employees the right “to organise and bargain collectively through representatives of their own choosing”. [23] While Roosevelt did not intend this to do any more than prop up the AFL, it had an electrifying effect on the working class.  
Years of defeat and hardship boiled up in anger and rage. Even with between 12 and 17 million unemployed, the working class seized the opportunity to fight back. Roosevelt, or so it seemed, had guaranteed workers’ right to join a union. Underpinning this explosion of militancy was the widespread belief in 1933 that the economic decline had actually bottomed out. Now was the time to fight. As the AFL reported, there was “a virtual uprising of workers for union membership”. In factory after factory workers were holding mass meetings that then “sent word they wanted to be organised”. [24] The open shop was under attack.
In July 1933 there were nearly 300 strikes and in August 400, as workers demanded the right to organise. By the end of 1933 there had been more strikes than in any year since 1921. This rank and file revolt met with fierce resistance from employers, while the government paid only lip service to the protection of workers’ rights and the AFL leadership stood by helpless. Only the United Mine Workers and the handful of other industrial unions actually gave an official lead to the revolt. More typical was Teamsters president Daniel Tobin’s dismissal of the men and women now signing up to join the unions as “rubbish”. [25] According to the American Civil Liberties Union, the months from July until the end of 1933 saw “widespread violations of workers” rights by injunctions, troops, private police, deputy sheriffs, labour spies and vigilantes”. [26] By the end of the year at least 15 workers had been “killed by police, company guards or vigilantes”. [27]
General Hugh Johnson, the man Roosevelt put in charge of the National Recovery Administration (NRA), told delegates at the AFL convention in October 1933 that “unions were no longer needed and that strikes had become superfluous since the president had created new mediation machinery under the NRA”. The unions should “be under government supervision” anyway. [28] Roosevelt himself warned the unions in October 1933 that “horses that kick over the traces will be have to put in the corral”. [29]
Employers completely ignored the NRA codes with respect to pay, conditions and union recognition. Johnson stood by while there was the wholesale victimisation of union members and sanctioned the formation of company unions into which a million workers found themselves enrolled. Johnson even provoked his own NRA staff to strike when he sacked one of them for union activity!
The AFL opposed workers taking industrial action to protect themselves and instead insisted that they should place their faith in Roosevelt and the NRA, even though William Green, the AFL president, was informed as early as August 1933 that as far as the textile industry was concerned there was not a single mill in the South “living up to the code as signed by the president”. [30] William Collins, the man sent by Green to organise Detroit, assured some of the most ruthless employers in the country that “I never voted for a strike in my life. I have always opposed them”. [31] Under such inspired leadership the outcome was predictable. By the start of 1934 it appeared that the working class revolt had either been contained or was actually being beaten back.
 
The role of the left
Looking back at the period Sidney Lens, then a young Trotskyist, remembered how “a radical mood replaced ... the despair of the very early 1930s”. It was a time when “one leftist among a thousand workers was enough to give the group direction and stimulus”. On one occasion:
We hired a hall that seated 30 people and gave out leaflets inviting workers of a certain shop to a meeting. Of the 275 employees more than 200 turned up; we had to adjourn to a nearby parking lot, where all the workers present signed application cards.
It was, he remembered:
An exhilarating time for young radicals. When I got on the bus, strangers were talking freely about how the union drives were going in their shops. I have never seen anything like it before or since. “This must be”, I thought to myself, “how things are during a revolution”.
There were hundreds of strikes, most of them spontaneous. The ferocity of the strike wave was demonstrated by “the figures on casualties. From August through October 1933 15 strikers were killed on the picket line and another 40 were slain in 1934.” With the AFL leadership failing to give a lead, the American left, even though few in numbers, had a strategic role to play:
A group of workers enraged over wages or an unresolved grievance would be taken in hand by a leftist fellow worker who just knew what to do or, if not, where to get the best advice. The radicals brought to their task a number of a priori concepts, which were immensely helpful in organising the unorganised. They opposed in principle any collaboration with business. They considered the government an implacable enemy to be fought without restraint. And they were unequivocal about the “labour fakirs” – heads of the established unions – whom they thought of as the concubines of the employers and the state, to be opposed with equal vigor.
How did he explain the revolt? Workers he argued, “undergo a saturation process – they silently absorb one affront after another until the moment is finally reached when they are saturated with the abuses heaped upon them. That is what happened in the red decade”. [32]
The largest organisation on the left was the Communist Party. During this time it was following the Comintern’s Third Period line, having, as one historian has put it, “a final stab at insurrection”. [33] The Third Period involved the belief that revolution was imminent. It committed the party to “dual unionism”, the establishment of revolutionary trade unions. And it involved the embrace of a crazed sectarianism that labelled the AFL as “fascist” and others on the left as “social fascists”. The only redeeming feature of the politics of the Third Period was that it involved Communists in actively combating racism and fighting for black workers’ rights in a way that had never been seen in the United States before.
At the start of 1930 the Communists had only 7,545 members, a figure that had risen to 19,000 by the start of 1934. Much of this recruitment came from the party’s work among the unemployed. The party organised unemployed councils that fought for relief, resisted evictions and established gas and electricity squads to switch these utilities back on when the companies cut them off. It organised occupations of relief offices and protest marches that frequently involved violent clashes with the police. Party members often showed incredible courage in the face of police brutality. On 6 March 1930 the Communists organised nationwide protest marches against unemployment, part of an international protest, which they claimed mobilised over a million people in the United States. One historian argues that 500,000 is a much more realistic figure, but this is still a remarkable achievement. [34]
The achievement is all the more impressive when one considers the routine repression that Communists suffered. In Chicago the police raided one neighbourhood meeting in the run-up to 6 March and arrested 14 activists. They were handed over to the city’s “Red Squad”. Steve Nelson, one of those arrested, was strapped to a chair, worked over with a blackjack and then kicked unconscious. When he rejoined the others, “Harold Williams was stretched out, his torn pants revealing an enormous rupture, and B.D. Amos had his front teeth knocked out. Joe Dallet was bleeding from his mouth and had a gash on his cheek.” Two of their number were untouched: “This, we figured, was done deliberately so as to throw suspicion on their integrity.” The reason for detailing this episode is that there are beatings and there are beatings – and in the United States at this time a systematic working over by professionals was the norm. The so-called “third degree”, to be blunt, the use of torture to extract information and confessions, was widespread and routine in many US police departments. This helps illustrate why Communists were often held in such high regard despite their sectarian politics. The party still managed to put out 200,000 leaflets and 50,000 stickers in Chicago. On 6 March 30,000 people, black and white, demonstrated in the city. [35]
On 31 August 1931, once again in Chicago, a large crowd of black workers, led by the Communists, assembled to protest against evictions. In a scuffle with the police two protesters were shot dead and later that day the body of another who had been “taken for a ride” by the police was found, having been tortured and shot in the head. The party organised a massive funeral for the three men with 60,000 people, including at least 20,000 white workers, following the coffins. [36] On 7 March 1932 the Communists led a “hunger march” to the Ford River Rouge plant in Dearborn, Detroit. In the clashes with police and company guards four of the protesters were shot dead. Another died of his wounds later. Once again party members displayed tremendous courage. One of the dreadful ironies of Soviet state capitalism is that while American Communists were being shot down outside the plant, there were Russian Communist officials inside, at that very moment, “receiving instructions in Ford methods of production. This was part of a highly lucrative contract Ford had signed with the Communist regime”. [37]
Nevertheless, as Sidney Lens acknowledged, whatever one thought about their politics, individual Communist Party members “faced hardships, beatings and the threat of jail with great courage”. The other side of this coin was the routine violent disruption of the meetings of others on the left. This climaxed on 16 February 1934 when the Socialist Party held a broadly based rally at Madison Square Garden to protest against the military assault launched against workers in Austria by the Dolfuss regime. The rally was broken up by hundreds of Communists “armed with the usual bats and brass knuckles” who succeeded in making “a shambles of the affair”. [38]
A strike at the open shop Hormel packinghouse in Austin, Minnesota, in November 1933 demonstrates quite marvellously the coming together of working class unrest and strategically placed revolutionaries. One of the company foreman was Frank Ellis, an Industrial Workers of the World [39] veteran, who “had been thrown into almost every jail from Texas to Minnesota”. As foremen he had employed every good union man he could find. The consequence was that when the workers’ discontent reached “saturation” point (over deductions for a compulsory insurance scheme), Ellis and his supporters held meetings and established an independent Wobbly-style union, the Independent Union of All Workers. Continual conflict with the company finally came to a head on 10 November with a strike vote. Pickets were put on the gates, but on 11 November some 400 workers stormed the plant and cleared out management, company guards and any scabs they found. One foreman made his escape by rowboat across the Red Cedar River accompanied by loud cheering when the boat sank halfway. When the sheriff arrived at the plant the strikers bodily picked up his car with him in it, turned it round and sent him away. The workers had effectively occupied the plant.
With the threat of the National Guard being sent in, the workers agreed to mediation on the assurance of the governor, Floyd Olson, that their interests would be looked after. Olson was the leader of the Minnesota Farmer-Labour Party, a reformist politician, whose electoral base included the labour movement. [40] Although he often boasted of his radicalism, he told the strikers that they were putting him “on the spot because if I have to choose between my proper duty and my sympathy, I will be obliged to choose duty” – the excuse of the reformist politician throughout the ages. The strikers returned to work with only a partial victory, but the open shop had been busted. The union was entrenched in the plant and went from strength to strength. [41]
 
The tide turns
“Strikes continued to be broken, pickets continued to be imprisoned or slain, and the dreams and aspirations of union members continued to be shattered” despite the NRA, concludes Bernard Bellush. At best, “the door to labour’s rights was slightly opened”. [42] It was to be rank and file action that kicked down the door. In 1934 over 1.5 million workers were to take part in nearly 2,000 strikes.
Three strikes in particular – the Auto-Lite strike in Toledo, the Teamsters’ strike in Minneapolis and the longshoremen’s strike in San Francisco – were to completely change the strategic context for the American working class. All three were led by radicals or revolutionaries. All three defied the AFL leadership, confronted the state and were fought with fierce determination. They served notice on the Roosevelt administration that the working class could not be ignored.
 
Toledo
The AFL had paid some lip service to organising workers in the mass production industries, recruiting them into Federal Labour Unions (FLUs). By and large, they were short-lived, deprived of help and assistance, regarded with suspicion and certainly never a central concern of the AFL leadership. This situation became critical as hundreds of thousands of workers demanded unionisation. By mid-1934 there were 350,000 workers in 1,700 FLUs. The only advice the AFL gave them for confronting the most anti-union employers was to trust the government.
FLU Local 18384 in Toledo, near Detroit, had organised throughout the city, recruiting members in all the car component firms. The employer the local had to organise to survive was Auto-Lite. On 23 February 1934 the local called a strike there, demanding a pay rise and union recognition. Only a minority of the workforce walked out, but enough to cause the company problems. After five days it conceded a 5 percent pay rise and promised negotiations on recognition. In reality Auto-Lite prepared for another strike, taking on extra workers, trying to undermine the union by intimidation and then reneging on the promised negotiations. On 12 April union members walked out again. With most workers crossing the picket line, the strike looked like ending in a crushing defeat, one of many such setbacks at the time. On this occasion, however, the strikers turned to the American Workers Party (AWP) for help.
The AWP, almost completely forgotten today, was largely the brainchild of one of the most remarkable men in the history of American radicalism, Abraham Muste. [43] He was a Protestant clergyman, radicalised by his opposition to the First World War, who threw himself into the post-war workers’ struggles. He was one of the leaders of the 1919 textile workers’ strike in Lawrence and emerged from that conflict as the general secretary of the radical United Textile Workers. After the union was driven out of existence by the employers’ open shop offensive he became dean of Brookwood Labour College, making it a centre of radical opposition to the AFL leadership and training union organisers to build industrial unions committed to socialist politics. Muste’s radicalism led to determined efforts by the AFL president, William Green, to close the college down. In 1929 Muste and his supporters established the Conference for Progressive Labour Action (CPLA) to campaign for “progressive” trade unionism and to actively support workers in struggle. Its organisers in North Carolina were supporting striking mill workers when police in the town of Marion opened fire on pickets on 2 October 1929, shooting 36 men and women, most of them in the back as they ran for their lives. Six of the pickets were killed. One of them, 65 year old George Jonas, was shot dead when he was already under arrest and in handcuffs. When the workers came to bury their dead, none of the local preachers was prepared to defy the mill owners and officiate, so Muste “stepped forward”. [44]
The Depression transformed Muste from a radical into a revolutionary and a Marxist. In 1932 the CPLA began setting up Unemployed Leagues to fight for relief, to resist evictions and to support workers on strike. By the end of 1933 the Leagues had successfully established themselves in Ohio (100,000 members) and Pennsylvania (40,000 members). [45] Encouraged by this, Muste and his supporters established the American Workers Party in December 1933. It proclaimed itself a revolutionary socialist party. It was anti-Stalinist in politics, but part of that stance involved a rejection of Bolshevism. It was one of a number of such organisations internationally trying to find a middle way between reformism and Stalinism in the 1930s. It attracted a number of Marxist intellectuals, such as Sidney Hook [46] and James Burnham, but its orientation was very much on mass struggle.
In Toledo two of its members, Sam Pollock and Theodore Selander of the Lucas County Unemployed League, offered to reinforce the picket line with unemployed volunteers. The offer was accepted and the party secretary, Louis Budenz, quickly became a key adviser to the strike committee, the strategist directing the conflict.
The decisive moment came when the company secured a court injunction restricting picketing. Urged on by the American Workers Party, the strikers decided to defy the injunction. The police began making arrests, but this only led to the picket numbers growing as the strike came to be seen as a battle affecting the whole of the Toledo labour movement. Workers from other factories joined the strikers and the unemployed on the picket line and by the morning of 23 May there were 6,000, swelling to 10,000 as the day went on. That afternoon the police once again began making arrests and their brutality provoked resistance:
The fighting went on from mid-afternoon until midnight. In effect the great crowd outside imprisoned 1,500 strike breakers inside the factory. Auto-Lite barricaded its doors and turned off the lights. From the roof and upper-story windows deputies rained tear gas bombs on the people in the streets below ... The crowd replied with a seven-hour barrage of stones and bricks ... heaved through the factory windows. Fires broke out in the shipping room and the parking lot ... cars were overturned, saturated with gasoline and set on fire. During the evening strikers broke into the factory at three points and there was hand to hand fighting before they were driven out. The area for blocks around was blanketed with tear gas. [47]
The strikers improvised catapults out of inner tubes and bombarded the factory through the night, breaking every window. [48] The National Guard arrived the following day to rescue the besieged scabs. The workers were in no mood to submit and the fighting continued, driving the guardsmen back to the factory gates with a hail of bricks. They responded with bayonet charges and when this failed they opened fire, shooting two pickets dead, both unemployed. Still the fighting continued. At last, on 31 May with the Toledo Central Labour Union threatening a general strike, the company agreed to shut the plant. The troops were withdrawn and negotiations got under way. On 2 June Local 18384 won recognition. The strikers did not win all their demands but they had inflicted an unambiguous defeat on Auto-Lite.
The strike was, as Muste put it, “an expression of the pent-up suffering of many years”. [49] How did William Green of the AFL respond to it? He wrote to the Toledo Central Labour Union condemning the strike as a mistake and making it clear that there should be no thought of a general strike. With the fighting raging in the streets, he wrote to one of his organisers that “I hardly know what to do in this situation at the present moment”. [50] All that can be said in his favour is that his desertion to the other side was no great loss. Instead the strike was won by working class militancy given direction by revolutionary socialists.
 
Minneapolis
Local 574 of the Teamsters union in Minneapolis had 75 members at the end of 1933. It had relied for its survival on sweetheart agreements with a handful of coal yards, but in November 1933 it was taken over by a remarkable group of militants. Carl Skogland, Ray Dunne and his brothers, Miles and Grant, and Farrell Dobbs were all members of the Trotskyist Communist League. Inspired by the success of the Hormel strike in nearby Austin (Skogland had actually assisted in the strike), they developed a strategy for organising the trucking industry in the city. They recruited not just the drivers but the indoor warehouse workers as well, transforming the Teamsters from a craft into an industrial union.
This was accomplished in defiance of the Citizen’s Alliance, one of the most powerful and ruthless open shop organisations in the United States, which ran a network of informers and spies, operated blacklists and broke strikes, boasting that “the open shop is more firmly established in private industry than any time in the history of the city”. [51] In 1920 there had been 27,000 union members in Minneapolis; by 1928 the number had been driven down to 14,000, and under the impact of the Depression, fell to 7,000 in 1934. [52] The Teamsters had not won a strike in the city since they had been crushed in the great strike of 1916.
The first step in building the union required a victory to show that the employers could actually be beaten. To this end Skogland set about organising the coal yards, recruiting enough drivers to be able to call a strike on 7 February 1934. Some 700 drivers struck across 67 yards. As Charles Walker admiringly observed:
Preparation had been surprisingly detailed and painstaking. A map of the coal yards of Minneapolis was prepared, and mimeographed instructions were issued to each picket captain before the strike. Within three hours 65 coal yards out of 67 were closed as tight as a bull’s eye in fly time.
The tactic that decided the strike was the brainchild of a “rank and file coal heaver”: “the militant use of cruising picket squads”. [53] Instead of trying to maintain stationary pickets at 67 yards, the union put its men in cars and trucks and they patrolled the streets looking for scab trucks. They knew the routes, intercepted and stopped scab trucks, dumping their loads into the road. Sub-zero temperatures aided the strikes and, after three days, the employers surrendered. In the aftermath of the success thousands of drivers joined the union.
The next step was to organise the trucking industry across the city. This required closing the market district and the union prepared with military precision. Farrell Dobbs wrote in his Trotskyist classic, Teamster Rebellion, “Seldom anywhere ... has there been such a well-prepared strike”. With the aid of advisers from the Cooks and Waiters Union volunteers were ready to serve food to 4,000 to 5,000 people daily. The union established its own medical centre to treat those injured in the struggle so they could not be arrested at the hospital. It was manned by sympathetic doctors, nurses and volunteers. As for the picketing:
We had a special staff at our disposal to handle the telephones and operate a shortwave radio used to monitor police calls. Teenage volunteers with motorcycles were organised into an efficient courier service ... They served as the eyes and ears of the picket dispatchers and as a swift means of contact with picket captains. [54]
Once again they relied on “cruising picket squads”, operating their own repair shop to keep dozens of cars and trucks on the road. The union headquarters itself was guarded by men “equipped with tommy guns” to deter vigilante attacks. [55] The pickets were unarmed and included members of the Women’s Auxiliary. Brutal beatings by police and deputised volunteers left many seriously injured on 19 May, including “20 blood covered women ... several with broken legs or unconscious”. [56] After this women were withdrawn from picket duty and pickets were armed with clubs. The union prepared for confrontation and hid 600 men in the AFL hall, unnoticed by the police. When fighting broke out between pickets and police on 21 May, instead of the pickets receiving a beating, 600 men armed with clubs marched to their assistance, taking the police completely by surprise. When the police brought in reinforcements the union motored in its reserve of 900 men from union headquarters and broke the police lines by the simple device of driving a truck through them. Over 30 police and deputies were hospitalised in hand to hand fighting.
The following day another battle took place for control of the market district. The police were reinforced by large numbers of deputies provided by the Citizens Alliance, the teamsters by hundreds of striking building workers. In the ensuing “Battle of Deputies Run” two deputies were killed, one of them a leading member of the Citizens Alliance. The forces of law and order were driven from the market district and the pickets were left in control, “directing the traffic”. [57]
The employers now agreed to negotiations under the auspices of the Farmer-Labour Party. Governor Floyd Olson, known to be a bitter enemy of the Citizens Alliance, had donated $500 to the strike fund. But he had no wish to strengthen the position of the Trotskyists in the Minneapolis labour movement and his concern was to end the strike as soon as possible, before it could become an electoral liability, rather than to ensure victory on the union’s terms. He led the union to believe that the employers had accepted their terms and it recommended acceptance on 25 May.
Local 574 had won a stunning victory over a feared opponent but quickly discovered the May agreement was only a truce. Both sides prepared for another confrontation. The second Teamsters’ strike began on 17 July. The union had immeasurably strengthened its organisation, recruiting more members and establishing an unemployed auxiliary with 5,000 members. It had started a weekly newspaper, The Organiser, edited by Max Shachtman. During the strike it became a daily. This was to prove absolutely vital in order to counter the “red scare” that the Citizens Association ran in the press, aided and abetted by Teamsters president Daniel Tobin.
Once the strike began, the union’s picketing operation swung into action. To begin with pickets were once again unarmed. This time, however, the police had orders not to allow a rerun of the May strike and staged an ambush on 20 July, opening fire with shotguns on a truckload of pickets as they tried to stop a scab truck. When other pickets on foot went to the rescue, they too were shot down. By the time the shooting stopped 69 pickets and bystanders had been shot, two pickets killed and many more seriously wounded. [58]
This deliberate, calculated attack was intended to put an end to picketing, break the strike and smash the union. The union took steps to prevent its members picketing with guns. Dobbs describes taking firearms off the pickets “as the hardest thing I ever did in my life”. [59] A shoot-out with the police would give the authorities just the excuse they needed to destroy the union by open repression. But they continued picketing with “cars and trucks trailing scab vehicles, forcing the police to provide large escorts, up to 20 police cars for one scab truck, and therefore severely limited the number of scab trucks they could run”. [60]
Governor Olson sent 4,000 National Guardsmen into the city and declared martial law on 26 July, claiming this was necessary to prevent any further loss of life. But while he claimed he was being even-handed, in practice the troops set about breaking the strike and the employers had thousands of scab trucks running within days. The Local 574 leadership had to convince its membership to confront Olson, who was trusted as a man who was on the side of the workers and had opposed the Citizens Association in the past. Ray Dunne insisted to the strikers, “Submit to the governor and the strike is lost.” As Charles Walker points out, he did not use Marxist theory to explain the role of reformism; he simply pointed “to the 6,000 trucks moving in Minneapolis”. [61]
The union took the crucial decision to defy the martial law regime and reinstate the cruising picket squads as a guerrilla-style operation. Dobbs describes how it worked:
A series of control points was set up around the town, mainly in friendly filling stations, which cruising squads could enter and leave without attracting attention. Pay phones in the stations and couriers scouting the neighbourhood were used to report scab trucks to picket dispatchers. Cruising squads were then sent to the reported locations to do the necessary and get away in a hurry. Trucks operating with military permits were soon being put out of commission throughout the city ... Troops in squad cars responded to the calls usually to find scabs who had been worked over, but no pickets. [62]
Olson responded with a raid on the union headquarters and the arrest of the union leadership, but then found the only way he could get the picketing called off was to release the people he had just arrested and force the Citizens Association to come to terms with them. Olson was, as the Trotskyist leader, James P Cannon pointed out, trapped in contradiction. He was “on the one hand supposedly a representative of the workers; on the other hand, he was the governor of a bourgeois state”. [63] He had taken action to break the strike but there was a limit to how far he could go without losing the support of the working class on whom his electoral survival depended. Having failed to break the union he turned his attention to the Citizens Association. In a gesture of even-handedness he ordered their headquarters raided by troops. More to the point, on 8 August he met with Roosevelt, who agreed to put pressure on the banks that were financing the employers. The federal government’s Reconstruction Finance Corporation threatened to withdraw its loans which were saving the banks from bankruptcy and the employers’ resistance collapsed. [64]
Against all the odds Local 574 had won a decisive victory in one of the best conducted strikes in the history of the American working class. [65]
 
San Francisco
San Francisco had been one of the best organised cities in the US. This changed after the First World War when the open shop drive, spearheaded by the Industrial Association, broke union power. On the docks the longshoremen (dockers) were defeated in 1919, with the employers establishing a company union, known as the Blue Union. Conditions on the docks inevitably worsened with the onset of the Depression. There were big wage cuts and speed-ups which produced a growing toll of accidents.
A group of left militants – mostly syndicalists (many of them former Wobblies) but open to Communist Party influence – had started a rank and file paper, the monthly Waterfront Worker, in December 1932. As one of its founders, Mitch Slobodek, put it, “There was an undercurrent of restlessness on the waterfront when we started putting out the paper but no direction. The paper gave one”. [66] It urged its readers to form “small undercover groups of those whom we know on each dock” [67] as a covert network of militants, the nucleus of a union, ready to come out in the open when the time was right. Later on in the year the International Longshoremen’s Association (ILA) appointed an organiser in San Francisco, Lee Holman, who began signing up members.
The Communist Party were committed to the formation of revolutionary trade unions in opposition to the supposedly “fascist” AFL. The failure of this policy was not brought home because the AFL unions were not growing either. But in 1933, with the rush of workers into the AFL, many Communist Party members began ignoring the party’s policy. This was the case in San Francisco where the rank and file group that had developed around the Waterfront Worker, with Communist support, resolved to take over the ILA, democratise it and turn it into a militant fighting organisation. [68] In Seattle and Portland, Communist Party branches stuck to the party line, condemning the ILA as “social fascist”, and consequently they had no influence on events whatsoever.
As more and more dockers joined the ILA they increasingly came into conflict with the Blue Union and the employers. The official ILA position, argued by Holman, was that they should place their trust in the NRA and at all costs avoid trouble. But the militants around the Waterfront Worker, led by Harry Bridges, decided to act. In September 1933 on the Matson dock men refused to show their Blue Union cards and four of them were suspended for wearing ILA buttons. Holman refused to support them but the militants led a walkout that threatened to spread throughout the port and the employer backed down. The Blue Union was finished. As Bridges put it, that “was the end of the fear and intimidation”. [69] A small tactical victory had been carefully calculated so as to have a decisive strategic result.
Rank and file dockers the length of the Pacific coast were taking control of their union. They endorsed a policy based on union controlled hiring halls that would effectively establish the closed shop and give the union control of the docks – voting at the end of March by 6,616 to 699 for strike action if their demands were not met. ILA president Joseph Ryan, the worst type of AFL bureaucrat, stepped in to suspend the strike when Roosevelt promised mediation. The employers refused to give any ground, and were preparing to break the threatened strike and smash the union. The militants succeeded in having Holman, by now completely discredited by his opposition to strike action, suspended from office, and elected a strike committee. Mass meetings across the Pacific coast voted on 8 May for immediate strike action. On 9 May 12,000 dockers stopped work.
The walkout was quickly joined by the seamen, coming out both in solidarity and to win their own demands. Crucial, however, was the decision by the San Francisco teamsters, defying their full-time officials, to boycott the docks. Even when the employers got scabs to load and unload ships they could not move goods off the docks because of the teamsters’ decision to respect picket lines. Every day there were clashes between pickets and police. The first fatalities occurred at San Pedro on 14 May when police and company guards shot two pickets dead during an attempt to storm a scab compound. The strike remained solid.
ILA president Joseph Ryan (on occasions he claimed the union initials stood for “I Love America”) intervened to try to bring the strike to an end. His support in the union rested on the New York docks, where the union worked in close collaboration with the employers and organised crime, and he was not accustomed to the idea of actually having to put agreements to the membership. He negotiated a deal over the heads of the west coast strikers, only to have it repudiated at mass meetings. [70]
When union leaders failed to deliver a sell-out the employers determined to open the San Francisco docks by force. The Industrial Association set up a trucking firm with scab drivers who would cross picket lines and carried goods off the docks with a massive police presence. There was fierce fighting between pickets and police on 3 July, with the police making free use of clubs and tear gas. On 5 July some 20,000 pickets (dockers, seamen, unemployed, teamsters and others) assembled to stop the trucks. Bridges and his picket captains marshalled their forces to fight a regular battle. By the end of the day two pickets had been shot dead and dozens more were seriously injured. [71] The state governor, Roger Lapham, seized on the shootings as an excuse to send in the National Guard, although, just as in Minneapolis, the union disarmed pickets who turned up for duty with firearms.
It was by now clear to more and more workers that what was at stake was not just the longshoremen’s cause but the fate of the San Francisco labour movement. On 12 July the teamsters voted, once again in defiance of their officials, for an indefinite all-out strike. Workers across the city were walking out in sympathy in growing numbers in what one historian has described as “a creeping general strike”. [72] The AFL officials on the Central Labour Union reluctantly bowed to the inevitable and called a general strike on 14 July, beating off attempts to establish a rank and file controlled strike committee. One official admitted that it “was an avalanche. I saw it coming so I ran ahead before it crushed me”. [73] It was the only way they could keep the strike firmly under official control.
There was serious discussion at government level about whether or not to send in federal troops, with Governor Lapham arguing, “We can cure this thing best by bloodshed”. [74] Roosevelt was on holiday, and both acting President Cordell Hull, the Secretary of State and Attorney General Cummings were in favour of the use of force. Secretary of Labour Perkins was strongly opposed, arguing it would mean “regular shooting and a lot of people will drop in the streets”. Bloodletting would cause “frightful resentment” and would do serious damage “politically and morally and for the basic labour-industry and labour-government relationship”. [75] Roosevelt backed her judgement, a decision that, in effect, determined the direction of the New Deal. If the administration had sent in the troops, it would have alienated working class support. Instead the decision was made to rely on the union leaders to police their members, keeping them aboard as allies, even if it meant making concessions that Roosevelt had little sympathy with.
This did not preclude action against the left. On 17 July there was a well organised wave of vigilante attacks across California. With the police conveniently absent, gangs of armed vigilantes wrecked offices and meeting halls, and administered beatings, with the Communist Party the favourite target. Once the vigilantes had done their work the police arrived to arrest the victims. By the end of the day over 450 people had been arrested and charged with vagrancy, with bail set at $1,000 instead of the normal $10. This carefully organised assault was celebrated in the press as a popular uprising against the “reds”. Earlier a group of businessmen had got together to discuss having Bridges killed (he had already turned down a $50,000 bribe) but one of their number warned he would go public if they did. [76]
On 20 July the Central Labour Union called off the general strike on the grounds that acceptable mediation was now on offer. This effectively outmanoeuvred the longshoremen. The Teamsters voted to end their boycott of the docks and the now isolated dockers voted for mediation. Bridges was criticised by some on the left for this, but in retrospect it seems he accurately judged the balance of forces. On strike the balance of forces was against them; back at work it was in their favour. The final settlement gave the dockers a coast-wide contract with a six-hour day, time and a half for overtime and a union appointed dispatcher in joint union-employer hiring halls. On the job action soon cleared any scabs off the docks, ended the speed-ups and established the closed shop. [77] It was a historic victory.
 
Defeat
The victories in Toledo, Minneapolis and San Francisco changed the strategic picture as far as the class struggle was concerned. Whereas the Roosevelt administration had once felt that it could ignore the working class, it had now been forcibly brought home that this was no longer the case. And as far as the working class itself was concerned, it had been demonstrated that militant action, amounting on occasions to virtual insurrection, could triumph. Even in conditions of mass unemployment militancy and solidarity could defeat the most ruthless employers. In all three strikes the formula for victory was rank and file militancy and radical or revolutionary socialist leadership confronting employers, the union leadership and the state. The year 1934 was to see another great strike that proved the importance of this formula in a negative sense.
On 1 September 1934 the United Textile Workers called a national strike, the largest stoppage in US history up to that point. Between 350,000 and 400,000 workers walked out. Three weeks later, on 21 September, it was called off by the leadership on the basis of “assurances” given by the president personally. The result was a crushing defeat.
Textile workers were among the hardest hit by the Depression, with wages driven down and work relentlessly intensified by the “stretch out”. The union had virtually collapsed with only 15,000 members in February 1933. Section 7(a) revolutionised the situation and union membership had increased to 40,000 by September that year and to 340,000 by August 1934. This explosion in membership was driven by rage, but the rage was regarded as a dangerous embarrassment by a union leadership looking to Roosevelt and the NRA for justice. It was only under intense rank and file pressure that the union leadership finally called a strike.
While the mills in New England and Maine were shut down, the region where the strike would be decided was acknowledged to be in the South, in the Carolina Piedmont. Here the workers formed “flying squadrons”, car and truck convoys of pickets that motored from mill to mill, closing them down. The tactic met with great success and the authorities responded by mobilising the National Guard. In Georgia governor George Talmadge, “a friend of the workers”, declared martial law and ordered the internment of strikers. There were violent clashes. On 6 September company guards opened fire on a group of about 70 strikers picketing the Chiquola mill in Honea Park and killed seven. Secretary of Labour Perkins described this as “an unfortunate situation”. [78] Altogether 15 strikers were killed in the three weeks of the dispute. The union retreated in the face of this repression, suspending the flying squadrons and effectively abandoning any serious attempt to spread the strike. Having given up any attempt to win, they threw themselves on the tender mercies of the Roosevelt administration.
After the strike was called off on the basis of Roosevelt’s assurances one union leader, Francis Gorman, proclaimed it “one of the most amazing victories ever recorded in the annals of the AF of L”. [79] In fact the union had surrendered. Roosevelt’s assurances were worthless and thousands of workers found themselves sacked, evicted from company housing and denied relief by agencies run by men appointed by the “millocracy”. The employers’ intention was to strike a blow that would deter attempts at unionisation for a generation. Union membership collapsed from 340,000 in August 1934 to only 79,000 in the summer of 1935. The importance of this defeat for the American labour movement was that it left the South an open shop stronghold.
Was defeat inevitable? Certainly the textile workers confronted ruthless employers, armed to the teeth and with the full support of the police and the National Guard. The union had few financial resources and it received no help from the AFL. Nevertheless, when the strike was called off, union members were still fighting and still believed they could win. Between the end of the strike and the end of July 1935 there were 94 textile strikes across the South as the workers tried to protect themselves with or without the union. [80] Instead of even a fighting retreat the union leadership chose surrender and proclaimed the disaster a historic victory. The union leader who made this proclamation, Francis Gorman, belatedly recognised, two years after the strike, “Many of us did not understand fully the role of government in a struggle between labour and industry ... Government protects the strong, not the weak, and ... yields to that group which is strong enough to assert itself over the other”. [81]
* * *
Notes
1. For the 1919 steel strike see Brody, 1987. See also Foster, 1920.
2. Soule, 1947, p. 200.
3. For this strike see Davis, 1997.
4. According to Melvyn Dubofsky, from 1922 until his death in 1924 the AFL president, Samuel Gompers, “acted the beggar, beseeching employers to give the unions a break ... His successor as president, William Green, proved even less militant and more deferential to employers” – Dubofsky, 1994, p. 97.
5. Foner, 1991, p. 167. Dunne had been one of the leaders of the insurgent labour movement in Butte, Montana. After the kidnapping and murder of the Industrial Workers of the World organiser Frank Little in the city in 1917, an attempt was made to lift Dunne. “I had a .32 Colt in my coat pocket – with my hand on it – and I shot twice. Two of the men dropped and the third ran.” The next day he searched the press for a report of the shootings but found instead “headlines announcing that W.F. Dunne had disappeared” – Howard, 1924, pp. 192–193. William Dunne was for most of the 1920s a close ally of James P. Cannon in the Communist Party but he went on to become a hardline Stalinist. His younger brothers, Ray, Miles and Grant, were to follow Cannon out of the party and became stalwarts of the Trotskyist movement.
6. Down from a membership of 40,000 in 1920. Peterson, 1987, pp. 113,&nbp126.
7. Robertson, 2000, p. 23.
8. Cannadine, 2006, p. 361.
9. The phrase is from Forbath, 1991, p. 98.
10. Montgomery, 1980, p. 160.
11. Accounts of Fannie Sellins’s death differ over detail, something which reflects the determination of the authorities not to inquire too deeply. See however Cassedy, 1992, and Meyerhuber, 1986, pp. 42–59.
12. Huberman, 1937, p. 6.
13. Muste, 1970, pp. 65, 66.
14. Brooks, 1978, pp. 51–52.
15. Chandler, 1970, p. 5; Watkins, 1999, p. 40.
16. Lens, 1949, p. 256.
17. Chandler, 1970, p. 34; Watkins, 1999, p. 44.
18. Martin, 1976, p. 259; Perkins, 1948, pp. 135, 256. The best account of Roosevelt as a politician is that offered by David Shannon who characterises him as “an extraordinarily gifted political broker ... He did not design the New Deal; he ‘brokered’ it” – Shannon, 1979, p. 178.
19. Freidel, 1952, p. 121.
20. Kennedy, 1999, p. 297.
21. Lundberg, 1938, pp. 459-460.
22. Lens, 1949, p. 272. One aspect of Section 7(a) that is often ignored is its impact on black workers. Attempts by black organisations to have anti-discrimination written into the codes, banning unions from barring black workers from membership, were shamefully opposed by the AFL and eventually dropped. See Wolters, 1969.
23. Bernstein, 1970, p. 34.
24. Watkins, 1999, p. 218.
25. Zieger, 1994, p. 42.
26. Preis, 1972, p. 17.
27. Bellush, 1975, p. 56.
28. Ohl, 1985, p. 198; Bellush, 1975, p. 94.
29. Dubofsky, 1994, p. 118.
30. Bellush, 1975, pp. 55, 79–80.
31. Fine, 1963, p. 148.
32. Lens, 1974, pp. 286–287; Lens, 1980, pp. 56–57, 63–64.
33. The phrase is from Ryan, 2004.
34. Watkins, 1999, p. 119.
35. Folsom, 1994, pp. 246–257. For the Third Degree see Leo, 2008.
36. Storch, 2007, pp. 100–102.
37. Widick, 1989, pp. 49–50.
38. Lens, 1980, pp. 24, 54.
39. The Industrial Workers of the World, known as the “Wobblies”, was a large revolutionary syndicalist trade union organisation in the 1910s and 1920s.
40. For the Farmer-Labour Party, see Valelly, 1989.
41. Engelmann, 1974.
42. Bellush, 1975, p. 178.
43. For Muste see in particular Robinson, 1988.
44. Salmond, 2004, pp. 7–8, 22–23, 63–64.
45. Rosenzweig, 1975.
46. For a very interesting discussion of Sidney Hook’s involvement with the AWP see Phelps, 1997, pp. 109–123.
47. Bernstein, 1970, pp. 222–223.
48. Fine, 1963, p. 279.
49. Muste, 1970, p. 157.
50. Phelan, 1989, pp. 86–87.
51. Millikan, 2000, p. 219.
52. Faue, 1991, p. 56.
53. Walker, 2005, p. 90.
54. Dobbs, 1972, p. 103.
55. Walker, 2005, p. 272.
56. Millikan, 2000, p. 272.
57. Dobbs, 1972, p. 94.
58. In his biography of Floyd Olson, George Mayer writes of this incident that the Local 574 leadership “played an equally reprehensible role as the police”. He claims that “the strike leaders sought the shedding of blood to reinforce working class solidarity” and that they deliberately sent pickets into an ambush where they knew men would be killed – Mayer, 1987, pp. 209–210. Bernstein agrees, writing that Dunne and Dobbs deliberately sent “unsuspecting pickets into the rain of police gunfire”. He puts this down to the “Marxist doctrine of class warfare, with its inversion of ordinary ends and means” – Bernstein, 1970, p. 243. The problem with this is that the only evidence for it is the authors’ distaste for Trotskyism. The slander seems to have originated with people on Olson’s staff, who had their own reformist political agenda.
59. Dobbs, 1972, p. 156.
60. Dobbs, 1972, p. 157.
61. Walker, 2005, p. 198.
62. Dobbs, 1972, pp. 170–171.
63. Cannon, 1944, p. 161.
64. Mayer, 1987, p. 221.
65. The May and July strikes provoked the publication of a minor Stalinist classic: Permanent Counter-Revolution: The Role of the Trotzkyites in the Minneapolis Strikes by William Dunne and Morris Childs. They condemn the Trotskyists’ “defeatist strategy and tactics”, accuse them of “strike-breaking”, of writing “another miserable page in the history of class collaboration”, of being “spineless and unprincipled leaders”, and of following “a counter-revolutionary and, therefore, anti-working class policy” – Dunne and Childs, 1934, pp. 3, 21, 22, 23, 47.
66. Larrowe, 1977, p. 13.
67. Selvin, 1996, p. 57. The best account of the strike along the whole Pacific coast is Markholt, 1988.
68. The party organiser in California, Sam Darcy, had little time for “dual unionism”. On one occasion, when he was being berated by an emissary from party general secretary Earl Browder for rightist deviations, he threw the man out of the window. See Kimeldorf, 1992, p. 8.
69. Larrowe, 1977, p. 21.
70. Ryan was a friend to employers, gangsters and politicians, including Roosevelt when he was Governor of New York State. Incredibly, his political friends made him head of the New York State Parole Board, which was very useful to his gangster friends. Many of the ILA’s New York officials were gang members, most notably the head of the union in Brooklyn, Albert Anastasia, whose brother, Tony, ran Murder Incorporated for the New York mob. In the aftermath of the Pacific strike, a rank and file opposition developed in New York, led by Peter Panto. He built up widespread support but then suddenly disappeared in 1939. His body was eventually found in a secret mob cemetery in 1947; he had been strangled. See Kimeldorf, 1992, p. 124.
71. For a graphic account see Bernstein, 1970, pp. 272–279.
72. Crook, 1960, p. 123.
73. Nelson, 1990, p. 149.
74. Selvin, 1996, p. 178.
75. Martin, 1976, p. 320.
76. Larrowe, 1977, pp. 99–100.
77. Nelson, 1990, pp. 156–162.
78. Irons, 2000, pp. 148–150. For a nationwide account of the strike see Salmond, 2002.
79. Hodges, 1986, p. 117.
80. Hodges, 1986, p. 146.
81. Irons, 2000, p. 163.
* * *
References
Bellush, Bernard, 1975, The Failure of the NRA (W.W. Norton).
Bernstein, Irving, 1970, Turbulent Years 1933–1941 (Houghton Mifflin).
Brody, David, 1987, Labor in Crisis: The Steel Strike of 1919 (University of Illinois).
Brooks, Thomas, 1978, Clint: A Biography of a Labor Intellectual (Athenium).
Cannadine, David, 2006, Mellon (Alfred Knopf).
Cannon, James P., 1944, The History of American Trotskyism (Pioneer).
Cassedy, James, 1992, A Bond of Sympathy: The Life and Tragic Death of Fannie Sellins, Labor’s Heritage, volume 4, number 4.
Chandler, Lester, 1970, America’s Greatest Depression (Harper and Row).
Crook, Wilfred, 1960, Communism and the General Strike (Shoestring Press).
Davis, Colin, 1997, Power At Odds: The 1922 National Railroad Shopmen’s Strke (University of Illinois).
Dobbs, Farrell, 1972, Teamster Rebellion (Monad).
Dubofsky, Melvyn, 1994, The State and Labor in Modern America (University of North Carolina).
Dunne, William, and Morris Childs, 1934, Permanent Counter-Revolution: The Role of the Trotzkyites in the Minneapolis Strikes (Workers Library), www.marxists.org/archive/dunne/1934/10/.
Engelmann, Larry, 1974, ’We Were The Poor People’ – The Hormel strike of 1933, Labor History, volume 15, number 4.
Faue, Elizabeth, 1991, Community of Suffering and Struggle: Women, Men and the Labor Movement in Minneapolis 1915–1945 (University of North Carolina).
Fine, Sidney, 1963, The Automobile Under the Blue Eagle (University of Michigan).
Folsom, Franklin, 1994, Impatient Armies of the Poor (University of Colorado).
Foner, Philip S, 1991, The TUEL to the End of the Gompers Era (International Publishers).
Forbath, William, 1991, Law and the Shaping of the American Labor Movement (Harvard University).
Foster, William Z. 1920, The Great Steel Strike and its Lessons (B.W. Huebsch), www.archive.org/details/greatsteelstrike00fostuoft.
Freidel, Frank, 1952, Franklin D Roosevelt: The Apprenticeship (Little, Brown).
Hodges, James, 1986, New Deal Labor Policy and the Southern Cotton Textile Industry 1933–1941 (University of Tennessee).
Howard, Sidney, 1924, The Labor Spy (Republic Publishing).
Huberman, Leo, 1937, The Labor Spy Racket (Modern Age Books), www.archive.org/details/laborspyracket00huberich.
Irons, Janet, 2000, Testing The New Deal: The General Textile Strike of 1934 in the American South (University of Illinois).
Kennedy, David, 1999, The Oxford History of the United States (Oxford University).
Kimeldorf, Howard, 1992, Reds or Rackets: The Making of Radical and Conservative Unions on the Waterfront (University of California).
Larrowe, Charles, 1977, Harry Bridges: The Rise and Fall of Radical Labor in the US (Lawrence Hill).
Lens, Sidney, 1949, Left, Right and Center (Henry Regenery).
Lens, Sidney, 1974, The Labor Wars (Anchor Books).
Lens, Sidney, 1980, Unrepentent Radical (Beacon Press).
Leo, Richard, 2008, Police Interrogation and American Justice (Harvard University).
Lundberg, Ferdinand, 1938, America’s 60 Families (Vanguard Press), www.archive.org/details/americas60famili035216mbp.
Markholt, Ottilie, 1988, Maritime Solidarity: Pacific Coast Unionism 1929–1938 (Pacific Coast Maritime History Committee).
Martin, George, 1976, Madame Secretary: Frances Perkins (Houghton Mifflin).
Mayer, George, 1987, The Political Career of Floyd B. Olson (Minnesota Historical Society).
Meyerhuber, Carl, 1986, Less Than Forever: The Rise and Decline of Union Solidarity in Western Pennsylvania (Susquehanna University).
Millikan, William, 2000, A Union Against Unions (Minnesota Historical Society).
Montgomery, David, 1980, Workers’ Control in America (Cambridge University).
Muste, Abraham Johannes, 1970, Sketches for an Autobiography, in Nat Hentoff, The Essays of A.J. Muste (Simon and Schuster).
Nelson, Bruce, 1990, Workers On The Waterfront (University of Illinois).
Ohl, John Kennedy, 1985, Hugh Johnson and the New Deal (Northern Illinois University).
Perkins, Frances, 1948, The Roosevelt I Knew (Hammond).
Peterson, Joyce Shaw, 1987, American Automobile Workers 1900–1933 (State University of New York).
Phelan, Craig, 1989, William Green (State University of New York).
Phelps, Christopher, 1997, Young Sidney Hook (Cornell University).
Preis, Art, 1972, Labor’s Giant Step (Pathfinder).
Robertson, David Brian, 2000, Capital, Labor and State (Rowman and Littlefield).
Robinson, Jo Ann Ooiman, 1988, Abraham Went Out: A Biography of A.J. Muste (Temple University).
Rosenzweig, Roy, 1975, Radicals and the Jobless: The Musteites and the Unemployed Leagues 1932-1936, Labor History, volume 16, number 1.
Ryan, James, 2004, A Final Stab at Insurrection: the American Communist Party 1928–1934, in Matthew Worley, In Search of Revolution: International Communist Parties in the Third Period (IB Tauris).
Salmond, John, 2002, The General Textile Strike of 1934: From Maine to Alabama (University of Missouri).
Salmond, John, 2004, Southern Struggles (University Press of Florida).
Selvin, David, 1996, The Terrible Anger: The 1934 Waterfront and General Strikes in San Francisco (Wayne State University).
Soule, George, 1947, Prosperity Decade: From War to Depression 1917–1922 (Rinehart).
Storch, Randi, 2007, Red Chicago: American Communism at its Grassroots 1928–1935 (University of Illinois).
Valelly, Richard, 1989, Radicalism in the States: The Minnesota Farmer-Labor Party and the American Political Economy (University of Chicago).
Walker, Charles Rumsford, 2005, American City: A Rank and File History of Minneapolis (University of Minnesota).
Watkins, T.H., 1999, The Hungry Years (Henry Holt).
Widick, B.J., 1989, Detroit: City of Race and Class Violence (Wayne State University).
Wolters, Raymond, 1969, Section 7a and the Black Worker, Labor History, volume 10, number 3.
Zieger, Robert, 1994, American Workers, American Unions (John Hopkins University).
 



The Weimar Republic
Detlev Peukert
Penguin £.99
The key question in the history of the Weimar regime in Germany in
the 1920s and early 1930s is: why it was that the ruling class were
prepared, however reluctantly, to work with the Socialist Party (SPD)
in establishing the republic at the end of the First World War, but
had turned decisively against it by the end of the 1920s even to the
extent of embracing the Nazis? ‘There is,’ Detlev Peukert writes,
however, ‘no clear or simple answer to this question.’ Not true.
In 1918 Germany was gripped by revolution and the ruling class was
weakened and discredited by defeat. All that stood in the way of a
workers’ takeover was the SPD which called for law and order,
opposed the workers’ councils and promised to introduce socialism
peacefully after parliamentary elections had been held. Instead of
trying to fight the Socialists the ruling class entered into a unholy
alliance with them, agreeing to tolerate parliamentary democracy as
long as the SPD guaranteed that there would be no socialist
revolution. This alliance was sealed with the blood of Rosa
Luxemburg, Karl Liebknecht and the other Communists killed by the
right wing Freikorps early in 1919. It was on this somewhat
unreliable foundation that the Weimar Republic was erected.
By the end of the 1920s the German ruling class decided, first,
that the new alliance was no longer necessary and, second, that it
could no longer be afforded. With the onset of the Great Depression,
German capitalism required wage cuts and welfare cuts on such a scale
that trade unions, the Socialists and the Communists, indeed
parliamentary government itself, had to be smashed. To achieve this
they changed their alliance with the Socialists for an alliance with
the Nazis.
The key to understanding the downfall of the Weimar Republic is
the changing requirements of the German ruling class, the existence
of which Peukert does not even acknowledge. From this point of view
the only way to have effectively broken their power was through
socialist revolution.
But according to Peukert what we are confronted by is ‘a crisis
of modernisation’, ‘a failed experiment with modernity’ that
finally falls victim to the totalitarian temptation from both left
and right. This theoretical flourish is really only a thin disguise
for what is a standard liberal account written from the perspective
of how parliamentary democracy could have been saved, rather than
from that of socialist revolution. Indeed, according to Peukert,
socialist revolution in an advanced society like Germany was a
utopian non-starter.
One last point. Most criticism of this period focuses on the
criminal policies of the Communist Party (KPD) that campaigned
against the ‘social fascist’ Socialists and ignored the growing
Nazi menace. This is quite right. What must not be forgotten,
however, is the consistent refusal of the SPD to offer any resistance
to the German right in this period. Their cowardly opportunism was
the other side of the KPD’s ultra-leftism.
The KPD’s sectarian assault on the Socialists meant that they
could not win SPD supporters over to the need for joint action to
fight the Nazis. This reinforced the Socialists’ passivity. This
was a fatal mistake for which both the German and the European
working class paid the price.
 




Mark Phythian
The Labour Party, War and International Relations 1945–2006
Routledge, 2007, £19.99
One response to the Iraq war has been an attempt to blame it on
Tony Blair personally and to somehow exonerate the Labour Party. To
this end, the Labour Party’s past is mythologised, the Labour left
(despised and abused at the time) is treated as if it was the
authentic voice of the party, and previous Labour governments are
celebrated for their commitment to “internationalism”. In this
scenario, Blair performs as a sort of Pied Piper, leading the rats of
Hamelin or, on this occasion, the Parliamentary Labour Party from the
true path. There are a number of versions of this particular salvage
operation. The most recent is Mark Phythian’s The Labour Party,
War and International Relations 1945–2006. Here he makes a
heroic but, in the end, futile attempt to retrieve something from the
Labour tradition as far as foreign policy, international relations
and war are concerned.
At the start of his book, Phythian writes that the Labour Party’s
first serious consideration of “questions of war and peace” did
not take place until 1916–1917. The outcome was a Statement of
War Aims agreed at a special conference on 28 December 1917. In
the extract from the document that he quotes, the Labour Party made
it clear that it was only supporting the Allies in the First World
War so “that the world may henceforth be made safe for democracy”.
The most important of the party’s war aims was proclaimed as being
“that there shall be henceforth on earth no more war”. Among
other things, the statement also called for “the frank abandonment
of every form of imperialism” and “the entire abolition of
profit-making armament firms”.
The statement showed, Phythian argues, Labour’s “instinctive
pacifism”. [1] He fails to mention the
section of the statement where the party endorsed the Balfour
Declaration, urging that Palestine should be “set free” and
that “such of the Jewish people as desire to do so may return and
may work out their own salvation, free from interference by those of
alien race and religion”. Whereas even the Balfour Declaration
had supposedly guaranteed “the civil and religious rights of the
existing non-Jewish communities in Palestine”, the Labour Party
statement did not even go this far in acknowledging the existence of
the Palestinians. [2] It hardly needs
pointing out that since December 1917 the statement has remained a
dead letter: Labour governments have made war, crushed colonial
rebellions and embraced the arms industry, indeed today New Labour is
actually privatising parts of the British military. Their Zionist
commitment is the only part of the 1917 statement to which Labour has
remained true.
More important, however, is the fact that even at the very moment
that the Labour Party adopted this idealistic Statement of War
Aims it was participating in Lloyd George’s coalition
government that was engaged in waging the most bloody imperialist war
in history (at least up to that time). The Labour Party was part of
the coalition when James Connolly and the other Easter Rising
prisoners were executed in 1916. There is clearly a discrepancy
between the sentiments of the statement and the support for and
participation in the terrible slaughter that had already cost
millions of lives, left many more wounded and mutilated, and imposed
immense suffering on civilian populations in the combatant countries.
And, of course, Phythian also neglects the extent to which the
statement was a response to developments in Russia in the course of
1917. With the overthrow of the Tsar and the coming to power of the
Bolsheviks, the Labour leadership recognised that they confronted a
revolutionary rival for working class support. The statement was an
attempt to meet this challenge from the left by the proclamation of
various worthy sentiments that would placate the party’s rank and
file, while not compromising its actual support for the war. The gap
between Labour’s supposed instincts and its actual conduct in
government that was laid bare in 1917 has continued down to today.
How effectively does Phythian explain it?
He focuses on the period since 1945, identifying “certain values
and currents that have shaped the approaches the party has taken to
the question of war since 1945”. First there is “Labour’s
insistence on the primacy of the UN”, a principle that is required
to carry the main burden of his argument. There is also Labour’s
“distinctively restrictionist approach to military interventions”,
“Labour’s historic suspicion of power politics and secret
diplomacy”, “Labour’s tradition of anti-colonialism”,
“Labour’s internationalism” (although he does admit that this
is “an at times rather vague notion”), and, most remarkably, “a
deep-rooted suspicion of US motives in undertaking military
interventions”. Under Blair, he argues, these Labour values were
violated so that the Iraq war is very difficult “to reconcile ...
with the Labour Party tradition with regard to the questions of war”.
[3] Phythian’s objection to the
unprovoked attack on Iraq seems to have more to do with the absence
of a UN resolution than with opposition to New Labour’s support for
US imperialism in the Middle East. More generally, however, his
rehearsal of Labour’s supposed “values and currents” tells us
nothing about Labour’s foreign policy since 1945. Indeed much of
Phythian’s own account exposes the gap between “values” and
actual conduct. Nevertheless, he clings to his idealist
interpretation with something like desperation.
What we shall do here is examine Labour’s foreign and war
policies, laying bare the real motives that have guided Labour
governments since 1945. It is these motives, the Labour leadership’s
understanding of the best interests of British imperialism, rather
than any supposed values or instincts that have determined Labour’s
conduct in power. How else can one seriously explain how a party with
an “instinctive pacifism”, according to Phythian, could take the
decision in January 1947 to develop a British atomic bomb! [4]
At the risk of oversimplification, as far as the Labour Party was
concerned, the values and instincts were there for the consolation of
the party membership, while the business of government operated
according to a different agenda altogether. As a reformist party, the
Labour Party identified the British state, a capitalist state, as the
agency of reform and improvement. This identification, as far back as
the first Labour government in 1924, produced a determination to
protect the interests of the British state and this has, in turn,
produced a history of war and colonial repression.
More specifically, since 1945, far from Labour governments being
motivated by Phythian’s “values and currents”, they have been
motivated by the need to maintain Britain’s role as a junior
partner of American imperialism. Indeed, Labour embraced this role
earlier than the Conservatives, who still thought Britain strong
enough to go it alone as late as the Suez invasion of 1956, and
later, under Heath, briefly looked to Europe rather than to the
United States. The only time that Labour governments have equivocated
in their support for American imperialism has been moments when they
too looked to the European Union as an alternative. These moments
always passed and “America right or wrong” has remained the
Labour leadership’s watchword.
The discussion here will focus on three wars: Korea, Vietnam and Iraq.
 
Korea
The Attlee government’s decision to send British troops to fight
in Korea in 1950 had one clear overriding motive: the need to sustain
Britain’s alliance with the United States. A failure to rally to
the American cause would inevitably have done serious damage to
relations between the two countries. In the circumstances the
despatch of troops was inevitable. The war was, of course, sanctioned
by the UN, but this was a mere fig leaf for America’s war. Labour’s
participation was determined not by any loyalty to the UN, but by the
need to show loyalty to the United States. This need derived from the
government’s awareness that post-1945 the British state no longer
had the power to protect British interests throughout the world. The
British were forced to turn to the United States for support and
protection even though this involved having to make serious
concessions to American interests and, of course, participate in a
war in which no British interests were involved other than the
American alliance. Clement Attlee, Ernest Bevan and Co resented being
placed in this subordinate position and hoped that economic recovery
would eventually enable them to deal with the Americans on more equal
terms. For the time being they had to defer to the Americans and
attempt to pass off their subordination as “influence”.
What is missing from Phythian’s account of Labour and the Korean
War is any awareness of the actual conduct of the war. The US Air
Force general Curtis LeMay was quite explicit about the impact of
aerial bombardment: “We burned down just about every city in North
Korea and South Korea both ... during the three years of warfare we
killed off over a million civilian Koreans and drove several million
more from their homes, with the inevitable additional tragedies bound
to ensue.” [5] This was a terrible war
that left Korea laid waste. The bombing was carried out with even
less restraint than the United States was to show in Vietnam. The
North Korean capital, Pyongyang, was flattened, a fate that never
befell Hanoi. The Americans used napalm against civilian targets on
an astonishing scale. According to one authoritative account, the US
Air Force “on an average day ... dropped 45,000 gallons” of
napalm. On 29 August 1952 (by now Labour was in opposition) the
Americans carried out their heaviest raid on Pyongyang, dropping 697
tons of bombs and 10,000 litres of napalm. The raid left 6,000 dead,
overwhelmingly civilians: there was “only the shell of buildings
and the remaining inhabitants to remind an observer that a city had
ever existed on the site”. [6] Even
Winston Churchill, by now prime minister, complained of how the
Americans were “splashing it [napalm] about all over the civilian
population. I will take no responsibility for it.” [7]
The Labour front bench was silent.
Nevertheless Attlee did manage to dress British subordination up
as influence. At the end of November 1950 President Truman announced
that the use of nuclear weapons was under consideration, prompting
Attlee to fly to Washington on 4 December and supposedly exercise a
restraining hand on the Americans. This, as Ralph Miliband put it, is
“a legend”. [8] The British received
no right of veto over the use of atomic bombs, but were assured that
they would be the first to know if the decision was taken. What we
can be certain of is that if the Americans had used nuclear weapons,
the Labour government, with whatever reservations, would have
supported them. It is worth remembering that Attlee, not Churchill,
was prime minister when Hiroshima and Nagasaki were atom bombed.
Attlee’s concern, moreover, was not with the loss of Korean or
Chinese lives, but with the danger of the war expanding to involve
the Soviet Union. The Russians were in a position to retaliate with
nuclear weapons, and Britain, with its US bases, would have been a
prime target. Labour had, of course, allowed the Americans to
establish air bases for B-29 bombers in Britain in the summer of
1949, and the following year these were equipped with nuclear
weapons. The Labour government did not secure any effective veto over
their use, let alone over the use of nuclear weapons in Korea. [9]
And, as Ralph Miliband once again points out, on two occasions in May
and September 1951 the Labour government assured the Americans that
it would support military action against China. [10]
Far from Blair’s support for the United States being some sort
of aberration, he can clearly be seen as continuing the policy of
junior partnership begun by Attlee and Bevin. There is a dreadful
continuity here, even down to the attempt to dress up subordination
as influence. In 1952 Hugh Gaitskell, soon to become Labour leader,
urged that more effort had to be made to present the American
alliance as a partnership because otherwise Britain looked “too
much like a satellite”. [11] This has
remained a problem.
 
From Vietnam to Iraq
With regard to the Vietnam War, Phythian considers Harold Wilson’s
greatest achievement to be “a negative one – not committing
British troops”. His refusal certainly marks his government out as
an aberration. How far this was Wilson’s achievement is another
matter. The Wilson government was every bit as committed to the
American alliance as Attlee and Bevin had been. He was, for example,
to collaborate in the CIA’s overthrow of Cheddi Jagan’s
government in British Guiana, still a British colony. [12]
The problem for Wilson was that he came to power in 1964 with a
majority of only four in the House of Commons and was reliant for his
position on the left of the Labour Party. He was, moreover,
threatened by powerful rivals on the right: George Brown, James
Callaghan and Roy Jenkins. This seriously limited the options
available to him. If Hugh Gaitskell had still been Labour leader in
1964 he would certainly have despatched a token force to fight
alongside the Americans regardless of the Labour left. Indeed in
August 1965 George Brown actually argued that if Gaitskell were prime
minister he “would have put a token force in Vietnam last fall”.
[13] Was Wilson any different?
The only reason Wilson did not send troops to Vietnam was because
he dare not, with a majority of four, while dependent on the Labour
left. Given his general support for the American alliance and his
consistent support for the American war in Vietnam, it seems certain
that if he had had a large enough majority, then troops would have
been sent. By the time Wilson had won a large majority in 1966 the
war’s unpopularity, together with scepticism about the prospects of
American victory, led to a continued refusal to send even a token
force. There was, it must be remembered, not just opposition to the
war, but growing support for the Vietcong.
Wilson’s refusal to send troops was not the result of any
“instinctive pacifism” on the part of the Labour government,
which was at the very same time engaged in confrontation with
Indonesia and fighting a guerrilla insurgency in South Arabia. And,
of course, the government was wholehearted in its diplomatic support
of the war, indeed it bent over backwards to give the Americans every
assistance short of troops on the ground. The US ambassador, David
Bruce, explained Wilson’s occasional public criticisms of US policy
as necessary “to counter the charge of being a mere puppet or
satellite of the US”. The Labour government would, he informed
President Johnson, have to sometimes “assert its independence by
taking exception to certain details of policies to which he is ready
to give general support”. [14] And,
as we now know, when Wilson disassociated his government from the
escalation of American bombing of North Vietnam in June 1966, the
statement was actually agreed with the Americans beforehand. [15]
Once again it is worth remembering that the Labour government was
supporting an American war that involved an unprecedented level of
bombing of both the North and the South, the use of death squads and
widespread torture (the Phoenix Programme), the routine brutalisation
and murder of civilians culminating in numerous massacres – indeed,
just about every war crime imaginable. Supporting this war was not an
achievement of any sort.
Which brings us to the Iraq war. Here, according to Phythian,
Blair broke with Labour tradition by supporting the Americans. This
break is portrayed as very much Blair’s responsibility. What
Phythian does not explain is why the United States went to war in
Iraq, which is surely a necessary preliminary in understanding
British participation.
The war was fought to secure US domination over the Middle East.
Everything else was a pretext. The British decision to participate
was motivated by a continuing belief that American power was
necessary to protect British global interests, and more particularly
by a determination to be a beneficiary of the American victory. This
was not some idiosyncrasy of Blair’s. When in July 2002 he told a
meeting of senior officials and ministers that not to go into Iraq
with the Americans “would be the biggest shift in foreign policy
for 50 years”, he was absolutely right. [16]
When it was said that “supporting the Americans is part of Tony’s
DNA”, this was once again absolutely right, but the same is true of
the British state itself.
Under New Labour the British Army has been reconfigured to fight
in America’s wars; the British intelligence services have an ever
closer relationship with the Americans (the presence of a CIA
representative on the Joint Intelligence Committee in the run up to
the Iraq war seems to have escaped the various inquiries) [17],
the British arms industry is increasingly tied to the US military
industrial complex with parts of the Ministry of Defence being
privatised, sold off to companies with US involvement, and, of
course, Britain’s independent nuclear deterrent is completely
dependent on the Americans. None of this is new, but it has reached
new levels under New Labour. Far from being an aberration, Blair was
the culmination of the Labour Party’s post-1945 commitment to the
American alliance.

Notes
1. Phythian, 2007, p. 3.
2. Stansky, 1969, pp. 318–326.
3. Phythian, 2007, pp. 6, 8, 10, 11, 12.
4. Phythian is not alone in his
idealist account of Labour foreign policy and the problems it
involves. Rhiannon Vickers, for example, can emphasise the party’s
“belief in anti-militarism” and then go on to argue a couple of
pages later that “Labour when in power, however, tended to view
Britain’s need for a strong military in much the same way its
opponents did. To some extent, it had to be more hardline when in
government than the Conservatives because of its apparent weakness in
the eyes of the electorate on the issue of defence. Thus, while
Labour’s instinct has been for anti-militarism, its policies have
not.” See Vickers, 2003, pp. 201, 203. An instinct, it has to
be said, is something one cannot help acting upon, rather than
something that has no relation to what one does other than help cover it up.
5. LeMay, 1965, p. 382. His was a
conservative estimate.
6. Sandler, 1995, pp. 226, 287–288.
7. MacDonald, 1986, p. 235.
8. Miliband, 1979, p. 312.
Phythian describes the visit as “a qualified success” (p. 45).
Ralph Miliband was, of course, the father of David Miliband, the New
Labour foreign secretary and Ed Miliband, another cabinet member. As
the joke goes, the father argued that the Labour Party would always
betray the working class, and the sons have helped prove him right.
At the end of his Parliamentary Socialism, Miliband called for
socialists to abandon “the belief that the Labour Party will
eventually be radically transformed” and to begin preparing the
ground for a socialist alternative. He urged that part of that
preparation “is the dissipation of paralysing illusions about the
true purpose and role of the Labour Party” (p. 377). He
certainly seems to have convinced his sons that the Labour Party was
not socialist and, as they weren’t either, they promptly joined.
9. In her Old World, New World
(2007), Kathleen Burk quotes an incredulous US Air Force commander
saying, “Never before in history has one first class power gone
into another first class power’s country without any agreement”
(p. 595). Not until October 1951 was “an agreement of sorts
reached” (p7. 57).
10. Miliband, 1979, p. 312.
11. Callaghan and Phythian, p. 203.
12. For the overthrow of Jagan see
Rabe, 2005. Jagan had already been removed from office once before in
1953. The Conservative government in London regarded him as
dangerously left wing. The Labour opposition gave them their full support.
13. Phythian, 2007, p. 74.
14. Phythian, 2007, p. 71.
15. Young, 2003, p. 75.
16. Campbell, 2007, p. 630.
17. One interesting example of this
close relationship is that the current head of the Royal Institute of
International Affairs, better known as Chatham House, is a former CIA
analyst, DeAnne Julius. She worked for the CIA in the early 1970s.
Gordon Brown first brought her into the British establishment in 1997
when he appointed her to the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy
Committee. For some reason her biography on the Chatham House website
does not mention her time with the CIA.


References
Burk, Kathleen, 2007, Old World, New World (Little, Brown).
Callaghan, John, and Mark Phythian, 2007, The Labour Party and
Foreign Policy (Routledge).
Campbell, Alastair, 2007, The Blair Years (Hutchinson).
LeMay, Curtis, 1965, Mission With LeMay (Doubleday).
MacDonald, Callum, 1986, Korea: The War Before Vietnam
(Palgrave Macmillan).
Miliband, Ralph, 1979, Parliamentary Socialism (Merlin).
Phythian, Mark, 2007, The Labour Party, War and International
Relations 1945–2006 (Routledge).
Rabe, Stephen, 2005, US Intervention in British Guiana
(University of North Carolina).
Sandler, Stanley (ed.), 1995, The Korean War: An
Encyclopaedia (Routledge).
Stansky, Peter, 1969, The Left and War (Oxford University).
Vickers, Rhiannon, 2003, The Labour Party and the World
(Manchester University).
Young, John, 2003, The Labour Governments 1964–1970:
International Policy (Manchester University).
 




Daniel J. Leab
Orwell Subverted: The CIA and the Filming of Animal Farm
Pennsylvania State University, 2007, £36.50
The Halas and Batchelor animated film of Animal Farm had
its world premiere in New York on 29 December 1954. A fortnight later
on 13 January 1955 it premiered in London. The film was celebrated as
the first British feature length cartoon, as a cartoon that dealt
with serious issues and as a breakthrough for the British film industry.
As we now know, the film was only made possible by CIA funding.
Daniel Leab’s appropriately titled Orwell Subverted is an
exhaustive study of CIA involvement in the making of the film, a
study that furthers the earlier work of Frances Stonor Saunders (Who
Paid the Piper? The CIA and the Cultural Cold War), throws
additional light on the CIA’s cultural activities, and reveals, for
the first time, the detailed changes that the agency insisted on in
the making of the film.
That George Orwell, a socialist who had fought with the Poum
militia in the Spanish Civil War, and who remained committed to the
socialist cause until the day he died, should have his great
anti-Stalinist classic hijacked by the CIA, is, of course, the
ultimate indignity. But was there something about the book and its
politics that lent itself to the use made of it by both the CIA and
the British secret propaganda agency, the Information Research
Department (IRD), established by the Labour government in 1948? Both
organisations sponsored the publication of Animal Farm and
Nineteen Eighty Four throughout the world. The IRD even
produced a comic strip version of Animal Farm, which it tried
to place in newspapers in as many countries as possible. Orwell’s
anti-Stalinism was, to be blunt, made use of for
counter-revolutionary and pro-imperialist purposes. How much of the
responsibility for this was his?
There is no doubt Orwell’s anti-Stalinism led him into dangerous
waters in the late 1940s. His understanding of the Soviet Union as a
bureaucratic or oligarchic collectivist society led him to conclude
that capitalism was the lesser evil in a conflict between the two
systems. While this was certainly better than proclaiming Russia a
socialist paradise, it did involve Orwell, on a number of occasions,
making it clear that in the event of a war between the US and the
Soviet Union he would support America. It also saw him collaborating
with the IRD shortly before his death, although the nature of this
collaboration has been widely and wilfully misinterpreted.
Even so, the important point was that, while capitalism might be
the lesser evil, he still regarded it very much as an “evil”.
Indeed, he argued that the only cause actually worth fighting for was
a United Socialist States of Europe, something that he recognised
both the Americans and the Russians would regard as a threat. He
condemned British subordination to the US as an obstacle to socialist advance.
Ironically, the best demonstration of the socialist credentials of
Orwell’s anti-Stalinism is provided by the changes the CIA required
to Joy Batchelor’s scripts, which were faithful to the book. Leab
identifies three areas where Joseph Bryan, a psychological warfare
expert who monitored the film for the agency, wanted modifications.
The “investors”, he told Batchelor, were very concerned at her
sympathetic portrayal of Snowball (based on Leon Trotsky). Her script
suggested that Snowball was “intelligent, courageous, dynamic”
and that if he had not been assassinated he might have succeeded in
“creating a benevolent, successful state ... this implication we
cannot permit”. Instead the CIA wanted Snowball portrayed as a
“fanatic intellectual whose plans if carried through would have led
to disaster no less complete than under Napoleon”.
The second objection was that the script had to make it absolutely
clear that not all farmers were bad, that many cared for their
animals and that there were farms where the animals were content. The
CIA was certainly not going to finance a film attacking capitalism as
well as Stalinism.
They also wanted to change the final episode of the novel, in
which the farm animals can no longer tell the pigs from the men, so
that it involved only pigs. This was, of course, a crucial change
because what Orwell was intent on demonstrating in the novel was that
the Soviet Union was behaving exactly the same as the imperialist
powers – in fact, had become indistinguishable from them. This was
clearly not acceptable to the CIA. Finally, they wanted the film to
end with an animal uprising against the pigs, something that was very
much part of CIA policy at the time.
Clearly, crucial aspects of Orwell’s novel were recognised by
the agency as being incompatible with their objectives. Why then were
they so easily able to hijack it?
The answer is simple. It was the British left’s continuing
celebration of the Soviet Union as socialist that effectively handed
the book over to the enemies of socialism in the 1950s. Orwell’s
warnings about Stalinism went unheard by the majority of British
socialists, and it was their sympathy for Stalinism that enabled the
book to be used against them, although even then its meaning had to
be violated.
The difficulty of the fight that Orwell was engaged in when trying
to convince the left that Stalinism had nothing to do with socialism
would, of course, have been familiar to the founders of this journal.
The problem was perfectly illustrated by the historian E.P.
Thompson’s 1951 response to allegations of tyranny and repression
in Eastern Europe. He contemptuously dismissed the claims as “the
Big Lie technique of Goebbels over again”. Indeed, the lie was “so
monstrous that we cannot be troubled with it, we turn our backs on
it, and direct the argument on to more practical questions”.
Even someone of Thompson’s stature was prepared to cast himself
in the role of Squealer! Nothing Orwell could write or do could
possibly make any impression on this certainty, this refusal to
recognise the Stalinist repression that was sweeping across Eastern
Europe. It was to take the action of the working class in Poland and
Hungary in 1956 to make these people listen. Hope lay with the
proles.
 




Peter Cole
Wobblies on the Waterfront: International Unionism in Progressive Era Philadelphia
University of Illinois, 2007
On 14 May 1913 longshoremen on the Philadelphia docks walked out on strike demanding a 10 cent an hour pay rise, a ten-hour day, time and a half for night work and double-time for Sundays. They enthusiastically signed up with the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW), the revolutionary syndicalist trade union known as the Wobblies, confident that this organisation would not sell them down the river. On 17 May “Local 8” (branch eight) of the IWW’s Marine Transport Workers Industrial Union was formed. After a hard fought dispute, that saw violent clashes with police and scabs, the employers conceded most of the union’s demands on 28 May. This began what was to be the IWW’s almost decade long domination of the Philadelphia docks.
This success was achieved at a time when the IWW’s organising efforts elsewhere in the eastern United States were ending in failure. The collapse of IWW organisation in both Lawrence, Massachusetts, where the great strike of 1912 was won, and in Paterson, New Jersey, where the great strike of 1913 was to be lost, demonstrated the difficulties the IWW faced. It led many strikes in the east, but, win or lose, it failed to establish stable workplace organisation. What Philadelphia showed was that this was not inevitable, that the difficulties could be overcome. According to Peter Cole in his Wobblies on the Waterfront Local 8 provided “a model for how the IWW simultaneously could advocate revolutionary ideals, while meeting the more immediate ‘bread and butter’ needs of workers”. If the Philadelphia Wobblies could combine “IWW tactics and ideals, while also dealing pragmatically on issues like hours and labour supply – surely other IWW branches could have done just the same”. Local 8, he argues, “seems to offer a ‘path not taken’.”
What was even more remarkable in the context of the time was the fact that Local 8 was also, as Cole insists, “arguably the most powerful mixed race union of its era”. As he points out, at this time there were only a few unions that organised black workers and most of those were biracial, that is to say that black and white workers were organised into separate locals. This was not the case with Local 8. It was, in line with IWW philosophy, an integrated local and, moreover, insisted that black and white dockers worked in integrated gangs. Just over half of the 4,000 workers who walked out on strike in May 1913 were black, the rest Lithuanian or Polish immigrants and Irish Americans. In these circumstances the union had to satisfy the black workers’ desire for equality and the IWW fitted the bill. Moreover, blacks “made up a majority of the leadership cadre” of Local 8 – men such as Glen Perrymore, Alonzo Richards, Charles Caster, Dan Jones, Joseph White and, most especially, Ben Fletcher. Fletcher was, as Cole writes, “one of the great African Americans of his generation ... He stands in the top echelon of black labour leaders”. [1]
 
The IWW and black workers
From the time of its foundation in 1905 the IWW was formally committed to the organisation of black workers on equal terms with whites. Not until 1910, however, was it in a position to begin anything like a concerted drive to recruit black workers. According to Philip Foner:
Leaflets and pamphlets were distributed by the thousands to convince the black man that he “has no chance in the old-line trade unions. They do not want him. They admit him only under compulsion and treat him with contempt. There is only one labour organisation in the United States that admits the coloured worker on a footing of absolute equality with the white – the Industrial Workers of the World.”
One leaflet, To Coloured Workingmen and Women, proclaimed, “If you are a wage worker you are welcome in the IWW halls, no matter what your colour. By this you may see that the IWW is not a white man’s union, not a black man’s union, not a red man’s union, but a working man’s union. All the working class in one big union.” The contrast with the American Federation of Labour (AFL) could not have been sharper. In 1910 eight AFL unions formally barred black workers from membership, while most of the other 50-odd affiliates kept black workers out by informal means. Some unions actually had higher initiation fees for black workers. For most black workers a strong union meant the closing down of job opportunities and even the sack if a closed shop was achieved by a union that barred black members.
Even in the South, where the Jim Crow laws enforced segregation, the IWW took an uncompromising stand in favour of equality, urging white workers to recognise that their class interests lay in unity with their black brothers. One IWW appeal asked white workers:
If one of you were to fall in a river and could not swim, and a Negro came along who could swim, would you drown rather than accept his offer of aid? Hardly! That is the IWW position. Labour organised on race lines will drown. Only organised on class lines will it swim.
When white firemen on the Cincinnati, New Orleans and Texas Railroad went on strike in protest against the promotion of black workers to firemen the IWW unreservedly condemned them. Even when black workers took the strikers’ jobs the IWW newspaper, Solidarity, warned that the strikers “are reaping the folly of unworking class conduct. They are getting what they deserved. Unity regardless of race, creed or colour is the only way out.” As far as the Wobblies were concerned when black workers broke the strikes by AFL unions that had excluded them from membership and kept them off the job the AFL had “no one but themselves to blame”. [2]
How successful was the IWW in recruiting black workers, in building working class unity? According to Sterling Spero and Abram Harris, in their The Black Worker, the IWW issued about 100,000 membership cards to black workers during what they describe as “the active part of its life”. [3] Foner considers this an exaggeration but regardless of the exact figure a large number of black workers held IWW cards at one time or another. Nevertheless, for all its aspirations the scale of the problem that racism posed for the working class was too great. For most black workers racism remained the face of the white working class. Even those black workers who were allowed into AFL unions encountered insults and discrimination. When black dockers in Baltimore, members of the AFL-affiliated International Longshoremen’s Association, had their offices remodelled they were expected to employ AFL carpenters and bricklayers whose unions barred black members. [4]
More serious was the East St Louis pogrom in July 1917 when white mobs killed 39 black men and women in an assault intended to drive black workers out of the city. [5] When the AFL convention met in the aftermath of the riot a resolution was proposed directing the executive council to work “to the end that all of the political, civil and economic disabilities so offensive and destructive to the rights of Negroes as human beings and American citizens be removed”. The proposer apologised for bringing such an unsavoury resolution to the convention but excused himself on the grounds that he was obligated to because of the support his union had received from black workers in a recent dispute. The committee on resolutions refused to endorse the resolution and the convention voted to reject “the statements contained in the resolution”. In effect, as one historian has pointed out, the AFL convention had countenanced “inequality and discrimination against the Negroes in America”. The AFL, once again unlike the IWW, refused to condemn the lynching of black men in the South. AFL president Samuel Gompers made clear that this was a matter for Southerners to resolve without “meddlers from outside”. [6]
Things were different on the Philadelphia waterfront. As one black longshoreman, James Fair, put it, “The IWW was the only union accepting black workers freely. They advocated just one thing – solidarity.” [7]
 
On the waterfront
In the months following the 1913 strike Local 8 waged a low level guerrilla war against the employers, building up its strength and consolidating its hold over the docks. By 1916, according to Cole, with the exception of two docks, “Local 8 maintained job control on all the city’s deep-sea piers.” You did not work if you were not a paid-up IWW member. By the summer of that year the local had over 3,000 members. However, the union’s revolutionary credentials were soon to be challenged. On 6 April 1917 the United States declared war on Germany and joined the bloodbath of the First World War. The American left was overwhelmingly opposed to the war, with the Socialist Party in particular taking a strong anti-war stance. Although most Wobblies were also opposed to the war, after some equivocation, the IWW decided not to campaign against the conflict. Such a stance would, it was felt, invite repression and compromise the opportunities that a war economy presented for building up the organisation. When the general executive board had discussed the issue it had been pointed out that if the union opposed the draft it would be destroyed. The chairman, Frank Little, made the point that they were likely to be run “out of business anyway ... Either we’re for this slaughterfest or we’re against it. I’m ready to face a firing squad rather than compromise.” [8] But no decisive stand was taken.
In Philadelphia the leadership went even further calling a meeting where a succession of union speakers, including Ben Fletcher, urged the need to support the war and to keep the docks working. The meeting, some 600 strong, voted not to strike for the duration. Members were encouraged to register for the draft and the union kept an “honour roll” of members serving in the armed forces at its headquarters. As the United States Shipping Board acknowledged after the war Local 8 members “loaded a large part of the munitions sent to Europe”. [9]
What this highlights is the dilemma of revolutionary trade unionism in a non-revolutionary period. There was always a tension between the needs of revolutionary agitation and the fight to maintain organisation and improve wages and conditions. Outside of a revolutionary situation revolutionary ideas would only appeal to a minority of workers, while maintaining union organisation and winning on “bread and butter” issues required the support of all the workers. One of the reasons IWW locals so often collapsed, even after successful strikes, was that the activists were primarily concerned with revolutionary agitation while the majority of workers were still primarily concerned with better wages and conditions. As James P. Cannon, himself a former Wobbly, put it, one of the main reasons for the failure of the IWW “was its attempt to be both a union of all workers and a propaganda society of selected revolutionists”. The IWW, he argued, was “in its time of glory ... neither a union nor a party in the full meaning of these terms, but something of both, with some parts missing”. [10] The Philadelphia Wobblies, Cole believes, had found the way to overcome this problem, building up a strong union committed to racial equality and class solidarity on the docks. The war put this achievement to the test. To keep the union strong the leadership effectively abandoned their internationalism. This was at a time, moreover, when the reformists of the Socialist Party were taking a determined stand against the terrible slaughter on the Western Front.
Cole, rather shamefacedly, apologises for Local 8’s retreat over the war. Certainly some in the leadership and most of the rank and file actually supported it, but the revolutionaries kept silent. These were men who had proven their credentials many times over, who had often been imprisoned and brutalised by police and vigilantes, men who had made great sacrifices and suffered terrible hardship in the cause. To keep the organisation they had built in the docks intact they compromised their revolutionary politics.
With the declaration of war the United States was swept by a deliberately orchestrated wave of patriotic fervour, of “100 percent Americanism”. In Philadelphia this saw German measles renamed “liberty measles” and sauerkraut renamed “liberty cabbage”. [11] Interestingly, Cole does not discuss the efforts that were made by Philadelphia socialists to oppose the war. In July 1917 socialists distributing anti-war leaflets were attacked in the street: “People ... began to beat and kick them. Before the police could arrive to protect them, the mob had torn off their clothing and divided it for souvenirs.” Subsequent attempts at anti-war leafleting were stopped by police arrests. On 26 August an attempt was made by the anti-war People’s Council to hold an anti-conscription meeting at the Archer Street Theatre, but it was broken up by off-duty sailors and marines urged on by the press. Two days later the offices of the Socialist Party were raided, literature was seized and the party secretary, Charles Schenk, was arrested. His opposition to the war cost him six months in prison. [12] And, of course, the pro-war stance taken by Local 8 did not save them from the repression that was about to engulf the IWW.
When the Wilson administration launched its roundup of the IWW leadership on 5 September 1917, Local 8 was not spared. Six of its leaders were arrested (Ben Fletcher, Walter Nef, John Walsh, Edwin Doree, Manuel Rey and Joseph Graeber). There were no protests, no walkouts on the docks. Even when Nef and Rey were finally sentenced to 20 years hard labour and Fletcher and the others to ten years in August 1918, there was no fight on their behalf. The focus on “bread and butter” issues had kept the union strong, indeed strong enough to survive the imprisonment of its leaders, but where were the politics?
After the war Local 8 maintained its dominance of the docks. This was a period of massive working class revolt throughout the United States, and the Philadelphia waterfront was not exempt. On 26 May 1920 the IWW called its members out on strike, “the largest this part of Philadelphia had ever seen, with close to 9,000 workers out at its peak ... more than 150 ships were immediately idled on the Delaware River and another 100 were soon affected”. Nevertheless the employers stood firm and after six weeks the union admitted defeat. When the employers followed up their victory, they were, according to Cole, assisted “by internal divisions and the insurgent challenge of Communism”. He argues that what became known as the “Philadelphia Controversy” “was as detrimental to Local 8 and the IWW as any open shop campaign or federal raid”. [13] This is not true: the ruling class offensive was decisive in driving back the whole US working class. Union membership fell from 5,110,000 in 1920 to 3,622,000 in 1922. This was a historic defeat in which the Philadelphia Wobblies unfortunately shared.
What of the “Philadelphia Controversy” then? In August 1920 Local 8 was expelled from the IWW because its members were loading the steamer Westmount with munitions destined for the White army fighting the Bolsheviks in the Crimea. Solidarity , the IWW newspaper, declared that the union “would rather face death and dismemberment than stand the disgrace of having its members render any assistance in keeping workers enslaved to the Moloch of capitalism”. Cole is, however, sceptical that munitions were actually being loaded and instead sees the affair as a conspiracy by Communist sympathisers in the IWW out to weaken Local 8 which was an obstacle to their takeover of the union. This is a later invention because there seems to have been no doubt at the time that the allegation was true. James P. Cannon, for example, writing at the time, had no doubt about it: “It seemed unbelievable that the IWW of Frank Little ... could be engaged in this nefarious enterprise – this high treason to the international working class.” [14] Howard Kimeldorf, in his account of the Philadelphia Wobblies, tells a more convincing story. According to Kimeldorf, the IWW general executive board ordered Local 8 to stop loading the Westmount after being approached by Soviet representatives. Ben Fletcher and another union official, Polly Baker, tried to persuade the gang doing the work to stop, but they refused and a meeting called to discuss the issue voted not to take any action. This precipitated Local 8’s expulsion. Once they were expelled Local 8 finally voted to black the ship and was eventually readmitted in October 1920. Certainly this crisis intersected with increasing factionalisation within the IWW, but it can also be seen very much as Local 8 continuing the stance that it had taken during the war. [15] And there were many Wobblies who were not Communist sympathisers who were critical of Local 8.
Local 8 had introduced a $25 initiation fee that was in clear violation of IWW rules. When it was readmitted to the IWW in October 1920 it was instructed to reduce the fee. Refusal led to it being expelled once again in December 1920, an expulsion that was upheld at the IWW convention the following year by 774 votes to 96. As far as the great majority of Wobblies were concerned a $25 initiation fee smacked of the AFL. Eventually the fee was reduced to $2 and Local 8 was again allowed back into the union. [16]
By now it was facing a challenge from the AFL affiliated International Longshoremen’s Association (ILA) which had the support of both the employers and the authorities. Presumably in an attempt to see off this threat in October 1922 Local 8 decided to impose the eight-hour day (they worked ten hours), starting work an hour late and finishing an hour early. On 16 October the employers responded with a lockout and set about smashing Local 8 with the full support of the ILA. By the time the dispute was over the ILA had supplied the employers with nearly 1,000 strikebreakers imported from New York. Local 8 was broken and, as is the way in these affairs, far from recognising the ILA the employers decided they preferred the open shop – that no union was even better than a scab union.
Without a doubt Local 8 won substantial improvements for its members, transforming work on the Philadelphia docks and uniting black and white workers, something particularly impressive given the racism of the time. Nevertheless, as a revolutionary organisation it failed to meet the challenge of war and solidarity with the Russian Revolution. These failures, as we have seen, were a consequence of the attempt to build a revolutionary trade union in a non-revolutionary period.
 
Class war in Philadelphia: the 1910 general strike
It is worth noting one other important weakness of Cole’s book: his focus is so tightly on the Philadelphia waterfront as to completely neglect developments in what was one of America’s major industrial cities. In 1900 there were over 700 factories in the city, employing 246,000 workers, principally in textiles, engineering and shipbuilding. The Baldwin Locomotive works was the country’s largest manufacturer of railway engines, the Brill works was the largest manufacturer of streetcars and the Cramp shipyard had turned the Delaware River into “the American Clyde”, “the shipbuilding capital of the United States”. [17] Moreover, the city was the scene of a general strike in solidarity with striking streetcar workers, a strike that assumed the dimensions of “a mass uprising” according to one historian. [18] The 1910 general strike is not even mentioned by Cole.
Let us look at the development of the class struggle in Philadelphia in this period. In 1899 and 1901 strikes in the shipyards to secure a nine-hour day were defeated, in 1903 nearly 50,000 textile workers struck for shorter hours in “the most stunning effort yet made by Philadelphia labour” and in 1904 the building trades won “one of the most startling victories”. [19] After this there was a period of retreat, but in 1909 shirt-waist workers in Philadelphia walked out in solidarity with those in New York who were striking (“the Uprising of the Thirty Thousand”), and Philadelphia’s streetcar workers also went on strike. The streetcar workers won some improvements but not union recognition, and the company Philadelphia Rapid Transit (PRT) proceeded to set up a rival company union and victimise activists. On 19 February 1910 the PRT fired 173 union members and their union, the Amalgamated Association of Street Car and Electric Railway Men, responded by calling over 5,000 men out on strike.
Streetcar strikes in the United States were often accompanied by considerable violence and loss of life. Companies recruited scabs, often hiring strikebreaking detective agencies to keep a service going. [20] This involved sending vehicles through working class areas where the strikers and their families lived and where support for their cause was strongest. Inevitably the streetcars were attacked with pitched battles with armed scabs and police resulting. Philadelphia was to be no exception. When the PRT imported strikebreakers from New York and Boston violence was inevitable. On 21 February the Philadelphia Ledger reported the events of the previous day:
Cars were smashed, then burned. A score of riots in which policemen, mounted and on foot, used revolvers and clubs, sent more than 100 men and women to hospital and impromtu infirmaries ... Almost simultaneously, in widely separated sections of the city, crowds of men and boys began a determined effort to aid the strikers ... Instances not unlike civil war marked the street disorders.
Over 10,000 people were on the streets fighting the police. Outrage at police conduct was so great that on 22 February there were spontaneous walkouts at building sites and textile and clothing factories across the city, involving some 30,000 workers. On the following day workers at the non-union Baldwin Locomotive works helped strikers demolish a tram during their lunch hour. They stayed to jeer the police who promptly opened fire, wounding two of them. The company’s vice president, William Austin, wrote an incredulous account of what followed:
The police ran the men back into the shop and then trouble began. Before anyone knew what started it we heard pistol shots. I looked out of the office window and saw a long line of policemen, about two dozen, lined up in front of the Willow Street Shop actually firing into the second and third storey shop windows. They were answered by a volley of nuts, bolts, washers, shaft hangers, iron rods, etc, some very heavy, and all calculated to kill if landed on the right spot. The police shot at least 200 shots into the shops. Fortunately no one was hurt on either side, but for a while it was a very serious business. [21]
The April 1910 issue of the revolutionary socialist journal the International Socialist Review actually printed a photograph of the police firing into the Baldwin works (along with another of “A Popular Bonfire” which showed a streetcar being burned by the strikers and their supporters). [22] One consequence of this incident was that large numbers of Baldwin’s workers rushed to join the unions and many of them were to join the general strike.
State police and the National Guard were brought into the city to regain control of its streets. The streetcar workers’ leader, Clarence Pratt, a Welshman, was arrested. In the face of this repression, with workers striking in solidarity, pressure built up for an official response. On 27 February the Central Labour Union (the equivalent of a trades council) called a general strike for 5 March if the PRT had not agreed to negotiations. A “Committee of Ten”, including two Socialist Party members, was set up to manage the strike. On 5 March some 100,000 men and women stopped work and within a few days the number had risen to 150,000. There were 40,000 building workers out, 20,000 engineers (including over 3,000 Baldwin workers), and nearly 40,000 textile and clothing workers. Even piano movers downed pianos. Thousands of non-union men and women joined the strike and over 20,000 of them signed up with the unions. To deter the police and militia from carrying out a feared massacre the Central Labour Union president, John Murphy, warned that any such action would provoke “a carnival of riot and bloodshed that would startle the entire country”. There were union men who “can shoot as straight as any trooper”. [23]
Much of the city was effectively shut down and under police and military occupation. Demonstrations and meetings were banned. When Eugene Debs the Socialist Party leader spoke in the city he had to be smuggled in. The mayor even closed down a production of John Galsworthy’s play, Strife, in the interests of “public order” – but really because the play advocated “arbitration” as the solution to industrial conflict. Streetcars were still run through the city but without stopping and with their scab crews shooting at anyone who came near.
Nevertheless, with the full backing of the mayor and of the city’s business establishment the PRT still refused to negotiate. Inevitably the general strike began to crumble. Proposals to make it state-wide were abandoned when the Pennsylvania State Federation of Labour came under pressure from the AFL leadership. The Committee of Ten finally called off the general strike on 27 March leaving the streetcar strikers to fight on alone. Joseph Cohen, a Philadelphia socialist, wrote in the International Socialist Review that the “aftermath was the washing aside in all directions of hundreds of wage earners victimised for having quit work”. He went on to observe that the general strike had been “the most unexpected affair Philadelphia had ever witnessed ... It was the most magnificent performance ever achieved by the labour of the city.” Nevertheless, a general strike confined to one city was always too likely to be “largely spectacular”. [24]
By the middle of April the Amalgamated Association finally reached an agreement with the PRT. The company, on the verge of bankruptcy, guaranteed no victimisation, conceded a pay rise and acknowledged the right of the men to join the union. However, it still refused to recognise the union. In the course of the dispute over 300 of its streetcars had been wrecked, many of them totally destroyed. The dispute had been “one of the bloodiest and most destructive in the city’s history”. By the time it ended 29 people had been killed, “about half of them in the battles between strikers and scabs and policemen; the rest resulted from the dangerous operation of the cars by inexperienced strikebreakers”. [25]
Without any doubt IWW members participated in these events and they were reported in the IWW press even though it was an AFL affair. The IWW newspaper, the Industrial Worker, pointed out quite correctly that an important factor in the failure to win a complete victory was the refusal of the power workers to support the general strike. As it pointed out, “The men who worked in the powerhouses, furnishing juice with which to run the cars, did more to defeat the striking motormen and conductors than the scab who manned the car.” Nevertheless, Louis Duchez, writing in the paper on 26 March, still argued that even though it had failed the general strike had done more to teach “class consciousness and solidarity than a whole trainload of literature”. From now on “the struggle ... will be fiercer than it has ever been before ... there will be a fight from now on”. [26]
Some last points about the general strike. First of all it was, as we have seen, an AFL affair. A rank and file revolt, provoked by strikebreaking and police brutality, forced or enabled the Central Labour Union to call the general strike. Even the United Textile Workers president John Golden, a man hardly known for his militancy, was swept along by his members’ fury. The general strike was, he proclaimed, “a splendid opportunity to preach the gospel of trade unionism” and indeed his union signed up thousands of new members. [27] This was the same man who two years later was to be immortalised by a Joe Hill song for his attempt to break the IWW strike in Lawrence (A little talk with Golden makes it right, all right). While the official leadership of the AFL was overwhelmingly collaborationist, anti-socialist, right wing and often corrupt, the rank and file clearly included many militants who were engaged in struggle not just with their employers but with their union leaders as well. The AFL unions were themselves the site of struggle. What also has to be recognised, however, is the shameful fact that the AFL unions in Philadelphia operated a ban on black workers. [28] Most of the AFL unions in the city had no black members. This, of course, makes the IWW’s achievement on the docks, whatever criticisms one might have, all the more impressive.

Notes
1. Cole, 2007a, pp. 2, 3, 4, 5. Cole has also edited another valuable volume, on Ben Fletcher, Cole 2007b.
2. Foner, 1974, pp. 68, 73–74, 108, 109, 110. For racist firemen’s strikes see Hammett, 1975, and for the 1911 Cincinnati, New Orleans and Texas Railroad strike see Arnesen, 2001, pp. 37–38. The Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen did not drop its ban on black members until 1963.
3. Spero and Harris, 1968, p. 331.
4. Spero and Harris, 1968, p. 194.
5. In East St Louis the AFL unions were campaigning against black migration to the city, blaming black workers for the employers’ attacks on wages and conditions. Instead of countering the employers’ efforts to exploit divisions between black and white workers, the unions reinforced them. Eugene Debs, one of the leaders of the Socialist Party, condemned the riot as “a foul blot upon the American labour movement ... Had the labour unions fiercely opened their door to the Negro instead of barring him, and forcing him in spite of himself to become a scab ... the atrocious crime at East St Louis would never have blackened the pages of American history” – from Rudwick, 1982, p. 145. The use of strikebreakers to defeat a strike at the Aluminium Ore Company in April 1917 was widely seen as worsening relations between black and white workers, but as Rudwick shows “most strikebreakers at Aluminium Ore were white” (p. 19). Nevertheless black workers became a convenient scapegoat.
6. Karson, 1965, pp. 76, 140–141. See also Foner, 1974, p. 139.
7. Kimeldorf, 1999, p. 31.
8. Chaplin, 1948, pp. 208–209. Little was, of course, right about the IWW being the victim of repression regardless of what stance it took. He was assassinated by gunmen working for the Anaconda Copper Company in Butte, Montana, on 1 August 1917.
9. Cole, 2007a, pp. 82–83.
10. Cannon, 1955. For Cannon’s Wobbly years see Palmer, 2007, pp. 52–86. See also the discussion in Darlington, 2008, pp. 212–217.
11. Abernathy, 1982, p. 560.
12. Peterson and Fite, 1957, pp. 31–32.
13. Cole, 2007a. p. 127.
14. Cannon, 1992, p. 72.
15. Kimeldorf, 1999, pp. 61–62. He quotes Local 8 veterans complaining that there were union members “breaking down every principle and rule established by the unions”. See also Cole, 2007a, pp. 130–131.
16. John Gambs in his history of the IWW observed that, as well as Local 8, the IWW also suspended its New York bakers’ local for having an initiation fee of $15. He wrote, “The principles involved far more than constitutional matters. It was a question of whether there was any place in the IWW for a group which maintained shop control by charging high fees, which had a relatively large treasury, which devoted its energies to the immediate welfare of a small group rather than to the emancipation of the working class” – Gambs, 1932, pp. 165–166.
17. Harris, 2000, pp. 30–31.
18. Fones-Wolf, 1986a, p. 167.
19. Scranton, 1989, p. 216; Fones-Wolf, 1986a, p. 152.
20. One of the most notorious of these detective agencies was run by James Farley, who “specialised in breaking streetcar strikes, which became endemic [in] the early 1900s” – Jeffreys-Jones, 1978, p. 80. Farley’s notoriety was such that he actually gets a mention in Jack London’s The Iron Heel. According to Farley, the way to break a streetcar strike was to let “the malcontents know that the cars are going to run, and that anybody who gets in the way is going to get hurt. That’s all there is to breaking a streetcar strike” – quoted in Knight, 1960, p. 152.
21. Brown, 1995, p. 217. See also Fones-Wolf, 1986b.
22. Cohen, 1910a, pp. 865, 868. International Socialist Review was very sympathetic to the IWW. Indeed Big Bill Haywood was on its editorial board and was a regular contributor. It provides a remarkable chronicle of class war America, right up until it was suppressed by the Wilson administration in 1918. For the International Socialist Review see Ruff, 1997.
23. Adams, 1966, p. 185.
24. Cohen, 1910b, p. 981.
25. Abernathy, 1982, pp. 549–550.
26. Foner, 1980, pp. 162–163. Duchez was, unfortunately, over-optimistic. In 1913 a 13-week strike saw the unions cleared out of the Baldwin works with hundreds victimised. According to Fred Thompson, in his semi-official history of the IWW (Thompson, 2006, p. 43), there was a small IWW presence at Baldwin’s at this time. It was made up of “dual card holders”, militants who held both an IWW card and the card of their particular AFL craft union. These “dual carders” dominated the strike committee, but to no avail. Later, in 1921, as part of the post-war rollback of union strength, an eight month strike involving 7,000 workers at the Cramp shipyard ended in defeat, mass victimisation and the introduction of the open shop.
27. Weyforth, 1917, p. 35.
28. As late as August 1944 the Philadelphia Rapid Transit Union was to shamefully strike in protest against the employment of black workers as crew. One union leader proclaimed that driving a streetcar was a white man’s job and that black workers belonged “on the roadway”. See Winkler, 1972.


References
Abernathy, Lloyd M., 1982, Progressivism 1905–1919, in Russell F. Weighly (ed.), Philadelphia (WW Norton).
Adams, Graham, 1966, Age of Industrial Violence 1910–1915 (Columbia University).
Arnesen, Eric, 2001, Brotherhoods of Color: Black Railroad Workers and the Struggle for Equality (Harvard University).
Brown, John K., 1995, The Baldwin Locomotive Works 1831–1915 (John Hopkin University).
Cannon, James P., 1955, The IWW, Fourth International (Summer 1955).
Cannon, James P., 1992, James P. Cannon and the Early Years of American Communism: Selected Writings and Speeches 1920–1928 (Spartacist).
Chaplin, Ralph, 1948, Wobbly (University of Chicago).
Cohen, Joseph, 1910a, When the Sleeper Awakens, International Socialist Review (April 1910).
Cohen, Joseph, 1910b, When the Sleeper Wakes, International Socialist Review (May 1910).
Cole, Peter, 2007a, Wobblies on the Waterfront: International Unionism in Progressive Era Philadelphia (University of Illinois).
Cole, Peter, 2007b, Ben Fletcher: The Life and Times of a Black Wobbly (Charles Kerr).
Darlington, Ralph, 2008, Syndicalism and the Transition to Communism (Ashgate).
Foner, Philip S., 1974, Organized Labor and the Black Worker 1619–1973 (Praeger).
Foner, Philip S., 1980, The AFL in the Progressive Era (International).
Fones-Wolf, Ken, 1986a, Trade Union Gospel: Christianity and Labor in Industrial Philadephia 1865–1915 (Temple University).
Fones-Wolf, Ken, 1986b, Mass Strikes, Corporate Strategies: The Baldwin Locomotive Works and the Philadelphia General Strike of 1910, Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography, volume 110.
Gambs, John, 1932, The Decline of the IWW (Columbia University).
Hammett, Hugh, 1975, Labor and Race: The Georgia Railroad Strike of 1909, Labor History 16.
Harris, Howell John, 2000, Bloodless Victory: The Rise and Fall of the Open Shop in the Philadelphia Metal Trades 1910–1940 (Cambridge University).
Jeffreys-Jones, Rhodri, 1978, Violence and Reform in American History (New Viewpoints).
Karson, Mark, 1965, American Labor Unions and Politics 1900–1918 (Becon).
Kimeldorf, Howard, 1999, Battling For American Labor: Wobblies, Craft Workers and the Making of the Union Movement (University of California).
Knight, Robert Edward Lee, 1960, Industrial Relations in the San Francisco Bay Area 1900–1918 (University of California).
Palmer, Bryan, 2007, James P. Cannon and the Origins of the American Revolutionary Left 1890–1928 (University of Illinois).
Peterson, Horace Cornelius, and Gilbert Courtland Fite, 1957, Opponents of War 1917–1918 (University of Wisconsin).
Rudwick, Elliott, 1982, Race Riot at East St Louis (University of Illinois).
Ruff, Allen, 1997, “We Called Each Other Comrade”: Charles H. Kerr and Company, Radical Publishers (University of Illinois).
Scranton, Philip, 1989, Figured Tapestry: Production, Markets and Power in Philadelphia Textiles 1885–1941 (Cambridge University).
Spero, Sterling, and Abram Harris, 1968, The Black Worker (Atheneum).
Thompson, Fred, 2006, The IWW: Its First Hundred Years 1905–2005 (Cincinnati).
Weyforth, William, 1917, The Organizability of Labor (John Hopkins University).
Winkler, Allan, 1972, The Philadelphia Transit Strike of 1944, The Journal of American History 59.
 



The apathy of the workers seemed to stultify all our efforts; it seemed that with the advance of education a spirit of selfishness had been imparted and self-sacrifice had died out. The gospel of the materialistic school seemed to have captured the great mass of the working class. Men replied to your appeal for fellowship and brotherly love in the words of Cain: ‘Am I my brother’s keeper?’ ... And then suddenly when things seem blackest, and dark night enshrouds abroad, lo! the Sun, and lo! thereunder rises wrath and hope and wonder, and the worker goes marching on.’ [1]
The Dublin Lockout of 1913 is without any doubt the most important industrial struggle in Irish history. It was fought to determine who should be the dominant force in Home Rule Ireland: the trade unions led by Jim Larkin or the employers. The struggle put all the various organisations, movements, currents and tendencies in Irish society to the test: it posed the simple question, where do you stand? And, by and large, the test was failed and the Dublin workers were left to be batoned and starved into defeat. The breaking of the Larkinite offensive was a crucial moment in Irish history. It left the way clear for the republican movement to capture the leadership in the national struggle and to establish its hegemony over the left, with the working class accepting a subordinate role in the struggle rather than striving to make Irish society in its own image.
At the same time, the Lockout was one of the most important industrial struggles in British history: it was an integral part of the great labour unrest that swept over the British Isles in the years 1910 to 1914 and had tremendous repercussions in Britain as well as Ireland. A victory for the Dublin workers would have shaken the resolve of employers throughout Britain, while the defeat of the Dublin workers only gave them encouragement. The fight for solidarity with the embattled ITGWU was carried into the heart of the British labour movement and served to lay bare the nature of trade union officialdom that was prepared to watch the Dublin workers defeated in isolation. The British union leaders were more concerned to defeat the Larkinite challenge to their own position than they were to rally to the side of the ITGWU in its battle with the Dublin employers. The weakness of the syndicalist left in Britain was brutally demonstrated by its failure to wrest the initiative from the officials, a failure that was to doom the Dublin workers to inevitable defeat. Clearly, the experience of the Dublin Lockout and its ramifications in Britain are of crucial interest for revolutionary socialists. What is remarkable is how little detailed attention has actually been devoted to the dispute. There is no single substantial account of this dramatic turning point in Irish history, rather it has been displaced by the 1915 Easter Rising which occupies the foreground even in the historical understanding of much of the left. James Connolly’s participation in this republican insurrection has worked to distort our understanding of its importance, to exaggerate its significance for the working class. This article will hopefully help to counter this tendency. It is an attempt to resituate the Lockout, to re-establish it as the central event in our understanding of the development of modern Irish society. It is also long overdue for socialists to begin the recovery of something of the remarkable working class phenomenon that was Larkinism.
 
Jim Larkin
James Larkin was born in Liverpool on 21 January 1876, the son of poverty-stricken Irish parents. He left school when he was eleven years old and held a number of jobs before becoming a docker in the late 1890s. By this time he was already a staunch socialist, having joined the Independent Labour Party (ILP) in 1892–93. Outside of work, his life was dominated by his efforts on behalf of the ILP and he became well-known as a public speaker, advocating the overthrow of capitalism and the introduction of the socialist commonwealth. His condemnation of the capitalist system was uncompromising and his vision of socialism involved its total overthrow, but as far as getting from the one system to the other was concerned, his thinking showed all the woolly naivete characteristic of the ILP in this period. Like many of his contemporaries in the socialist movement, Larkin had little time for trade unions which he regarded as the accomplices of capitalism and considered strikes to be counter-productive, hurting the working class more than the employers. The only way forward for the working class was not by engaging in diversionary trade union agitation, but by electing socialists into office, both locally and nationally, through the ballot box. Only in 1901 did he join the Liverpool-based National Union of Dock Labourers (NUDL), influenced, according to Eric Taplin, by Keir Hardie who was urging that the unions be won over to ILP socialism. He was not an activist within the union, however. Indeed, by 1903 he had actually been promoted to foreman with the firm of T&J Harrison. [2]
Larkin was transformed from a cardholding member into a militant activist in 1905 when the union attempted to impose the closed shop on seven of Harrison’s thirty-five foremen who had either refused to join the union or had allowed their membership to lapse. In June 800 men walked out and Larkin went with them. He was elected on to the strike committee and soon became the driving force behind its conduct of the dispute. The Shipping Federation provided the firm with some 500 scabs and after thirteen weeks the union went down to a crushing defeat. The company withdrew union recognition altogether, let alone imposing the closed shop on its foremen. It took back only those it wanted. Larkin was not among them.
During the dispute, Larkin had emerged as the most effective of the strike leaders and had made a name for himself as an organiser and an agitator. The dispute taught him the need for working class organisation and solidarity and the consequences when it was found wanting. It transformed him from a woolly ballot box socialist into an aggressive trade union organiser who was to preach the virtues of industrial militancy and class solidarity with tremendous effort.
In the aftermath of the defeat, Larkin was taken on by the NUDL as a full-time organiser, working in the ports of Scotland and Ireland. His militant methods were soon to bring him into conflict with the union leadership. It was in Belfast in 1907 that he was to achieve his most famous success, uniting Protestant and Catholic workers in struggle against the employers. At the end of May some 160 cross-channel dockers struck work to impose the closed shop on the Belfast Steamship Company. Larkin quickly brought out the rest of the cross-channel dockers by pressing demands for a general wage increase. His instinct was always to escalate disputes, to step up the pressure. When the carters refused to cross picket lines, some 1,000 of them were locked out and soon after the coal companies locked out a thousand of their men. The struggle put such a strain on the police that at the end of July they too went on strike. There was fierce rioting in which troops fired on the crowds and killed two workers. Despite efforts to whip up sectarian animosities, the workers remained united with both the breakaway Independent Orange Order and the Catholic Home Rule Ancient Order of Hibernians supporting the union. Eventually, the negotiations were taken out of Larkin’s hands by the NUDL’s secretary, James Sexton. The coal companies had already backed down and at the end of August Sexton negotiated a return to work for the carters winning a pay increase and union recognition. This left the dockers isolated and early in September they began to return to work without achieving their objectives.
Larkin had successfully established the NUDL in Belfast, but this first great trial of strength had proved inconclusive. Emmet Larkin, in his classic biography of Larkin, provides the best assessment of the dispute:
The myth that has grown up around James Larkin claims Belfast as one of his greatest achievements. What happened in Belfast can, of course, be conceived in the most grandiose terms. It could include the destruction of political and religious bigotry, organising the workers for the revolutionary act, and contributing to the dignity and integrity of the working classes. The rub is that Larkin did achieve all these things, but only to a limited extent. He did blend, for example, Orange and Green on a Labour canvass, but the pigment proved soluble in the religious wash. He did explain that he was a socialist, but his winning better wages and conditions cannot be offered as a laying of the foundations for a change in the social order. He did appeal to what was best in the Belfast workers, but how much their store of dignity and integrity were increased by him is certainly impossible to say. Still is the attempt to count for nothing? No! – only beware of confusing it with the achievement. In the long run Larkin achieved little of a tangible nature in Belfast, not because he was something less than what he should have been, but because his enemies were too powerful and circumstances too adverse. In the short run he shook Belfast to its roots. There had not been such an upheaval in a hundred years, and there has not been one since. [3]
While the struggle was still underway in Belfast, Larkin was at work establishing the NUDL in Dublin. By the end of September, he had recruited some 2,000 dockers and carters into the union and the following year was to lead them in three different disputes, all of which ended in victory. As Emmet Larkin writes:
Coming so soon after the upheaval in Belfast, Larkin’s early achievements in Dublin have practically gone unnoticed. Conducting and winning three disputes during 1908 was no mean achievement. When it is understood they were won in the face of a severe economic depression, a serious unemployment situation, and a hostile union executive in the person of Sexton, the achievement was remarkable ... The deeper significance of these early disputes, though no one realised it at the time, was that they were the beginnings of a truly revolutionary working class movement in Ireland. [4]
Larkin’s successes in no way improved his standing with the NUDL leadership which was completely opposed to his militant methods, preferring instead the path of moderation, conciliation and collaboration. By the end of 1908 Larkin had established successful branches of the union in every major port in Ireland, but his reward was suspension from office. On 20 November he was informed that the NUDL Executive had given Sexton the power to summarily suspend him if he continued to ignore official instructions. In reply, Larkin urged a general campaign to organise all the unskilled workers in Ireland and threatened to launch a breakaway Irish-based union to accomplish the task. When he was duly suspended on 8 December, this is what he proceeded to do.
 
The ITGWU and the great labour unrest
The decision to establish the Irish Transport and General Workers Union was taken at a meeting in Dublin on 28 December 1908. There were delegates present from all the major ports, and with the exception of Belfast, the great majority of the NUDL’s Irish membership followed Larkin without too many problems. The NUDL Executive had made absolutely clear that it was not prepared to give support to its Irish members in dispute so that a split was probably inevitable. In Belfast, however, the new union encountered serious opposition because many Protestant workers were not prepared to support a Dublin-based union and remained loyal to the NUDL. In essence, the ITGWU was established as a rank and file revolt against the NUDL leadership. This aspect was more important at least to begin with, than its nationalism. Larkin’s great strength as a union leader was to be the way in which he maintained a rapport with the rank and file, relating to them directly. He was more of a rank and file leader than he was a union official. Incredibly, however, the new union only admitted men to membership and it was not until September 1911 that a sister organisation, the Irish Women Workers’ Union was founded by Larkin’s unjustly neglected sister, Delia.
Determined efforts were made to strangle the new union at birth. Hardly had the organisation been established than it was plunged into a bitter dispute in Cork that was to end with James Fearon, the Cork organiser receiving six months in prison and the union suffering a humiliating defeat. Soon after in August 1909, Larkin was arrested and charged with conspiracy to defraud, a charge got up by the Cork Employers Federation, aided and abetted by the NUDL Executive. In November and December of 1908 Larkin had transferred monies from the Cork branch of the NUDL to help support the Dublin carters who were in dispute. He was now charged with having defrauded the Cork membership, first of all because the NUDL had not officially recognised the Cork branch and secondly because the money had been used for purposes for which it was not intended. Sexton appeared as a key prosecution witness and played a crucial part in securing Larkin’s conviction. On 17 June 1910 Larkin was sentenced to one year’s imprisonment, an astonishingly harsh sentence for what was in effect a technical offence. The sentence was clearly designed to destroy, if at all possible, both Larkin and his union, but it seriously backfired. Protest was such that the authorities felt obliged to back down and Larkin was eventually released after only three months. On 1 October 1910 a huge torchlight procession marched through the streets of Dublin in his honour. The ITGWU had survived the attempt to strangle it at birth and now the great task of organising the unskilled workers of Ireland really got underway.
The ITGWU’s drive to organise Ireland’s unskilled workers has to be seen as part and parcel of the great labour unrest or labour revolt that swept over Britain from 1910 to 1914. [5] In many ways, Larkin’s efforts in Belfast in 1907 and in Dublin in 1908 presaged the great explosion of militancy that was to come throughout Britain. The first signs of the coming upturn appeared, it seems, in Ireland. Certainly, Larkin was well aware, by the end of 1908, that there were possibilities for extending union organisation through all the categories of general labour. All that was required was the proper method and this, as we shall see, he believed he had found.
In Britain the labour unrest was characterised by its militancy and by its accompanying violence, by its contemptuous disregard for procedures and agreements. It was as much a revolt against the dead hand of trade union officialdom as it was against the employers. The strike wave was fuelled by great anger and bitterness, but it is important to avoid the notion that it was somehow an irrational response to suffering and injustice. [6] This just will not do. The fact is that the often violent methods used in the conduct of disputes in both Britain and Ireland in this period were completely rational. They were absolutely necessary if victory was to be achieved. The only way that the employers’ determined resistance to union organisation could be broken down was by militant aggressive action, accompanied, if and when necessary, by demonstrative violence. What has to be realised is that the fact that unskilled workers were by and large unorganised was not some sort of natural phenomenon or the result of the immaturity of the trade union movement. On the contrary, it was due to the way that the employers had in the past systematically defeated earlier attempts at organisation by mass strikebreaking and wholesale victimisation. Larkin was one of the many who had personal experience of this. The methods of respectability and moderation championed by the official union leaderships had failed and they were swept aside. In their place was put unbridled militancy: the employers had to be battered to the ground and this could not be done politely or according to the rule book.
1911 was the year that the ITGWU securely established itself, growing from a mere 5,000 members at the beginning of the year to some 18,000 at the end. The union played the major part in organising the wave of unrest that swept over Ireland that year, but it certainly cannot claim to have conjured it up. As Emmet Larkin quite correctly insists:
It would be a mistake to think that all these strikes and lockouts were confined to Dublin or those towns where Larkin and the Transport Union were in the ascendancy. The labour unrest was general throughout Ireland, and Larkin was again only a convenient focus for what was a national picture. Beginning in August 1911 the workers from one end of Ireland to the other made demands on their employers. From Jacob’s biscuit factory in Dublin to the bacon factories in Limerick,from the dock labourers in Belfast to the Urban Council employees in Cork, spontaneous demands were made and quickly conceded. Newsboys, clothing workers, golf caddies, tanners, maltsters, dairy workers and tramwaymen all clamoured for an increase in wages. The Freeman’s Journal had to open a special column for Irish Labour Troubles in August to chronicle the sudden outburst of financial unrest. The Transport Union had more than enough to do in these busy months. Larkin and Partridge were in Dublin, Daly was in Wexford, McKeown was in Dundalk and Connolly was in Belfast. The general wave of strikes did not subside in Ireland until February of the following year. [7]
During 1912 the ITGWU consolidated its position in Dublin and other towns but made no further dramatic advances. 1913, however, saw Ireland once again in the grip of a strike wave that was to sweep irresistibly over the whole country. Before the year was over agricultural labourers, blacksmiths, bill posters, biscuit workers, bottle makers, box makers, brass finishers, bricklayers, building labourers, cabinet makers, canal loaders, carpenters, carters, coach makers, confectioners, dockers, electricians, engineers, gas workers, glaziers, hairdressers, iron founders, linen workers, market gardeners, match workers, millers, news boys, painters, paviors, planterers, plumbers, poplin workers, seamen and firemen, sewage workers, soap makers, stevedores, stone cutters, tobacco workers, tramway workers, van drivers, wood machinists – even schoolchildren were all to be involved in industrial action. From A to Z were to be involved in often violent confrontation with their employers and the state.
Between January and August 1913 there were over thirty strikes in Dublin alone. The first blow was struck by the ITGWU when over 100 dockers employed by the Dublin Steampacket Company walked out to impose the closed shop on their foremen. The union extended the dispute to other shipping companies, calling more dockers out over wages and hours, and eventually after three months won a decisive victory. Larkin in the words of his biographer, was ‘master of the port’. [8] While this dispute was still underway the union became involved in a bitter conflict in Sligo where the employers imported blacklegs from Liverpool. There was bitter fighting with the police in which one picket was killed before the union emerged triumphant at the end of March.
Joseph O’Brien describes the situation in Dublin after the victorious dockers’ strike:
Between the dockers’ strike and the momentous events of August, several unrelated minor disputes took place that illustrate widespread grievance and militancy in the skilled and unskilled trades during that fateful year. The bottlemakers fought unavailingly for three weeks against the introduction of machines; 350 biscuit workers struck for one day for the reinstatement of a suspended worker; 500 coachbuilders were out for six weeks before they won a minimum wage; over 100 sawyers won a 50 hour week, as did 50 billposters of David Allen and Company: hairdressers struck to protest the abolition of the tipping system and their strike was honoured by the glaziers and carters of Brooks, Thomas and Company, who refused to install a pane of glass in a hairdressing establishment in sympathy with the strikers ... [9]
At the same time, Larkin was also busy organising the agricultural workers of County Dublin. A large enough membership had been built up by August for the union to threaten strike action and thereby secure an unprecedented 20 per cent pay rise for this most downtrodden section of the working class.
By the summer of 1913 the ITGWU had achieved a membership of over 30,000 and Larkin was claiming that Dublin was the best organised city in the world. This, modestly comments the ITGWU’s official history, ‘was possibly true’. The union seemed firmly in control of events and the working class was confident and full of hope. [10] Only the Guinness Brewery and the Dublin United Tramway Company remained steadfast against the union.
 
Larkinism and revolution
What was the nature of the labour unrest in Ireland? According to Dermot Keogh in his recent study of the rise of the Irish trade unions all that was at stake from 1910 to 1914 was the principle of trade union organisation. The great struggles of these years were for the limited objective of the right to organise and demonstrated only trade union consciousness on the part of the workers. There were only a handful of revolutionary socialists in Ireland and while they might actually lead massive struggles, they never won any significant number of workers over to their politics. In effect, what Keogh argues is that the struggles that shook Dublin and other towns were fought merely to establish the sort of moderate responsible trade unionism that he regards as acceptable: this was all the working class wanted and it was only employer intransigence that made them turn to the likes of Larkin for leadership. [11] Increasingly this view seems to be emerging as the new orthodoxy, retrospectively making even the years of the labour unrest safe. Even Desmond Greaves, the official historian of the ITGWU, seems to move in this direction (although somewhat shamefacedly). How valid is this attempt to hamstring the historical experience of the Irish working class?
First of all, we must make quite clear that there was not a revolutionary socialist working class in Ireland struggling for state power: Dublin in 1913 was not Petrograd in 1917, the Citizen Army was not the Red Army and James Connolly was not Vladimir Lenin. To pretend otherwise only gives credence to the arguments of the likes of Keogh. What there was, however, was very different from anything that he is prepared to recognise. The struggles from 1910 to 1914 were indeed for the right to organise, were to build strong union organisation, but to the workers who fought the police on the streets, who withstood months of hunger and want, who defied clerical condemnation and press abuse, trade union organisation meant something much more potent than Keogh is prepared to concede. The fight was to make the union the dominant force in the land, to break the employers’ power and to make them dance to the union’s tune: it was what Bob Holton has described as ‘proto-syndicalism’. [12] This was a powerful element in the unrest in Britain, but there it failed to overcome the entrenched resistance of the trade union leaderships. In Ireland it was much more successful: having seen off Sexton and the NUDL, the Larkinites had much more of a clear field.
Of course, we can criticise this project and point out its political weaknesses and limitations, but nevertheless it represented a desire to hammer the employers and to establish a union ascendancy rather than any desire for the sort of accommodatory trade unionism that prevails today. Having said this we have at the same time to recognise that there were different conflicting currents within the labour unrest and that at different times different aspects of the movement came to the fore (Larkin himself sometimes reflected this shifting within the movement), but in Ireland it was the militants who were to prevail, at least into the early months of the 1914–18 war.
Anyone who cares to look in the pages of the union newspaper that was edited by Larkin, the Irish Worker and People’s Advocate will see that Keogh has completely misread the situation:
Nothing like it has ever been seen since it was suppressed by the British Government in the early months of the First World War. This novel production was and remains unique in the history of working class journalism. It was less a newspaper than the spirit of four glorious years. To read the Irish Worker of these years is to feel the quickening pulse of Dublin. Week after week, while working and waiting for the millennium, Larkin attacked, with a monumental perseverance, the sweating, exploiting employers and the corrupt, cynical politicians who in his eyes were responsible for the reprehensible social conditions of Dublin. He gave no quarter and expected none as he vilified any and all, high or low, who had the misfortune to come under the notice of his pen. [13]
At the height of the 1911 upsurge, Larkin claimed sales nearing 100,000 copies, but much more likely is an average weekly sale throughout the paper’s life of around 20,000. [14]
In his 1911 A Call to Arms Larkin informed his readers that during the recent skirmish between
Labour and Capitalism in Ireland you got a foretaste of how your bowelless masters regard you. Their kept press spewed foul lies, innuendoes, and gave space to the knaves of our own class for the purpose of garotting our glorious movement. At present you spend your lives in sordid labour and have your abode in filthy slums; your children hunger, and your masters say your slavery must endure for ever. If you would come out of bondage yourself must forge the weapons and fight the grim battle.
The written word is the most potent force in our modern world. The Irish Worker will be a lamp to guide your feet in the dark hours of the impending struggle; a well of truth reflecting the purity of your motives, and a weekly banquet from which you will rise strengthened in purpose to emulate the deeds of your forefathers, who died in dungeon and on scaffold in the hopes of a glorious resurrection for our beloved country. [15]
This was to be the paper’s weekly purpose: to serve as a weapon in the working class’s struggle to liberate itself and free Ireland.
From the very first issue of 27 May 1911, Larkin made clear that the paper was a nationalist paper, that ‘we owe no allegiance to any other nation nor King, governors, or representatives of any other nation. That all such persons are interlopers and trespassers upon this our land.’ But, he emphasised, the working class was ‘determined to accomplish not only National Freedom ... from military and political slavery such as we suffer under at present, but also from a more degraded slavery economic or wage slavery.’ For this ‘we must have our own party!” [16] The paper combined its forceful advocacy of the One Big Union with its advocacy of an Irish Labour Party and of Irish Nationalism. [17]
Clearly as a movement Larkinism involved a combination of very diverse elements: syndicalism, industrial unionism, labourism, socialism, nationalism and Catholicism. Holding them all together in some sort of unit was the principle of working class solidarity. This was the central ethic of the ITGWU, the core around which everything else revolved. Any section of workers in dispute could rely on the active support of the rest of the union. Picket lines were scrupulously respected and ‘tainted’ goods were never touched. The sympathy strike was a crucial instrument for breaking employer resistance so that no group of workers was ever allowed to be defeated in isolation. Every section of the working class had to be enrolled in the One Big Union so that there were no gaps for the employers to exploit, so that everywhere they turned they confronted a united working class stood shoulder to shoulder. There was no place at all for the non-unionist or the scab. This was the core of Larkinism, and by the summer of 1913 it had given the union a veritable stranglehold over the city of Dublin with only a few gaps still to close.
What of Jim Larkin himself? Bob Holton provides a good summing up of the man:
The ideas and activities of Larkin ... are not easy to categorise. In spite of his commitment to direct action and consistent hostility to conciliatory trade unionism, he still retained an interest in parliamentary and municipal politics throughout the years of labour unrest. At times, his pronouncements against strikes and in favour of compulsory arbitration seemed highly atypical of a syndicalist militant. Whatever he actually said on the platform, however, Larkin’s practical activities often contradicted these statements. He certainly wielded the strike weapon with considerable effect, asserting rank and file power against both employers and union leaders. This divorce between theory and practice is symptomatic of the unsystematic character of Larkin’s approach. At the same time it is extremely misleading to picture the man simply as an impulsive industrial militant. Though his flair for mass strike organisation cannot be doubted, he had an even more central concern than simple industrial agitation. Above all else Larkin was striving to articulate and promote an ethic of working class brotherhood and unity. He saw this as an essential prerequisite for attempts to overthrow capitalism and to lay the groundwork for an alternative social order.’ [18]
This is, by and large, a fair assessment, but it does not relate Larkin closely enough to the circumstances that produced him. Larkin, after all, did not spring fully-formed from a Greek God’s forehead, but was rather the product of working class experience and practice. He had been formed within the working class. There were many militants who shared his attitudes and outlook, but his exceptional abilities and forceful personality had pushed him to the fore. His weaknesses and inconsistencies were those of the movement, of the most advanced section of the working class that constituted Larkinism. He made as much plain himself when he told a meeting:
Don’t bother about cheering Larkin – he is but one of yourselves. It is you that want the cheers, and it is you that deserve them. It is you and the class from which I come – the downtrodden class – that should get the cheers ... I don’t recognise myself- a mean soul like myself in a mean body – as being the movement. You are the movement and for time being I have been elected as your spokesman. [19]
This is an important point. Larkin’s great strength was his ability to articulate, indeed shout out his members’ bitterness and anger, their hopes and longings. It seemed to Constance Markievicz, when she heard him speak in public, that ‘his personality caught up, assimilated and threw back to the vast crowd that surrounded him every emotion that swayed them, every pain and joy that they had ever felt made articulate and sanctified.’ [20] To R.M. Fox, he ‘was a crater through which volcanic rumblings emerged from the great upheaving force which was responsible for social tremors throughout the world.’ [21] He was a great agitator, ‘always weak as a theorist ... (but) a master of smashing technique when it came to Labour struggle.’ [22]
Let us consider Larkin’s weaknesses more closely. Personally, he was a great egoist and often quite self-consciously gloried in his role as the embodiment of the militant labour movement. This inevitably made him difficult to work with, but his great strengths always outweighed any disadvantages deriving from this. He was certainly not the psychotic that Desmond Greaves makes him out to be. [23] More important are his political limitations.
Larkin’s politics can be seen as resolving themselves into two different strategies for achieving socialism that existed side by side. On the one hand he was an advocate of trade union struggle and of the One Big Union, of workers building up their union strength until such a time as industry was already effectively in their hands. Even within this strand of his thinking there were contradictory elements, for example, his occasional advocacy of the virtues of arbitration. Nevertheless, this was a strategy of class war. On the other hand, however, he advocated the establishment of an Irish Labour Party, a reformist party to be controlled by the Irish TUC, which would contest elections and in the fullness of time take power by constitutional parliamentary means. The employing class was the enemy that had to be defeated in struggle, while the state was a neutral agency that could be captured through the ballot box.
Today the weaknesses of this sort of politics are clear. First, Larkin’s belief that the union was the weapon that could defeat the capitalist class can be seen as not recognising the unevenness of working class consciousness and the consequent need for the most advanced sections of the class to be organised as a political leadership, as a revolutionary party. Second, he did not recognise that the state had to be smashed rather than captured, that this required an armed insurrection rather than an electoral victory or even a general strike. The result was that Larkin, with all the advantages that his enormous following among the working class gave him, did not set about building the revolutionary party that could have provided the leadership necessary to accomplish the overthrow of capitalism. Instead, Larkinism remained a movement that could extract concessions from the employers, that could put them on the defensive, but because of the limitations of even the most militant trade unionism, it was not able to achieve the socialist reorganisation of society, and let us be quite clear, this was what Larkin intended and loudly advocated. For him the union was the instrument that the working class would use to emancipate itself and establish the socialist commonwealth. However, while strikes could bring individual employers to heel, any attempt at overthrowing capitalism would inevitably confront the state and this, Larkin, along with the rest of the left in both Britain and Ireland, was not prepared for. The state would be captured through the ballot box as far as they were concerned.
Even Jim Connolly advocated politics that were essentially similar, indeed he was more of an explicit syndicalist than even Larkin. Interestingly, Connolly had played a leading part in attempts to build revolutionary parties in Britain and Ireland and had for a time been a member of Daniel De Leon’s Socialist Labor Party in America. His politics in the late 1890s and early 1900s were De Leonist, emphasising the importance of building industrial unions, but under the control of the party. Connolly was to eventually break with De Leon’s conception of the revolutionary party, but he did not develop any alternative of his own. Instead as far as he was concerned the One Big Union became the chosen instrument for the overthrow of capitalism. He did not become a ‘pure’ syndicalist, however. In America, he joined the Socialist Party of America, a reformist organisation that nevertheless included revolutionaries among its members and back in Ireland he was to support Larkin’s campaign for an Irish Labour Party (he proposed the successful resolution establishing it at the 1912 ITUC) and he was a leading member of the propagandist Socialist Party of Ireland. Connolly’s politics were not, therefore, all that far removed from Larkin’s, although they had a much sharper theoretical expression. Arguably much of his writing at this time was a Marxist theorisation of Larkinism. [24] What places both men in the revolutionary camp is that despite the inadequacies of their politics, they both saw the ITGWU as a weapon in the class struggle, as a club with which to beat the capitalist class into submission and to prepare the way for socialism. Only after the Russian Revolution and the establishment of the Comintern was this confused form of revolutionary socialism to be superceded. By then Connolly had been executed by a British firing squad, while Larkin was to be a founder member of the American Communist Party.
One last point is worth making about Connolly. Almost every account of the years from 1910 to 1916 written from whatever sort of leftwing perspective exaggerates his role at the expense of Larkin’s. Even so careful an historian as Raymond Challinor refers to the Irish Worker in 1911 as being ‘Connolly’s Irish Worker’. [25] In fact, the paper was edited by Larkin with only brief interruptions from its first issue in May 1911 until he left Ireland for America in October 1914. While one must always beware of substituting individuals for mass movements, nevertheless it has to be insisted that it was Larkin who was the spokesman, representative and acknowledged leader of the mass movement of working class revolt in this period and that Connolly was only one of his lieutenants, even if the most able. As far as the ITGWU membership was concerned Larkin personified their movement. Any discussion of Connolly has to start from a recognition of this fact. The only way that his politics can be adequately comprehended is if his articles and pamphlets are seen not as the work of some sort of socialist guru, but as the efforts of someone who was both a theoretician and an activist, to relate to that mass movement, to give theoretical expression and political direction to it. Understanding ‘Larkinism’ is a prerequisite for understanding Connolly.
 
The great lockout, 1913
The ITGWU’s hold over Dublin was such that few employers cared to challenge it, indeed the early months of 1913 saw many employers adopting conciliatory stances. But there was one important exception: Catholic Ireland’s most powerful capitalist, William Murphy, an important figure in the Home Rule movement and the owner of the Irish Independent newspaper and of the Dublin United Tramway Company. He was determined not just to exclude the union from his own concerns, but to destroy it throughout the whole city. Interestingly, Murphy had difficulty convincing his fellow employers that the time was ripe to crush Larkinism. Few had his resources and Larkin had made blacking and picketing such powerful weapons that even the use of scab labour was no longer effective: it spread disputes rather than ended them. Working class solidarity had defeated the methods that had been successfully used to destroy the unskilled unions since the 1890s. Unable to convince the Dublin Employers Federation that confrontation would be more effective than conciliation, Murphy had to prove by example that Larkinism could be smashed. Crucial was his success in getting the Liberal government in London (which had the wholehearted support of the British Labour Party) to endorse any measures necessary to clear the union off the streets. For Murphy to be able to convince other employers that the ITGWU could be broken, the state had to make clear that it would guarantee the safety of scab labour, and once he was able to demonstrate that this was indeed the case, the other employers accepted his leadership.
By the same token, Larkin was determined to organise the trams and, moreover, had no reason to expect that this would put the union’s very existence at risk. If it came to a strike, then picketing, blacking and boycotting would inevitably bring the tram system to a halt, and, sooner or later, Murphy would have to concede union recognition.
Murphy struck first. On 19 August he sacked all the union members working in the despatch department of the Irish Independent and on the 21 August sacked about 100 men working in the parcels department of the tram company. Before he could conduct a similar purge of the drivers and conductors, Larkin called them out on strike. At 10 a.m. on 26 August, the second day of the Dublin Horse Show, the same 700 union men stopped work, abandoning their trams and passengers where they stood. The response was disappointing with many men continuing to work, but Larkin was confident that victory was in his grasp, that solidarity action would soon close down Murphy’s concerns and bring him to heel. Dublin Castle moved quickly to demonstrate its full support for Murphy and on 28 August, Larkin and the rest of the ITGWU leadership were all arrested and charged with seditious libel, seditious conspiracy and unlawful assembly. A union demonstration on O’Connell Street, called for Sunday 31 August was banned. Larkin was no sooner released on bail that he made clear his intention to defy the ban and went into hiding to escape re-arrest.
Already there had been clashes in different parts of the city between pickets and police with police being badly injured. The police had clearly had instructions to drive the union off the streets and were carrying out their orders without restraint. Moreover, the conflict was spreading as other more determined employers joined in. A flour mill dismissed all union members in its employ and when Jacobs’ biscuit factory received a delivery from the firm over 2,000 men and women walked out. At this point elements within the ITGWU leadership, led by William O’Brien began looking for a way out of the fight. They resolved to comply with the ban on the demonstration in O’Connell Street and to hold a rally elsewhere. Larkin repudiated them from hiding. [26]
Police violence reached a peak over the weekend of 30 and 31 August with a general attack on the working class taking place. The workers were to be taught a lesson they would not forget and the state was to make clear its full support for the employers. On Saturday evening there was serious fighting in a number of areas of the city as people defended themselves against police attack. On Burgh Quay and Eden Quay the police brutally beat all and sundry, clubbing two union members to death. In Foley Street, they invaded the tenements, smashing furniture and beating men, women and children in their own homes. By morning there were two dead and over 200 badly injured.
On the Sunday, Larkin was smuggled into the Imperial Hotel in O’Connell Street and appeared on a balcony to address the crowds. This was taken as a signal by the police to clear the street which they did with great brutality, clubbing people indiscriminately to the ground. A liberal MP, Handel Booth, in Dublin for the Horse Show, subsequently described the police as:
The most brutal constabulary ever let loose on a peaceful assembly. Up and down the road, backwards and forwards, the police rushed like men possessed. Some drove the crowd into the streets to meet other batches of the government’s minions wildly striking with truncheons at every one within reach. In escaping many ran the gauntlet until the third or fourth blow knocked them senseless ... kicking the victims when prostrate was a settled part of the police programme. [27]
Fighting continued throughout the rest of the day and into the first days of September as the police imposed the rule of the truncheon in working class districts. Another 300-odd people were badly injured before the conflict subsided.
With Larkin once again in prison and the workers driven off the streets, the employers now felt confident enough to follow Murphy’s lead and to move against the union. Firm after firm attempted to impose an undertaking not to belong to the ITGWU on their workers, and, when it was refused, locked them out. The building trade took the opportunity to move against the United Labourers Union, locking out some 1,000 men, while in the county, the Farmers’ Association locked out their agricultural workers. By the end of September, Dublin was in the grip of a general lockout that involved some 400 employers and 25,000 workers. The ITGWU was fighting for its life.
 
The isolation of Dublin
Most accounts of the Dublin Lockout consider it primarily as an event in Irish history, as an incident in the fateful years of struggle that were to culminate in the Easter Rising of 1916 and in the War of Independence and Civil War that were to follow. Accordingly, they fail to adequately locate it within the context of the great labour revolt that had engulfed the whole of Britain as well. While the ITGWU was staunchly nationalist, it also regarded itself as part of the great movement of working class insurgency that was challenging employers, union officials and government in both countries. Larkin identified himself completely with the syndicalists and socialists in Britain, especially those grouped around the Daily Herald and around the British Socialist Party, who were trying to reshape the unions as instruments of class war rather than class compromise. Once the lockout was general in Dublin, he quickly realised that the only way the union could escape being ground down in a protracted unequal war of attrition was if the dispute could be spread to Britain. This required British workers taking industrial action in support of their Dublin brothers and sisters and refusing to handle blacked goods. The ITGWU had always extended such assistance to British workers and now that it was fighting for its life it demanded that this action be reciprocated.
To whom should appeals for solidarity have been addressed? To the union bureaucracies or to the rank and file? Larkin had no doubts. His own experience with the NUDL had educated him in what was to be expected from the union bureaucracy. Why should officials who betrayed their own members behave any better when it came to supporting the members of another union, and an Irish union at that? From the very beginning Larkin appealed directly to the rank and file, and his call was to meet with a tremendous response that was almost to overwhelm the opposition of the trade union bureaucracy. On 16 September railwaymen in Liverpool began to black all Dublin traffic and soon some 13–14,000 men were locked out or on strike as far afield as Birmingham, Sheffield, Crewe and Derby. The action was completely unofficial, organised by local rank and file committees who tried to move towards a national stoppage in support of the Dublin workers. There was a very real possibility of linking the railwaymen’s own outstanding grievances with the growing demands for solidarity with the ITGWU, but the union leadership, in particular J.H. Thomas, resolutely opposed any such attempt. The officials were able to outmanoeuvre the militants, to isolate them and prevent the revolt spreading and in this way secured a return to work. This incident highlights both the great strengths of the labour revolt and its great weaknesses: on the one hand there was tremendous militancy and a great willingness to take solidarity action, but on the other hand the movement was too loose, too uncoordinated, too unorganised to overcome the opposition of Thomas and Co. To head off demands for action in support of Dublin, the unions instead offered financial support, although even this was to be used in attempts to undermine Larkin and to settle the dispute over his head. [28]
The Lockout soon involved the thousands of victimised workers and their families, altogether more than a third of Dublin’s population, in great hardship. In an attempt to alleviate the suffering, towards the end of October a scheme was put underway to send some 350 children to stay for a holiday with the families of sympathisers in Britain. This was not an idea conjured out of thin air but was a tactic that had been used in protracted disputes both on the continent and in America. On 21 October, Archbishop Walsh of Dublin, a staunch supporter of the Home Rule movement, published a letter in the press condemning the scheme, asking the mothers if they had ‘abandoned their faith’ and accusing them of sending ‘away their children to be cared for in a strange land without security of any kind that those to whom the poor children are to be handed over are Catholics, or indeed, are persons of any faith at all.’ [29] Many children had already left, but on 23 October large crowds led by a number of priests prevented the departure of another party and assaulted the organisers. For a number of days attempts to take the children out of the country were confronted by threatening crowds until the police intervened, with the same admirable impartiality that they displayed throughout the dispute, and arrested Dora Montefiori, Delia Larkin and others who had helped organise the holidays, for kidnapping. They were only released when they undertook to abandon the scheme.
This clear intervention by the Church against the ITGWU was widely welcomed. The London Times gloated that the priests ‘have reasserted their authority over the women of the working classes, and it is no longer certain that Mr Larkin enjoys the unquestioning obedience of the men.’ Arnold Wright, a paid apologist for the employers, in his account of the Lockout, described these events as ‘one of the most remarkable and significant uprisings of Catholics that Dublin had witnessed for many a long day.’ While Augustine Birrell, the Liberal Chief Secretary for Ireland optimistically concluded that ‘it has broken the strike.’ [30] But while the union was momentarily shaken by this manifestation of clerical hostility, the rank and file remained solid and united in their determination to win.
Larkin met the clerical challenge with indignant outrage: ‘l am not frightened by the Archbishop or the priests. No one ever heard me say a word against them, but I say the priest who says I would allow a child to be proselytised is a liar in his heart.’ [31] His involvement was temporarily ended, however, when on 28 October, a hand-picked jury found him guilty of sedition and he was sentenced to seven months imprisonment. Connolly assumed control of the union and neatly turned the tables on the Archbishop by suspending relief operations at Liberty Hall and sending the children to their priests for food. After a week had demonstrated the complete failure of the Church to sustain its congregation, the union resumed relief operations, and an uneasy truce was obtained between the Church and the ITGWU.
Interestingly, while the Church’s hostility to the union gave rise to sometimes bitter attacks on clerical interference in matters that were none of their business, there is no evidence to show that it undermined the devout Catholicism of the great majority of the locked-out men and women. Larkin himself remained a staunch Catholic and on one occasion was actually to refuse to share the platform with a divorcee at a solidarity meeting organised by the British Socialist Party in Grimbsy. The young Harry Pollitt replaced him. [32] Even Connolly took great care to avoid upsetting the religious susceptibilities of the rank and file (he condemned divorce as a product of capitalism!) and actually confessed on one occasion that although not a believer, he nevertheless posed as one. [33] He believed that as the union got stronger so the Church would inevitably be forced to come to terms with it; just as the Church had initially condemned the Land League in 1879, but had then rallied behind it, so it would be with the ITGWU. The Church, he argued, would never put all of its eggs in the capitalist basket. [34]
Far from weakening the workers, the imprisonment of Larkin, together with the death on hunger strike of James Byrne, the imprisoned chairman of Dun Laoghaire Trades Council, had the effect of increasing their determination and of once again rallying British workers in their support. Connolly appealed to British workers to vote against the Liberal candidates in three pending by-elections in Reading, Keighley and Linlithgow even if it meant voting Tory. In all three by-elections, socialists campaigned against the Liberals and for the release of Larkin. The Liberals lost all three seats.
At the same time, the Shipping Federation began to import scabs from Britain into Dublin. There were fierce clashes between mass pickets and the police, but the union failed to win control of the streets. In retaliation, on 12 November, Connolly repudiated the union’s agreement with the Dublin shipping companies and closed the port of Dublin. This was a dramatic escalation of the dispute because the union was now effectively hurting even those firms not involved in the Lockout in order to try to and force the Dublin employers to terms. Scabs were poured into the port to try and keep it open, with the Shipping Federation being actively assisted by Havelock Wilson’s National Sailors and Firemen’s Union. The ITGWU’S failure to drive out the scabs, many of whom carried licensed firearms, and who were protected by both police and troops, forced the union to appeal once again for solidarity action in Britain. The only way to beat the Shipping Federation’s strikebreaking was to close down the ports in Britain.
The renewed clashes between pickets and police in the first weeks of November determined the ITGWU leadership to organise its own self-defence force, the Citizen Army. There were already informal groups of union members conducting a guerrilla war against the scabs and the police, but Connolly now proposed to establish a formal disciplined force that would be capable of defending itself against police attack. The formation of the force was announced at a meeting on 13 November called to celebrate Larkin’s release from prison after only seventeen days of his sentence had been served. The Liberal government had bowed down before the growing wave of protest that was threatening to carry the Dublin dispute across the water into Britain. While the Citizen Army, armed with metal-shod clubs, was never strong enough to put a stop to the importation of scabs, it was effective in deterring the police from repeating their exploits of the end of August.
According to Greaves, by this stage of the dispute, ‘the republicans, the Irish-Irelanders and the Liberal intelligentsia’ had all rallied to the side of the union. [35] Certainly some had, but that is not the whole story by any means, and what Greaves leaves out is in many ways more important than what he includes. The harsh fact is that while individual republicans sympathised with the union, the largest and by far the most important republican organisation, the Irish Republican Brotherhood absolutely refused to take sides. Greaves, for reasons best known to himself, completely ignores this not unimportant detail.
Sean O’Casey, at the time a staunch Irish-Irelander and an active member of the IRB, was also a locked out ITGWU member. He had long argued within the union that the workers had no need of socialist politics but should rally to the republican movement for their salvation. Now he took himself at his own word and when the Lockout began urged that the IRB should declare itself for the workers, should side, as he saw it, with ‘the men of no property.’ He was told instead that the IRB could not involve itself in a sectional dispute but that individual members could give the union their support if they wished. For the time being, he accepted this and continued to be active both in the IRB and in the ITGWU where he was joint secretary of the Relief Fund Committee. Then on 25 November, the IRB was instrumental in establishing an Irish National Volunteer force in Dublin which O’Casey saw as competing for recruits directly with the Citizen Army. Worse, however, was the fact that while a number of Home Rule organisations were invited to participate in founding the Volunteers, the ITGWU was not. Having refused to ally itself with the locked out workers, the IRB now proceeded to associate itself with the representatives of the employers. The Volunteer movement was established in alliance with ‘men who had done all they could to snatch from the workers the right to join the Trades Union of their choice’, who ‘had locked out their employees because they had ventured to assert the first principles of Trades Unionism.’ [36]
The reason for this was simple: in the conditions of class war prevailing in Dublin, the IRB had a choice of allying itself with either the ITGWU or the Home Rulers, but not both. They believed in building a republican movement across the classes and rejected the ITGWU as representing a sectional interest and for insisting on putting its own petty concerns before the interests of the nation. The Home Rulers were much more amenable.
This did not go unchallenged, however. When the Volunteer movement was launched at a rally at the Rotunda Rink on 25 November, the meeting was invaded by ITGWU members. The moment Laurence Kettle, the joint secretary of the Volunteer committee who was well-known for his hostility to Larkinism, stood up to speak, his voice was drowned out. There was scuffles, and it was only after some time that stewards armed with hurley sticks were able to clear the union members from the hall. [37] O’Casey himself made one last effort to challenge the way the IRB was going, but was shouted down at a meeting of the Dublin circles of the organisation with the chairman waving a revolver. He gave up his involvement with the republican movement and threw himself wholeheartedly into the fight against the Dublin employers. [38]
Once he was released from prison, Larkin launched a campaign for solidarity action in Britain, his ‘fiery cross’ crusade. He spoke at huge meetings across the country, explaining the plight of the Dublin workers, castigating the leaders of the Labour Party and of the unions and appealing for action in support of his members. In response to his call a second wave of unofficial industrial action spread across the country. In South Wales two ASLEF drivers were sacked for refusing to carry Dublin traffic and some 30,000 railwaymen struck in support of them. Once again Thomas was instrumental in smashing the strike, getting his members back to work and actually ordering them to replace the two victimised ASLEF members whom he described as ‘a disgrace’ to trade unionism. There was considerable support for the ITGWU on the docks and officials reported great difficulty in keeping their members at work in London and Liverpool. Without any doubt the great obstacle to solidarity action with the Dublin workers was not any lack of sympathy among key groups of workers, but the opposition of the trade union bureaucracy. The militants, many of them active socialists and syndicalists, were just not organised enough to wrest control from the hands of the officials. The pressure from below was such, however, that on 18 November the Parliamentary Committee of the TUC took the unprecedented step of calling a special conference of the TUC for 9 December to consider the Dublin situation. This was the first special conference in the TUC’s history and gives a good indication of how the pressure was building up. To keep control, the bureaucracy gave ground, hoping that the solidarity movement would run out of steam in the interim. On 22 November the Daily Herald published a manifesto, drawn up by Larkin, that appealed directly to the rank and file to bring their officials to heel.
The British union leaders seem to think, speak and act as though trade unionism was meant to be used as a salve for the sore of poverty ... They seem to think that round-table conferences, nice language, beautiful phrases that fall trippingly from the tongue, Conciliation Boards and agreements are the be-all and end-all of life ... We say trade unionism is a root remedy and by industrial action we can accomplish great things. We are not willing to say that trade unionism shall be used either by industrial commissioners, Conciliation Boards or by Cabinets to chloroform the workers, to persuade them to remain as dumb, driven dogs.
Instead, Larkin urged, that the rank and file had to:
Tell your leaders now and every day until December 9, and raise your voice upon that day to tell them that for the future they must stand for Trade Unionism, that they are not there as apologists for the shortcomings of the Capitalist system, that they are not there to assist the employers in helping to defeat any section of workers striving to be free, nor to act as a brake upon the wheel of progress. [39]
The manoeuvre had worked, however. Attempts to launch unofficial action were let drop, while all eyes turned to the TUC. Even Larkin saw the priority as putting rank and file pressure on the TUC to take action, rather than launching it independently, confident in the knowledge that the TUC would be dragged in its wake. Instead the momentum was lost and the initiative was allowed to slip away. To some extent Larkin was putting his faith in the left officials such as Robert Smillie of the miners and Ben Tillett of the dockers, who had shared platforms with him during his ‘fiery cross’ crusade. Tillett, in particular, had called for the most extreme measures. On 16 November from the same platform as Larkin in the Manchester Free Trade Hall in front of 4,000 people with 20,000 locked outside, Tillett called on British workers to arm, promised to lead them in battle against the police and to personally make an end of McKenna, the Liberal Home Secretary. At the same time, however, he was busy stamping out attempts at unofficial action in support of the Dublin workers. [40]
When the TUC special conference assembled on 9 December, Larkin found himself confronting not a conference of rank and file delegates, but a conference dominated by full-time officials. As R.M. Fox remarks, while the conference was ostensibly ‘to decide what was to be done about Dublin ... (in reality) it was to decide what was to be done about Larkin.’ [41] The conference was packed against him: according to Bill Moran there was not one delegate who had been formally elected or mandated for the occasion, instead they were all either appointed by their executives or chosen from the delegation to the annual TUC. [42] What did take Larkin by surprise, however, was the ownership of the hand that wielded the knife that struck the fatal blow: Ben Tillett! He proposed the first motion to be put, condemning Larkin’s attacks on the leaders of the trade union movement and opening the floodgates for a score of attacks on the ITGWU leader. Larkin replied in kind, but Tillett’s Judas’ resolution was carried almost unanimously (only six delegates voted against). Then the conference moved to discuss the question of sympathetic action and voted against it by 2,280,000 votes to 203,000. The movement for unofficial action was decisively crushed and Dublin was isolated. In Connolly’s words:
We asked ... that the working class of Britain should help us to prevent the Dublin capitalists carrying on their business without us. We asked for the isolation of the capitalists of Dublin, and for answer the leaders of the British labour movement proceeded calmly to isolate the working class of Dublin ... And so we Irish workers must go down into Hell, bow our backs to the lash of the slave driver, let our hearts be seared by the iron of hatred, and instead of the sacramental wafer of brotherhood and common sacrifice, eat the dust of defeat and betrayal. [43]
 
Defeat
After the British TUC’s betrayal, defeat was inevitable and by mid-January 1914 the workers were beginning to return to work on whatever terms were on offer. There was still an almost daily catalogue of clashes between strikers and armed scabs and police in which many union members were injured and arrested. On 18 December an armed scab shot a sixteen year old girl on picket duty: she died on 2 January. Her killer was freed on bail and charges were eventually dismissed. Two weeks later a scab carrying a revolver was beaten to death by a group of union men and another drowned after being thrown into the Liffey. [44] The main issue was no longer in doubt, however.
The union made an effort to rally its forces in the Dublin municipal elections that January. The Dublin Labour Party was completely dominated by the ITGWU. Although the Labour vote held up the result was a disaster with only two of the thirteen Labour candidates securing election. According to one historian, this defeat ‘was crucial’ in finally convincing the union leadership that they were beaten. [45] By the middle of February there were still some 5,000 workers locked out and the last to accept defeat were the women of Jacob’s biscuits who did not go back until mid-March.
What is the significance of the defeat? According to Greaves in his biography of Connolly it was not a defeat at all! Rather it was ‘a draw’. There were no sackings, he claims, and the pledge to leave the ITGWU was ‘reduced to a scrap of paper’. [46] When we turn to his later history of the ITGWU he acknowledges the victimisations that took place, the bankruptcy of the union and its catastrophic loss of membership, but now the dispute was not ‘lost, won or drawn? It was all three.’ He is pretty well sure to be at least partly right! [47] In fact the dispute ended in a crushing defeat and it is idle to pretend otherwise. The ITGWU which had appeared to have Dublin securely in its grasp in the early summer of 1913 had been broken by the employers and the state, assisted by the TUC. The union had survived as an organisation, but the movement of working class revolt had been smashed. The apparently irresistible tide of Larkinism had been turned back.
The struggle had been of massive proportions with the ITGWU taking on employers, police, courts, press, clergy and imported scabs. Four workers were dead and over 400 had been imprisoned. Hundreds had been injured in fights with the police. And in the end all the sacrifice was turned to dust by the TUC. It was the refusal of the TUC to endorse sympathetic action that finally ensured that the ITGWU would go down in defeat. This, of course, will be no great surprise to readers of this journal: if the Tolpuddle Martyrs had relied on the TUC they would still be languishing in Australia. What is important, however, is to understand why it was that the powerful movement of support for Dublin among the British rank and file was unable to overcome the opposition of the trade union bureaucracy. There were tens of thousands of men and women throughout Britain who rallied behind Larkin on his ‘fiery cross’ crusade, but their militancy, their anger was not organised and given a political direction. Many of them were members of the Independent Labour Party or of the British Socialist Party and neither organisation intervened in industrial struggles: for both parties, politics meant propaganda and elections.
There was no revolutionary party that was organised to intervene politically in the trade unions and in industrial disputes. The tiny Socialist Labour Party of which Connolly had been a founder was barred from playing such a role by its sectarianism. By the time such a party was formed in the summer of 1920, the great labour revolt was coming to an end and the new Communist Party had to cope with a period of retreat. The absence of a revolutionary party meant that while pressure from below might push the trade union bureaucracy reluctantly into action, they were always able to maintain their strategic position within the unions and once the pressure had eased could regain the initiative and re-establish control. Only independent rank and file organisation with the political leadership that a revolutionary party could have provided would have been able to prevent this.
 
The road to Easter week
In a recent article, Donny Gluckstein briefly discusses the development of Connolly’s ideas in the period after the defeat of the ITGWU and the outbreak of the World War. He argues that Connolly’s search for an alternative to the politics of the Second International proved, in the end, fruitless, because when his syndicalism was shown to be inadequate, he turned instead to ‘militarism’ which became a substitute for mass action. [48] There is an important kernel of truth here, but because Gluckstein discusses Connolly solely in terms of an ‘internationalist’ perspective, he misses the crucial ways in which the peculiarities of the Irish context shaped and determined his development. The situation was considerably more complex than he allows. Connolly’s politics were inextricably bound up with the fate of Larkinism, of the working class revolt that had been broken in the lockout and it is essential to return him to that context.
Despite its industrial and electoral defeats, throughout 1914 the ITGWU continued its efforts to establish itself as apolitical force in Dublin. The political issue that dominated the country once the lockout had ended was the question of partition and whether or not the Home Rulers would fight it. Larkin was quite clear that partition had to be opposed, not because it violated Irish national integrity but because it would cripple the Irish working class. By separating off Protestant workers in the north from their brothers and sisters in the south, partition would consolidate and strengthen sectarian divisions. In a Home Rule Ireland with Catholic and Protestant workers united, the working class would be a force to be reckoned with, but in a partitioned Ireland southern workers would be danger of being overwhelmed by rural conservatism. Partition had be fought even at the risk of civil war. [49]
The Volunteer movement was the arena in which the union decided to intervene – by May 1914 the Irish Volunteers had some 70,000 members and was still recruiting. Not only was it far from certain that this force would oppose partition, but the union was also worried about its potential as a strike-breaking force. To meet this situation, in March 1914 the union reorganised the by now virtually defunct Citizen Army with the intention of challenging the Home Rulers for the leadership of the volunteering movement. It is worth noting, in view of the usual opinion that Connolly initiated everything in this period, that he was not present at the meeting at which this was decided and was not even included on the Citizen Army executive: the initiative was the work of Larkin, O’Casey and others.
In the months that followed, the Irish Worker ferociously and consistently attacked the Home Rulers and the Volunteers for their betrayal over partition and for the anti-union opinions of their leaders. As far as Larkin was concerned, the Volunteer movement was ‘bogus’, ‘a Castle-controlled organisation’, ‘a movement to excuse the political betrayal of the country ... organised to save the politicians from moral and political obloquy’. It was intended ‘to sidetrack any real movement.’ Moreover, its leaders had made clear that they were prepared to ‘if given the opportunity, attack, baton, shoot and massacre the organised working class.’ [50] The IRB members on the Volunteer executive came in for their share of abuse because not only had they failed to break with the Home Rulers, they had actually allowed John Redmond, the Home Rule leader to impose his own nominees on them. ‘On Your Knees! Provisional Committee; You Half-Baked Rebels’, editorialised Larkin, pointing out that one of the republicans who had voted in favour of accepting Redmond’s diktat was to deliver the oration at Wolfe Tone’s grave in Bodenstown that Sunday – ‘Poor Tone – it is enough to make him turn in his grave.’ [51] O’Casey warned a week later that the Volunteers ‘may be used to break up democratic progress even as some of the Volunteers of ’82 hunted down the followers of Wolfe Tone in glorious ’98 ... This talk of a union of all classes is impossible.’ [52]
In fact there was a difference of opinion developing within the Citizen Army as to how it should relate to the Volunteers. O’Casey, in particular, was for unremitting hostility, but others including Connolly hoped to be able to pull the republicans in their direction. As some elements within the IRB, under pressure from the Citizen Army, moved towards a break with the Home Rulers, Larkin came round to their point of view. O’Casey resigned as secretary of the Citizen Army in protest.
The outbreak of war on 4 August presented the ITGWU with its next challenge. From the very beginning the union opposed the war, condemned it in its paper and organised marches and rallies to protest against it. As it was clearly too weak to launch industrial action against the war, the union leadership looked to the Volunteers and made a determined effort to capture that movement from the Home Rulers. When Redmond announced his support for Britain and called on his followers to enlist, Larkin asked the reader of the Irish Worker, ‘Is there no man to provide a rope and a tree for this twentieth century Judas?’ [53] Redmond Eats His Own Vomit, he entitled one editorial castigating the Home Rule leader for his betrayal. [54] And indeed, for a time it seemed as if the Volunteers might actually be wrenched from Redmond’s hands and the Home Rule Party smashed. When the IRB led a breakaway from the Home Rule dominated Volunteers and established a separate force opposed to the war, Connolly welcomed this step as a ‘Napoleon-like stroke’ that had ‘saved the situation for the country at large.’ The split had ‘sent a thrill of joy through the heart of every true man and woman in the country’ and had dealt ‘a staggering blow’ to the Home Rulers. [55] A week later, he wrote urging a forward policy on the Volunteers urging them to take the offensive against Redmond. They must pledge themselves ‘to remain in armed service in Ireland for Ireland’ and ‘to enforce the repeal of all clauses in the Home Rule Act denying to Ireland powers of self-government now enjoyed by South Africa, Australia or Canada.’ A declared intention to extract independence from the British by threat of rebellion would, he argued, enable the breakaway Volunteers to rally support and isolate the Home Rulers. They had to recognise ‘that against the shamelessly vile methods of the politician there is but one effective weapon – the daring appeal of the Revolutionist.’ [56] Connolly was convinced that the opportunity was there to create a mass volunteer force that under working class leadership would be capable of winning independence by the threat of rebellion, or, if that failed, by rebellion itself. This belief informs much of his writing in the early months of the war.
Meanwhile, Larkin left Ireland at the end of October for what was intended to be a short fund-raising visit to America. He was not to return for over eight years. During his supposedly temporary absence, Connolly was appointed acting-general secretary of the union (he was not Larkin’s candidate), taking over editorship of the Irish Worker and command of the Citizen Army as well.
Despite all the efforts of Larkin, Connolly and their supporters, the opposition to the war was overwhelmed by a great surge of pro-British sentiment. Far from Redmond being isolated, it was the Citizen Army and the breakaway Irish Volunteers who suffered that fate. The writing was on the wall as soon as war broke out: the Citizen Army Notes that appeared in the Irish Worker on 8 August lamented the fact that ‘several of our best comrades are leaving the North Wall to fight for the glory of England.’ The writer looked forward to the day when the North Wall was crowded with armed men ready ‘to fight for the glory of Ireland’ but observed that
after witnessing the street scenes in Dublin during the past week, it seems almost hopeless to expect that such a day will ever dawn. Here we have a war in which Ireland has no interest ... yet we venture to assert that no English city is displaying more enthusiasm than Dublin, in sending its bravest and best to murder men with whom they have no quarrel. [57]
With the collapse of hopes for a mass opposition to the war, Connolly’s politics began to undergo a transformation that was to eventually end with him as one of the leaders of the Easter Rising. Whereas he had once considered the emancipation of the working class and the freedom of Ireland as inextricably linked, now the two began to come apart, with the emancipation of the working class I being postponed, while the striking of a blow for Ireland loomed ever more imminent. He made this clear in a crucial article where he argued that our programme ‘in time of peace was to gather into Irish hands in Irish trade unions the control of all the forces of production and distribution in Ireland’ but ‘in times of war we should act as in war … While the war lasts and Ireland still is a subject nation we shall continue to urge her to fight for her freedom ... The time for Ireland’s battle is NOW, the place for Ireland’s battle is HERE.’ [58]
Gluckstein argues that Connolly had in effect jettisoned mass action in favour of militarism, which is correct as far as it goes, but is nowhere near specific enough. As the war in Europe dragged on month after bloody month, Connolly became increasingly gripped by the fear that Irish national consciousness, that Ireland’s distinct national identity was being altogether eradicated. Keeping alive ‘the soul of Ireland’ came to preoccupy him more than opposition to the war itself did. He wrote
For twelve months, twelve very long dreary agonising months we have seen war in Ireland, war upon the soul of the Irish people ... Never has a nation suffered such an onslaught. Belgium in its agonies under the heel of the invaders, nor Poland in its awful travail, cannot claim to have suffered as Ireland has suffered since war was declared ... The fighting in Belgium and Poland was for the material possession of towns and cities, the fight in Ireland has been for the soul of the race. [59]
Marxist analysis was increasingly replaced by republican rhetoric. Eventually he was to conclude that even the working class had betrayed Ireland:
It is with shame and sorrow we say it, but the evil influence upon large sections of the Irish Working Class of the bribes and promises of the enemy cannot be denied ... For the sake of a few paltry shillings per week thousands of Irish workers have sold their country in the hour of their country’s greatest need and hope. For the sake of a few paltry shillings Separation Allowance thousands of Irish women have made life miserable for their husbands with entreaties to join the British Army ... Deep in the heart of Ireland has sank the sense of degradation wrought upon its people – our lost brothers and sisters – so deep and humiliating that no agency less potent that the red tide of war on Irish soil will ever be able to enable the Irish race to recover its self-respect, or re-establish its national dignity in the face of a world horrified and scandalised by what must seem to them our national apostacy. Without the slightest trace of irreverence but in all due humility and awe we recognise that of us, as of mankind before Calvary, it may truly be said: ‘Without the shedding of Blood, there is no Redemption.’ [60]
Connolly had embraced the messianic conception of revolution as redemption advocated by Padraic Pearse and which informed the plans of the IRB’s Military Council. [61] It was on this basis that he allied the tiny Citizen Army (less than 200 strong) with the forces under the command of the Military Council. He was co-opted onto the Council and was to be the Dublin commander of the combined forces of the Irish Republic during Easter Week.
The Easter Rising was a deliberate blood sacrifice whereby that participants hoped to save the soul of Ireland by laying down their lives. The 700 Volunteers and 120 Citizen Army members who seized control of the centre of Dublin on 23 April 1916 never had any hope of success whatsoever. There was no popular support for the rebels indeed once they had been defeated grateful crowds assembled in the streets to cheer the British troops and shout abuse at the prisoners. It was in every sense of the word a putsch, and, moreover, a putsch where the organisers did not even believe success to be possible. [62] Connolly was among those executed afterwards.
He was driven to participate in the Easter Rising by desperation. The Lockout, the British TUC’s betrayal, partition, the failure of opposition to the war, the enlistment of thousands of Irish workers in the British Army, all combined to drive him into the hands of the, republicans. After a lifetime of socialist activity, he despaired of the working class and took up the doctrine of the blood sacrifice. The tragedy was, as Lenin pointed out, that the Irish rose ‘prematurely before the European revolt of the proletariat had time to mature.’ Indeed, they rose before war weariness had seriously gripped significant sections of the Irish population. The evidence suggests that even without the repression that followed the Rising, Irish public opinion would have turned against the war, especially when the British tried to introduce conscription in 1918. Then would have been the time to strike, with the British Army drained of all reserves and: popular support rallying behind the rebels. [63] Whereas in 1916 the; ITGWU had only 5,000 members, by 1918 the figure was over 40,000 and the Irish TUC was to call a token but nevertheless successful one day general strike against conscription. By then, however, Connolly was dead and Larkin was still in America and the union had passed into the hands of men who fully accepted that the working class should have a subordinate place in society. In the struggle for Independence, the ITGWU was to confine itself politically to supporting Sinn Fein and the IRA and was never to attempt to transform the national struggle into a struggle for socialism. For all their great achievements Larkin and Connolly had not created anything that could contest control of the union with the likes of William O’Brien and the entrenched bureaucracy that developed around him. [64] The great working class revolt in Ireland had produced no revolutionary party, instead the workers put their faith in their union and in the end this failed them.

Notes
1. Irish Worker, 12 August 1911.
2. For the best account of Larkin’s early career as a political and trade union activist see Eric Taplin, James Larkin, Liverpool and the National Union of Dock Labourers: The Apprenticeship of a Revolutionary, Saothar 4 (1977).
3. Emmet Larkin, James Larkin (London 1968) p35. This book provides the best account of the Belfast dispute, but also of interest are John McHugh, The Belfast Labour Dispute and the Riots of 1907, International Review of Social History XXII, 1 (1977) and Henry Patterson, James Larkin and the Belfast Dockers’ and Carters’ Strike of 1907, Saothar 4 (1977).
4. Larkin, ibid., pp. 53–54. Even an historian as hostile to Larkin and Larkinism as Dermot Keogh nevertheless pays tribute to his efforts in Dublin in 1908: ‘Larkin’s achievement was really quite remarkable when it is considered that he carried on a protracted strike, punctured by truces, without any support from the NUDL. He had to rely almost entirely on local money to fill his war chest. Neither did he make any effort to control the dispute or prevent new members signing on who had just come out on strike. At its height there were 3000 men relying on him for support. He did not provide very well for them, but they were prepared to endure the hardship of a lockout for a principle.’ From Dermot Keogh, The Rise of the Irish Working Class (Belfast 1982), p. 133.
5. For the great Labour Unrest see in particular Bob Holton, British Syndicalism 1900–1914 (London 1976), and also Joe White, 1910–1914 Reconsidered, from James E. Cronin and Jonathan Schneer, Social Conflict and the Political Order in Modern Britain (London 1982), and, of course, Mike Haynes The British Working Class in Revolt 1910–1914, International Socialism 22 (Winter 1984).
6. Albert Sorel in his Reflections on Violence (New York 1969) propagated this view which also informs George Dangerfield’s celebrated The Strange Death of Liberal England (London 1966).
7. Larkin, op. cit., p. 83.
8. Ibid., p. 103.
9. Joseph V. O’Brien, Dear, Dirty Dublin (Los Angeles 1982), p. 223.
10. C. Desmond Greaves, The Irish Transport and General Workers Union: The Formative Years (Dublin 1982), p. 91. Interestingly the other side of working class optimism was upper class despondency. O’Brien notes the gloom that afflicted the rich and well-to-do. (O’Brien, op. cit., p. 223)
11. Keogh, op. cit., pp. 3–4. Keogh reveals his own political loyalties when he remarks that Pope Leo XIII’s papal encyclical, Rerum Novarum, provides enough guidance for any trade union activist (ibid, pp. 49–51).
12. Holton, op. cit., pp. 207–208.
13. Larkin, op. cit., p. 69. Robert Lowery writes of Larkin as a writer and editor: ‘As a writer, he authored nearly 400 articles over a forty-one month period. Every week he wrote one or more editorials which were fresh and lively and, as often as not explosive. Readers could always expect something which would move them one way or the other. One week it might be a stirring tribute to Robert Emmet, Wolfe Tone or St Patrick. The next week might feature a blistering attack on a sweatshop employer or a scathing denunciation of a local politician who had been caught padding his payroll with his relatives. The number of articles written by Larkin is staggering when one realises that he was also in charge of the Irish Transport and General Workers’ Union, president of the Irish Women Workers’ Union, a frequent candidate for political office, and often the main speaker at workers’ rallies in all parts of Ireland ... As an editor Larkin must be judged a success.’ This is from his excellent article, Sean O’Casey and the Irish Worker, Robert G. Lowery, O’Casey Annual, No. 1 (London 1984), pp. 42–43.
14. Greaves, op. cit., p. 58. He notes that ‘Assuming that Dublin contained about 50,000 “adult males”, something like a third of these must have bought the paper, which one can therefore safely assume was read or discussed by the entire working class of the city. This was something unprecedented in any city in the world.’ While the point is well made it is somewhat strange to see ‘adult males’ and the working class taken as synonymous.
15. R.M. Fox, Jim Larkin: The Rise of the Underman (London 1957), p. 73.
16. Irish Worker, 27 May 1911.
17. I discuss in more detail the ideology of the Irish Worker in my “A Lamp to Light your Feet”: Jim Larkin, the Irish Worker and People’s Advocate and the Dublin working class (forthcoming).
18. Holton, op. cit., pp. 187–188.
19. Irish Worker, 29 July 1911.
20. Larkin, op. cit., p. 145.
21. R.M. Fox, Smoky Crusade (London 1938), p. 167.
22. Fox, Larkin, op. cit., p. 74.
23. Greaves history of the ITGWU has as one of its themes a careful but sustained attempt at character assassination, at trying to diminish Larkin’s role and to suggest mental in balance. See in particular Greaves, ITGWU, op. cit., p. 131.
24. The best account of Connolly’s politics is still C. Desmond Greaves, The Life and Times of James Connolly (London 1972), despite its attempts to fit Connolly into a Stalinist stages theory of the struggle for socialism.
25. Raymond Challinor, The Origins of British Bolshevism (London 1977), p. 66.
26. Keogh, op. cit., pp. 193–199, argues that the strike was collapsing when police brutality gave it a new lease of life and that O’Brien’s decision to abide by the O’Connell Street ban demonstrates the essential moderation of the ITGWU leadership, excepting, of course, Larkin whom he blames for things getting out of hand. He completely misunderstands the situation. The actions of the police were a considered and calculated effort to drive the union off the streets and thereby prevent it picketing Murphy’s concerns which would have inevitably closed them down. While there were elements within the ITGWU itself and or the Dublin Trades Council who would have tried to avoid a fight and reach an accommodation, they were rendered impotent by the fact that the employers had decided on the destruction of the union and by the fact that the rank and file were determined to fight and win, and looked to Larkin for leadership. Keogh, like many ‘moderates’, just cannot comprehend situations where moderation in swept away by the rising tide of the struggle.
27. Ibid., p. 202.
28. See Bill Moran, 1913, Jim Larkin and the British Labour Movement, Saothar 4 (1978), p. 41.
29. Larkin, op. cit., p. 124. Incredibly Greaves, ITGWU, op. cit., p. 107 writes that: ‘the proposers of the scheme were guilty of misjudgement. Republicans and socialists in Ireland knew that despite all appearances to the contrary, there were people in England who wished the Irish nation well. But the mass of the people could not be expected to believe it until it came within their own experience ... In a word they treated the English Socialists as “soupers”. It was most unfair, but it was very understandable.’
30. The Times, 24 October 1913; Arnold Wright, Disturbed Dublin (London 1914), p. 3; Leon Ó Broin, The Chief Secretary (London 1969), p. 77.
31. Larkin, op. cit., p. 125.
32. Greaves, Connolly, op. cit., p. 331; John Mahon, Harry Pollitt (London 1976), pp. 41–42.
33. On divorce see Connolly’s Labour Nationality and Religion, which is reprinted in Owen Dudley Edwards and Bernard Ransom, James Connolly: Selected Political Writings (London 1973), pp. 100–103. He combines this position with a strong attack on the Church’s attitude towards women. See also Samuel Levenson, James Connolly (London 1973), p. 113.
34. Irish Worker, 6 July 1912; The Harp, September 1908. This raises some important problems because it is clear that for socialists to have attacked Catholicism as such in Ireland at this time would inevitably have isolated them from the working class and moreover from a working class that was engaged in massive struggles in defiance of clerical condemnation. Connolly’s position seems decidedly opportunist but a militantly atheist position seems totally inappropriate.
35. Greaves, ITGWU, op. cit., p. 110.
36. P. Ó Cathasaigh, The Story of the Irish Citizen Army (Dublin 1919), p. 9.
37. F.X. Martin, The Irish Volunteers (Dublin 1963), pp. 105–110).
38. For an account of O’Casey’s politics in these years see my “In the Hunger-Cry of the Nation’s Poor is Heard The Voice of Ireland”: Sean O’Casey and Politics 1908–1916, Journal of Contemporary History (forthcoming).
39. Moran, op. cit., p. 43; Holton, op. cit., pp. 192–194; Larkin, op. cit., p. 131.
40. Jonathan Schneer, Ben Tillett (London 1982), p. 168. This is a superb account of a left official at work.
41. Fox, Smokey Crusade, op. cit., p. 172.
42. Moran, op. cit., p. 44.
43. Forward, 9 February 1914.
44. O’Brien, op. cit., p. 236; The Times, 19 January 1914.
45. Arthur Mitchell, Labour in Irish Politics, 1890–1930 (Dublin 1974), p. 54. See also Peter Murray, Electoral Politics and the Dublin Working Class before the First World War, Saothar 6 (1980).
46. Greaves, Connolly, op. cit., p. 338.
47. Greaves, ITGWU, op. cit., p. 121.
48. Donny Gluckstein The Missing Party International Socialism 22 (Winter 1984), p. 17.
49. Larkin, op. cit., p. 160.
50. Irish Worker, 30 May 1914.
51. Irish Worker, 20 June 1914.
52. Irish Worker, 27 June 1914.
53. Irish Worker, 27 September 1914.
54. Irish Worker, 17 October 1914.
55. Irish Worker, 17 October 1914.
56. Irish Worker, 10 October 1914.
57. Irish Worker, 20 June 1914.
58. Workers’ Republic, 23 January 1916.
59. Workers’ Republic, 7 August 1915.
60. Workers’ Republic, 5 February 1916.
61. For a more detailed discussion of this see my James Connolly and the Easter Rising, Science and Society, XLVII, 2 (Summer 1983).
62. For a discussion of Lenin’s different assessment of 1916 see my The Easter Rising: Success or Failure?, Monthly Review 34, 7 (December 1982).
63. This has been argued most strongly by Conor Cruise O’Brien, The Embers of Easter 1916–1966, from Owen Dudley Edwards and Fergus Pyle, 1916: The Easter Rising (London 1968). The young radical Cruise O’Brien must have done something particularly wicked to be reincarnated in his present monstrous reactionary form.
64. For O’Brien’s career see Arthur Mitchell, William O’Brien and the Irish Labour Movement 1881–1968, Studies 60, 239 (Winter 1971) and D.R. O’Connor Lysaght, The Rake’s Progress of a Syndicalist: The Political Career of William O’Brien, Irish Labour Leader, Saothar 9 (1983). Highly recommended also is Emmet O’Connor’s stimulating study of the disastrous consequences of O’Brien’s policies in one particular area, Agrarian Unrest and the Labour Movement in County Waterford 1917–1923, Saothar 6 (1980).
 



G. Fuller (ed.)
Loach on Loach
Faber & Faber 1998, £11.99
G. McKnight (ed.)
Agent of Challenge and Defiance
Flick Books 1997, £14.95
For 35 years Ken Loach has been making films about the realities of class society in Britain. From his early days at the BBC, which produced the celebrated ‘Wednesday Plays’ Up The Junction (1965), Cathy Come Home (1966), In Two Minds (1967) and The Big Flame (1969), through to his feature films of the 1990s, Hidden Agenda (1990), Riff-Raff (1991), Raining Stones (1993), Ladybird, Ladybird (1994), Land and Freedom (1995), Carla’s Song (1996) and most recently the magnificent My Name Is Joe (1998), Loach has maintained a steadfast commitment to working class experience, portraying both the relentless struggle to survive in capitalist society, and the fightback against oppression and exploitation. Over the years he has, in often difficult circumstances, produced a marvellous body of work, culminating in the epic Land and Freedom, still going strong with My Name Is Joe, arguably his best film so far, and rumoured to be working with writer Jim Allen on a new film about James Connolly and the Easter Rising. After 30-odd years, Loach seems to have been given a new lease of life, playing off against the crass hypocrisies of Tony Blair’s New Labour. Paradoxically, his most recent films are better known on the Continent than they are in Britain, where his passions and concerns have, to all intents and purposes, been marginalised and outlawed as Blair and Co have sought to dedicate Cool Britannia to the service of big business.
At last, however, we have two books celebrating Loach and his work: Loach on Loach, edited by Graham Fuller, and Agent of Challenge and Defiance, edited by George McKnight. The first is a volume in the Faber & Faber series of extended interviews with notable film directors. Loach joins the likes of Woody Allen, Frederico Fellini, David Lynch, Alfred Hitchcock, Krzysztof Kiéslowski, David Cronenberg, Martin Scorsese and, most recently, John Sayles. This is an indispensable volume that no socialist interested in the cinema should be without. The second, edited by McKnight, is a mixed collection of essays examining different aspects of Loach’s work for a primarily academic audience. A number of the contributions are of interest, but taken as a whole the volume lacks bite.
 
From Cathy Comes Home to Days of Hope
In his introduction to the Loach on Loach volume, Graham Fuller usefully divides Loach’s career into four phases: first, the ‘Wednesday Plays’ period of the 1960s; second, the period of the more overtly political plays and the first feature films in the 1970s; third, the documentary period in the 1980s when Loach was successfully strangled by censorship; and lastly, the succession of powerful feature films that he has made and is still making in the 1990s. Let us look at the first two phases.
Loach directed ten ‘Wednesday Plays’, of which the best known is undoubtedly Cathy Come Home, written by Jeremy Sandford and starring Carol White and Ray Brooks. This powerful drama of homelessness was first broadcast in 1966 and is generally credited with making the homeless a political issue and with inspiring the establishment of the charity Shelter. It successfully highlighted the failure of Harold Wilson’s Labour government to seriously tackle a major social injustice.
In retrospect, however, Loach himself is quite critical of the play:
Shelter’s done some terrific work. It’s been an excellent resource for research and has obviously helped a lot of families find homes and that’s a very positive thing. What’s inadequate is the idea that homelessness is a problem that should be solved by a charity. It boils down to a structural problem within society. Who owns the land? Who owns the building industry? How does housing relate to unemployment? How do we decide what we produce, where we produce it, under what conditions? And housing fits into that. You can’t abstract housing from the economic pattern. So it is a political issue; the film just didn’t examine it at that level.
He goes on to describe how the Labour minister of housing, Anthony Greenwood, met with him and his producer, Tony Garnett, to express his appreciation of the play. When they tried to discuss with him what the Labour government was actually going to do about homelessness, ‘He ummed and ahhed and talked around it.’ Even Edward Heath, the then leader of the Conservative Party, expressed concern. Of course, by the standards of New Labour, Greenwood would be a dangerous red – indeed so would Edward Heath – and even an expression of concern would be most unlikely. Nevertheless, is Loach being too hard on himself here? Certainly, Cathy Come Home had limitations which meant that the likes of Greenwood and Heath never felt threatened by it, but this particular viewer can still remember the feelings of anger and outrage with which the play left him. These feelings were not containable within the parameters of British Labourism. This seems to have been Loach’s own experience.
Cathy Come Home was a step, perhaps a necessary step, on the way to a more explicitly Marxist stance, to a determination to make more overtly socialist films. If the likes of Greenwood and Heath could respond favourably to the play then the conclusion that Loach and Garnett drew was that it ‘couldn’t have been very political. As a result, we said to ourselves that if we were to do a film like that again, we’d somehow have to tackle the ownership of land, the building industry and the financing behind it. Otherwise you’re not really challenging anything’. [1] In a period of increasing class conflict, when first Wilson’s Labour government and then Heath’s Conservative government confronted the trade unions, Loach and Garnett were to find themselves with a growing audience, moving from drama exposing the victimisation of the poor to drama celebrating working class resistance.
In 1969 Loach directed The Big Flame, in 1971 The Rank and File and in 1975 the epic Days of Hope, all written by the Trotskyist playwright Jim Allen. [2] These were a response to and celebration of the great class battles that saw the defeat of Labour’s In Place of Strife and of the Conservatives’ Industrial Relations Act, that saw first the defeat of Heath’s government by the miners in 1972 and then its destruction at their hands in 1974. As far as we know, this was not drama that the likes of Greenwood or Heath found the least bit congenial.
It is perhaps a mistake to describe the Loach-Allen dramas as merely celebrating working class resistance, because they were also very much concerned with explaining betrayal and defeat. They were determined to show not just working class men and women fighting back, displaying their creativity, courage, intelligence and humanity in battle with the bosses, but also how they were sold down the river by the official leaders of the labour movement, whether it was the trade union leader or Labour government minister. This is a crucial dimension of The Big Flame, with its occupation of the Liverpool docks, of The Rank and File, a dramatic account of the 1970 Pilkington’s strike (the firm was cunningly disguised as Wilkinson’s), and, lastly, of Days of Hope, their epic four part dramatic reconstruction of working class experience from 1916 through to the defeat of the General Strike in 1926. In some ways, this particular emphasis on betrayal can be seen as deriving from Jim Allen’s orthodox Trotskyism. He was for a period a member of the Socialist Labour League and has tended ever since to continue that organisation’s tendency to reduce all the problems confronting the working class to ‘a crisis of leadership’, and Loach has fallen in with this approach.
The danger of the ‘crisis of leadership’ notion is that abstracted from a more general appreciation of the balance of class forces, of the relative strengths and weaknesses of both the working class and the capitalist class, it can become a variant of conspiracy theory, whereby all that is necessary is to expose what is going on, to show the reformist or Stalinist leadership for what they are and, hopefully, replace them with a revolutionary leadership that will lead the working class to victory. In a revolutionary situation, the decisive moment can, indeed, be reduced to the question of leadership, but, short of that, other considerations require attention. It is necessary to consider the level of organisation and consciousness of the working class, the state of working class morale, the degree of confidence, the strength of traditions of solidarity, the willingness to engage in struggle, how angry people are, and how confident they are that they can do something about it. And, moreover, it always has to be remembered how quickly all this can change, so that an apparently cowed workforce, stitched up by a corrupt alliance of union leaders and management, can suddenly explode into action, as happened at Pilkington’s. The question of leadership has to be placed in this context. Interestingly enough, I would argue that this is exactly what Loach and Allen do in The Big Flame and The Rank and File, where the drama remained at ground level, focusing on working class people organising and fighting back. It is lost in Days of Hope.
Days of Hope is a working class saga that follows Philip, his wife Sarah, and her brother Ben through the tumultuous years of war and class struggle from 1916 to 1926. The first two episodes, 1916 – Joining Up and 1921 are magnificent socialist dramas that successfully use individual experience of historical developments to illuminate the meaning of those developments. By the disappointing fourth episode, 1926 – The General Strike, however, the drama has abandoned this necessary grounding. Instead, it has become an overly didactic history lesson intent on showing how the General Strike was betrayed. Loach and Allen were concerned to ‘prove’, beyond any shadow of doubt, that it was betrayed by showing how the sell out was contrived at national level. It was as if showing that union leaders betray strikes was enough to make them magically disappear, or at the very least obliterate their influence. Unfortunately, one of the problems with merely proving betrayal is that it can fulfil working class expectations of the inevitability of betrayal, producing resignation and hopelessness rather than anger and increased determination. From the shop steward who becomes a foreman to the union leader who joins the ermine vermin in the House of Lords, traitors are very much part of working class folklore.
What was crucially missing from the last episode of Days of Hope was how the General Strike, the most momentous act of solidarity in British working class history, was actually experienced by the rank and file, of how they reacted to the betrayal and the conclusions that the most politically advanced of them drew. Working class experience and its articulation, Loach and Allen’s great strength, was abandoned in order to prove the betrayal of the General Strike. The final episode seemed almost to be intended to satisfy professional historians rather than a working class audience. The drama had lost its way, had become boring just at the moment where it attempted to make its big point. Days of Hope ended on the wrong note. It has to be accounted a heroic failure.
Subsequently, this dramatic failure was put down by some to the Trotskyist politics that informed the series. This is not so. Days of Hope did not fail because of its Trotskyist politics, but because Loach and Allen failed to successfully dramatise those politics. This was not a mistake they were to make with their later epic, Land and Freedom, where the temptation to have scenes showing the Stalinist apparatchiks actually planning the downfall of the Spanish Revolution is firmly resisted.
One interesting point worth briefly considering is the response of a section of the academic left to Days of Hope, in particular the journal Screen. There was a brief furore around the notion of ‘the classic realist text’, occasioned by Colin McCabe’s indictment of Loach’s failure to develop a revolutionary cinematic form that would somehow endow the audience with a revolutionary awareness of contradiction. Two problems arose from this scholasticism, problems that, it must be said, never seemed to trouble Loach: first, those few films that ever attempted to fulfil McCabe’s ambitions proved incomprehensible and, second, far from advancing working class struggle, the whole exercise proved more adapted to advancing academic careers. [3]
The year 1967 saw the appearance of Loach’s first feature film, Poor Cow, based on the Nell Dunn novel. This was followed in 1969 by Kes, based on the Barry Hines novel. Both these films explored a very different dimension of working class experience from his class war dramas. They focused on working class people surviving in capitalist society and on the costs and consequences involved. Kes in particular is a magnificent achievement. Similar themes were explored in subsequent feature films: Family Life (1971), The Gamekeeper (1980), and Looks and Smiles (1981). Looks and Smiles has been described by Loach as being in some ways a sequel to Kes. Whereas in Kes the tragedy was of the working class lad being sentenced to a life of working down the pit, by 1980 in Looks and Smiles the tragedy was of the working class lads being sentenced to life on the dole! Times change.
 
Censored
Loach had lost any illusions he might have had in the Labour Party and Labour governments during Harold Wilson’s first term in office from 1964 to 1970. Wilson’s support for the US war in Vietnam and his notorious attack on the National Union of Seamen in 1966 all helped convince Loach, along with thousands of other socialists, that there was no place for them in the Labour Party. The conclusion he drew was that Labour ‘was the enemy in another guise’. He acknowledged that there were still socialists in the Labour Party, but ‘as far as the leadership goes, it’s still the enemy’. [4] The election of Margaret Thatcher and the Conservatives to power in 1979, however, was to herald a dramatic intensification of the class struggle, at least on the part of the ruling class. The deliberate creation of mass unemployment, the calculated wrecking of the lives of millions of working class men and women, was accompanied by an unprecedented assault on the trade union movement.
In these circumstances Loach decided that it was not enough to direct plays or feature films, no matter how politically informed they might be. He determined to turn his considerable talents to the production of documentaries, made for television, that would put the socialist case. Thatcher would be condemned, her accomplices in the labour movement would be exposed, and the rank and file would be given a voice. The result was the most dramatic and blatant episode of political censorship, the suppression of a major film maker, since the Second World War. Loach describes his own thinking at the time:
I’d lost direction as regards feature films. But I also wanted to try to make a contribution, however minimal, to the political struggle that was going on ... by the early 80s working people were getting hammered right, left and centre. Margaret Thatcher had embarked on her catastrophic project of revitalising the economy in the way she saw fit-restoring the profit margins by attacking the working class. Unemployment went up from half a million to over 3 million in a year or so. Factories were closing. Families were being destroyed. With that in mind, the idea of making a feature film which took three years to finance and another year to come out and then got shown in an arthouse to ten people and a dog just seemed a crazy thing for me to be doing. [5]
Out of these concerns came the four part documentary Questions of Leadership (1983), subtitled, Problems of Democracy in Trade Unions: Some Views from the Frontline. According to Loach, the series told how:
In the first three years of the Thatcher government there had been a whole series of major strikes and the possibilities of more by an organised workforce that was basically militant, undefeated, and prepared to fight closures, prepared to fight wage cuts, prepared to fight all the things that we now take for granted as an act of god. The response of the union leaders to this militancy was to make certain that each strike happened on its own; not to call out other sections of the union in support; to do a deal before the goal was achieved so that the people out on strike were constantly confused; not to challenge the employers or the government in the way the workers who were prepared to take action wanted. As a result, all the strikes were defeated. So that’s what the films said. [6]
The first episode looked at the Lawrence Scott and Electromotors closure, the steel workers’ strike, British Leyland, British Rail and the NHS. The second looked at democracy, or rather the lack of democracy, in the electricians’ union, the EETPU, including an interview with union leader Frank Chapple, who cut it short by walking out. The third dealt with the victimisation of Derek Robinson at British Leyland. And the fourth and last was a film of a day’s discussion and debate of the issues raised that included contributions from both critics and supporters of the union leaderships. The four programmes provided a unique opportunity for a number of left wing and rank and file trade unionists to criticise the conduct of the trade union leaders and the lack of democracy in the trade unions. These criticisms were explicitly endorsed by the commentary, which at one point stated quite bluntly that, in a very real sense, ‘the leaders of the trade unions have kept this Conservative government in power’. [7]
There is an excellent discussion of Questions of Leadership and its fate in the McKnight volume – Julian Petley’s chapter, Ken Loach and Questions of Censorship. Loach was eventually informed that the series was too unbalanced to be broadcast and required substantial changes, with Channel 4 and the Independent Broadcasting Authority blaming each other for the decision. The series was to be reduced to three programmes, with each programme followed by a half hour discussion made by another director. The fourth programme that concluded the series was also to be made by someone else. This began a protracted process of negotiation and delay that dragged on into 1984 and the start of the Great Miners’ Strike. By now the stakes were such that any chance of the programmes being broadcast in any shape whatsoever had vanished. As Loach himself observed, the union leaders criticised were the very men that ‘the government and the Coal Board are relying on to leave the miners isolated. Anything which criticises them is really too sensitive to broadcast now’. [8] Questions of Leadership was killed. Legalistic pretexts were found to mask what was in reality straightforward political censorship.
Once the Great Miners’ Strike was under way, Loach was commissioned by Melvyn Bragg’s The South Bank Show to make a documentary looking at the songs and poems that were being written by the strikers about their experiences. The film included scenes of police violence against the pickets, and somewhat predictably it was decided not to show it due to lack of balance. Eventually it did appear on Channel 4 in January 1985, but with a balancing programme providing an opportunity for the former Communist Jimmy Reid to join the chorus attacking Arthur Scargill. It is worth remembering that coverage of the strike produced such breakthroughs in creative television as the celebrated filming of a mounted police charge at Orgreave provoking the miners into throwing anything they could lay their hands on at their attackers. This was shown on television the other way round to create the impression that the police charge was a response to attacks made on them. So much for balance.
The overall consequence of all this was, as Julian Petley points out, that ‘one of Britain’s most radical film makers was either marginalised or completely silenced during one of the most momentous, not to say catastrophic, decades in British political history’. [9]
 
Fighting to survive
The late 1980s saw Loach make a return to political film making. In 1986 he directed Fatherland, which prepared the way for a remarkable sustained period of creativity that is still going strong. The year 1990 saw the appearance of his underrated thriller Hidden Agenda. Set in Northern Ireland, the film combined the John Stalker and Colin Wallace affairs effectively enough to be described as ‘the IRA entry at Cannes’ by one Tory MP. It is a grim tale of conspiracy and assassination, involving a secret state that is running out of control, and ending with the police investigator, Kerrigan, walking away from what he knows has gone on. This is a fitting metaphor for the conduct of the liberal establishment throughout the whole war. The film impresses more with every viewing.
After Hidden Agenda Loach went on to make three films that explored working class experience in a period of defeat. Riff-Raff (1991) and Raining Stones (1993) are films about ducking and diving as class struggle, of guerrilla war and individual resistance within the capitalist system. The first, Riff-Raff, looks at a group of building workers, all fiddling the dole, converting a disused hospital into luxury flats, a symbolic rendering of the triumph of Thatcherism. Low pay, dangerous conditions and personal abuse are their everyday experience. They respond by taking as many liberties as possible while dreaming of something better. The only one of them who is politically aware, Larry, attempts to interest them in the union and even goes to the site manager to complain on behalf of his mates. His victimisation goes unopposed. This is a working class that has been defeated. The corrosive effects of this defeat are highlighted by the young Glaswegian, Stevie, who catches someone breaking into his squat (the poor robbing the poor) and discovers that his girlfriend is using heroin. Resistance does come in the end, however, although it is individual, not collective. After a fatal accident on the site, Stevie and one of his mates torch the building and bring the whole lot down. The end of the film is immensely satisfying, even if it does not point the way forward politically.
The harsh reality is that for millions of people at that time the collective response to oppression and exploitation did not seem a realistic prospect. Sticking your neck out has been replaced by ducking and diving. Nevertheless individual victories, small triumphs, can still be achieved even in the context of defeat. Loach celebrates these small scale victories, while recognising the larger picture of retreat and downturn. There is, however, always a voice in these films arguing for a collective response, advocating class politics. The only exception to this is the recent My Name Is Joe. How significant is this? Has the triumph of Blair’s New Labour somehow demoralised Loach? My own view is that there are no real grounds for regarding this absence as ominous, as indicating a depoliticisation of his work. Instead, one can be confident that the voice advocating class politics will undoubtedly reappear and move centre stage when the working class once again moves into action as a class, and resistance becomes generalised.
Raining Stones follows the attempt of a working class family to retain their dignity and self respect in circumstances of poverty and unemployment. Bob wants his daughter to have a new dress for her first communion. He tries to raise the money by various means (rustling a sheep and stealing the turf from the Conservative Club’s bowling green), but in the end has to go into debt, a debt he has no chance of paying. What Loach and writer Jim Allen show us are working class men and women trying everything to survive, while being preyed on by loan sharks, the purest exponents of Thatcherism. Once again, Bob is driven to lash out in an act of individual, not collective, resistance, and once again it is tremendously satisfying.
Loach’s next film was Ladybird, Ladybird (1994), an almost unbearable experience. He acknowledges this as a film he personally ‘feels very warmly toward’, although, ‘I can see it’s quite a tough film for people to take’. [10] This is something of an understatement. Once again, it is a story of working class men and women surviving, but only just.
At one point in the Loach on Loach book, Graham Fuller asks him what has driven his work in the 1990s. His reply is most instructive:
As Britain emerged from the spell that Thatcher had put on it, I and perhaps some other film makers, felt very dissatisfied with ourselves. We felt we hadn’t really put on the screen the appalling cost in human misery that aggressive Thatcherite politics had brought on everybody. We should have made films in the early 80s that really showed what was happening, but I know that I didn’t. I think the last few years have been an attempt to remedy that. [11]
His most recent film, the outstanding My Name Is Joe (1998), continues in that vein, with its central character a reformed alcoholic fighting to survive in a community devastated by unemployment, drugs and crime.
Very different is Carla’s Song (1996). Here we have a Glaswegian bus driver who refuses to knuckle down at work and be a ‘good employee’ confronting the realities of the US war on the Sandinistas in Nicaragua. George – standing in, one suspects, for the British working class – knows nothing of what is going on in Central America, of the brutal war that is being waged by the US backed Contras against the Nicaraguan people. He accompanies the Nicaraguan refugee, Carla, back to Nicaragua to help her search for her missing lover. The search becomes George’s journey to understanding as he is forced to confront the enormity of what is being done in Nicaragua. An attempt by the common people to take control over their lives has brought the vengeance of the most powerful country in the world down on them. George cannot deal with this and returns home, hopefully a wiser man, while Carla remains behind to fight for the Nicaraguan Revolution.
One recent discussion of Loach’s work, John Hill’s Every Fuckin’ Choice Stinks that appeared in Sight and Sound, has argued that what we see in Carla’s Song is Loach turning to the ‘Hispanic “other”’ for an embodiment of ‘the purity of political spirit the British working class is increasingly seen to lack’. Certainly there is implicit in Carla’s Song a lament that whereas the Spanish Civil War was a major issue within the British labour movement and someone like George might well have gone to fight there, today the Nicaraguan war has gone relatively unnoticed. Nevertheless, Hill is exaggerating what he sees as Loach’s growing pessimism. [12] Instead, we have to see his films as dramatising what is undoubtedly the experience of an important section of the working class – trying to survive rather than fighting back. As the level of class conflict in Britain rises, as working class confidence increases and the fightback gathers momentum, so, without any doubt, this will be reflected and celebrated in Loach’s films.
 
The Spanish Revolution
What of Land and Freedom? This is arguably Loach’s masterpiece, one of the great socialist films. Here Loach not only produces a remarkable portrayal of revolution and of the fight against fascism, but also decisively settles the account with Stalinism. The film retells the story of George Orwell’s Homage To Catalonia, but through the eyes and in the voice of Dave a young, idealistic, working class Communist from Liverpool. He falls in with the POUM in revolutionary Barcelona and becomes a witness to the secret history of the Spanish Revolution. His story is told through the old letters, photographs and newspapers that his granddaughter has discovered after his death.
Dave is a witness to the bravery with which the POUM militia, both men and women, fight the fascists. He fights alongside them and has friends and comrades killed. He is a witness to the carrying out of the revolution – Loach’s celebrated scene when the issue of collectivisation is discussed and voted on. Nevertheless, he still supports the Communist Party line of postponing the revolution until after Franco has been defeated (as did Orwell), and eventually prepares to transfer from the POUM militia to the International Brigades (as did Orwell). Dave is in Barcelona recovering from a wound at the time of the revolutionary outbreak of May 1937 and sees the Communist apparatus in action, suppressing the revolutionary left in the interests of Stalin’s foreign policy. He realises that what his POUM comrades, including his lover, Blanca, have been saying about the Communists and their counter-revolutionary intentions is true, whereas what the Communists are saying about the POUM being fascist agents and stooges is lies. Dave has fought alongside these people, and he knows they are being slandered. He tears up his party card and rejoins his militia unit. The terrible climax of the film is the enforced disarming and disbandment of the POUM militia and the arrest of its leaders under the guns of Communist troops. In the confusion, Blanca is shot and killed. The revolution is dead, murdered.
The last image of the film is of Dave’s funeral with his granddaughter and some old comrades giving the revolutionary salute over his grave. The spirit of revolution lives on. Loach explores an episode of heroic defeat, but succeeds in leaving his audience inspired.
 
Last word
Let us leave the last word with Loach himself. He is replying to Graham Fuller asking whether his socialist politics were still relevant:
It just grows ever more apparent that there are two classes in society, that their interests are irreconcilable, and that one survives at the expense of the other. In the 60s, we didn’t have the mass unemployment we have now. We didn’t have such alienation. We didn’t insist that the workforce should be ever more flexible, ever more exploited. All that was endorsed by Thatcher. Her politics were inverse Marxism in a way: the working class must pay; the organised working class must be disorganised. And that’s exactly what she did ... In Britain, the recurring themes don’t go away. The human cost of the experiment in free market economics that Thatcher inflicted on us is still working itself out because the policy hasn’t changed, and it won’t change drastically under Tony Blair. The human cost is something that never goes away. Its always in front of your eyes and its always something that draws you to deal with it. You walk through the cities, especially the outskirts of cities, and you see people are not having a good time. The underlying observation of what people are experiencing is that things don’t have to be this way. There are better ways to live. [13]

Notes
1. G. Fuller (ed.), Loach on Loach (London 1998), p. 24.
2. Born in 1926 in Manchester, Jim Allen worked in many industries, including the building trade, the merchant navy and as a miner. In January 1965 he became a script writer on Coronation Street (Stan Ogden, it is worth remembering, was at one time a former International Brigade member, although any residue leftism was soon eliminated from the programme) where he worked for 18 months. He resigned after writing a script in which the whole cast go on a mystery bus tour from the Rover’s Return and are all killed when the bus goes over a cliff. Unfortunately this episode was never made. He is one of the most important 20th century British dramatists. For a discussion of his work see P. Madden, Jim Allen, in G. Brandt (ed.), British Television Drama (Cambridge 1991).
3. There is a discussion of this controversy in D. Knight, Naturalism, Narration and Critical Perspective: Ken Loach and the Experimental Method, in G. McKnight (ed.), Agent of Challenge and Defiance (Trowbridge 1997).
4. G. Fuller, op. cit., p. 24.
5. Ibid., p. 64.
6. Ibid., p. 66.
7. G. McKnight, op. cit., p. 106. Once again, the ‘crisis of leadership’ thesis is not an adequate explanation of the defeat of the unions at the hands of the Conservatives. This can be demonstrated quite simply: the union leaders had been just as prone to betrayal in the early 1970s but had been carried along, against their will, by a working class revolt that generalised class conflict whether they liked it or not. This did not happen in the early 1980s when the working class was on the defensive and was defeated in detail. This is not to let the union leaders off the hook. They certainly played their part in the defeats of the time, but their contribution, shameful though it was, has to be put in the wider context of the balance of class forces.
8. Ibid., p. 109.
9. Ibid., p. 119.
10. G. Fuller, op. cit., p. 94.
11. p. 111.
12. J. Hill, Every Fuckin’ Choice Stinks, Sight and Sound (November 1998). For a more fundamental critique of Loach, see B. Light’s letter in Sight and Sound (January 1999).
13. G. Fuller, op. cit., p. 113.
 



Richard Heffernan
New Labour and Thatcherism
Macmillan 2000, £42.50
Colin Hay
The Political Economy of New Labour
Manchester University Press 1999, £14.99
Norman Fairclough
New Labour, New Language?
Routledge 2000, £9.99
In an editorial on 24 April 2000, New Statesman warned its readers to beware of the notorious food voucher system New Labour is imposing on asylum seekers. We should all watch this scheme carefully, the magazine advised, because:
How governments treat refugees ... is how they would treat the rest of us. Nothing better illustrates the present meanness of mind and spirit than the food voucher scheme for asylum seekers which goes to elaborate lengths to avoid a few stray pennies falling into Albanian hands, and costs more to administer than a cash benefits scheme. Can it be very long before we have similar voucher schemes for the unemployed, single mothers and others on benefits? Our rulers may eventually get rid of the asylum seekers, but they will still want someone to kick around.
For a magazine close to New Labour to editorialise in these terms seems to indicate that disillusion with Blair and Co is complete. Even the New Labour government’s friends believe that it is capable of just about anything, that there is no policy initiative too reactionary for Blair, Straw, Brown, Blunkett and the rest of them, that while the interests of big business and the rich are sacrosanct the rest of us can be treated with thinly disguised contempt.
This is all a long way away from the great day of reckoning on 1 May 1997 when the Major government was decisively thrown out. Nevertheless, to be fair, it has to be admitted that Blair made it absolutely clear in the general election campaign that his government would be an uncompromisingly right wing government that looked more to Thatcher for inspiration than to Attlee or Wilson, or even Gaitskell and Crosland. New Labour’s perverse conclusions were that their electoral triumph derived not from the electorate’s rejection of Tory policies, but from New Labour’s embrace of those policies.
Despite Blair’s open conservatism, there were still some on the left who entertained serious illusions in the radical potential of a New Labour government. It seems almost cruel to recall some of the contributions to the 1998 Lawrence & Wishart volume, The Moderniser’s Dilemma: Radical Politics in the Age of Blair. Paul Richards, for example, enthused about New Labour’s embrace of ‘permanent revolution’ and prophesied that by 2007 New Labour ‘will be viewed as the natural party of government’. Tony Blair, still in charge, will be seen as ‘Britain’s most radical prime minister since Lloyd George’. Even more optimistically, he forecast that everyone would ‘remember the day they spent at Greenwich at the Millennium Experience for the rest of their lives’. For another contributor, Anne Showstack Sassoon, despite some reservations, Blair and New Labour were engaged in a Gramscian project. Indeed he might well be ‘a contemporary Gramscian Modern Prince’. In particular, she saw Gramsci’s influence as informing New Labour’s education policy! She identified New Labour’s links with the Demos think tank as of strategic importance, while another contributor, Geoff Andrews, acknowledged the extent to which Tony Blair was the Marxism Today candidate for Labour leader. A follow-up volume, perhaps entitled An Apology for the Moderniser’s Dilemma, would seem called for. [1]
Even a much more substantial commentator like Brian Simon, a lifelong Communist, Marxist historian and champion of comprehensive education, could write in his autobiography, A Life In Education (another Lawrence & Wishart book), of a new progressive consensus informing New Labour’s educational policy: ‘New Labour has hit the ground running. Early measures give new hope for the future.’ [2] What has followed has been a New Labour assault on everything Simon has spent his life in education fighting for. The abolition of student grants and the imposition of fees for higher education, the beginning of the privatisation of state school provision, performance related pay for teachers, the extension of the Conservatives’ regime of testing, covert selection and the reappointment of the much hated Chris Woodhead as chief inspector of schools revealed New Labour’s reactionary educational credentials. Presumably Simon was one of those who did not realise that David Blunkett was only joking when he told the Labour Party conference that there would be no selection under a Labour government. [3]
Of course, if Blunkett’s deliberate and calculated lie could pass as a joke, then Peter Hain’s 1995 volume, Ayes To The Left: A Future for Socialism (yet another Lawrence & Wishart book), is one of the great contemporary comic novels. Appealing to William Morris and Tom Mann, to Noam Chomsky, to Ralph Miliband and Antonio Gramsci, Hain warned that the next Labour government would be ‘considerably constrained by hostile "extra-parliamentary" forces in the City, the currency markets, the civil service and other parts of the state apparatus including ... the judiciary, the intelligence services and the military’. To counter this, New Labour would have to ‘generate support through popular mobilisation and campaigning for socialist ideas’. Blair and Co needed, according to Hain, to ‘embark upon a consistent and continuous programme of discussion, highlighting the nature of power in a capitalist society, and working together for an alternative’. Above all else, he warned, New Labour must avoid ‘being identified as the establishment’. Particularly hilarious was his categorical assertion that New Labour ‘should be a microcosm of a libertarian socialist society, pre-figuring it through its own practice’. [4] Only two years later this socialist prince was to have made the magical transformation into New Labour frog, from extra-parliamentary radical into one of Blair’s courtier apparatchiks. From being a starry eyed advocate of inner party democracy, Hain moved to being one of the cynical architects of the Welsh Labour Party stitch-up, imposing Alun Michael on a party and electorate who wanted Rhodri Morgan. Indeed, according to fellow Labour MP Paul Flynn, Hain’s remarkable abilities have led to him being compared with ‘Odo, Star Trek’s shapeshifter who liquefies at the end of each day and sleeps in a bucket, then emerges later in any shape he wishes’. [5] Lightweight, heavyweight, opportunist, all saw New Labour, despite the evidence, as a vehicle for their hopes and dreams, in itself a tribute to the power of spin.
How to explain New Labour’s dramatic shift to the right? There are two preliminary points to be made here. First, it is necessary to be clear about how right wing previous Labour governments have been, strikebreaking, attacking working class living standards in the interests of capital, suppressing colonial unrest. An understanding of the Thatcherite character of New Labour politics should not be allowed to foster illusions in the performance of previous Labour governments. Second, the Blairite domination of the Labour Party is not the triumph of the revisionist wing of the party, of the traditional Labour right wing. Anthony Crosland, for example, looks like a dangerous leftist set alongside Tony Blair and Gordon Brown, as indeed do Denis Healey, Roy Hattersley and even the likes of Ted Heath, the former Conservative leader. On the contrary, what we have with New Labour is a government that has embraced Thatcherism and in a number of areas (education, welfare, privatisation) is actually carrying Thatcherism further than the Conservatives ever dared.
This is not to say that the Labour Party itself has become a Thatcherite party, although this certainly seems to be Blair’s ambition. The growing revolt exemplified by the downfall of Alun Michael and the victory of Ken Livingstone is evidence of this. Rather the Labour leadership have embraced Thatcherism as the only way that they will be allowed to run the country. Of course for Blair, Peter Mandelson and their closest allies in the New Labour leadership this is the way they actually prefer to run the country. Indeed, as a number of commentators have pointed out, they have effectively repudiated Labour’s past, even to the extent of regarding the party’s establishment as a mistake.
Two related factors explain New Labour’s embrace of Thatcherism; developments in the global economy and their working out in Britain, and the shift in the balance of class forces within Britain that took place in the 1980s. Overwhelmingly, discussion (usually misleading) of New Labour has focused on the first, with the second, the terrain of class conflict, being either passed over or ignored. In fact, for the purposes of this discussion it is the balance of class forces that is decisive.
The 1980s saw not only a number of historic defeats being inflicted on the working class (the return of mass unemployment, the miners’ strike of 1984–1985, Wapping, the consolidation of draconian anti trade union legislation), but an accompanying aggrandisement of capital. Crucial in this respect were a whole range of Conservative initiatives designed to redistribute wealth and power into the hands of big business and the rich. Deregulation and privatisation brought a significant increase in the wealth and power of the capitalist class in Britain accompanied by a weakening of the position of the working class. The balance of forces shifted. This is not an abstract proposition but is reflected in people’s everyday lives, in what they have to put up with at work, at the job centre, in life generally. While inequality and poverty, exploitation and injustice all increased and worsened under the Conservatives, the response of New Labour in the 1990s was to embrace the neo-liberal agenda of the victors in this latest round of the class war. In essence, what we have with Blair is a recognition that the Labour Party would only be allowed into government by the capitalist class if it was prepared to continue with the Thatcherite agenda, that New Labour had to become ‘the party of business’. This explains the paradox whereby New Labour came to power as a result of popular rejection of Conservative policies, but, at the same time, embraced those policies.
Blair’s courting of Rupert Murdoch exemplifies New Labour’s relationship with the capitalist class. One recent account has described how this courtship operated at a number of levels:
First, Rupert Murdoch himself was wooed like a beautiful woman. When he came to town, Blair and his lieutenants would drop everything to have dinner with him. After Blair’s annual party conference speech, the Labour leader’s first priority was to speak to Murdoch. He would allay his concerns on some issues, highlight political movement in others; always courteous, deferential and eager to learn Murdoch’s own opinion ... This process of intensive cultivation reached its crowning moment in the summer of 1995 when the Labour leader flew halfway across the world to address a meeting of News International executives on Hayman Island, just off the Queensland coast. Blair’s decision to embark on this 25,000 mile round trip...was an extraordinary act of fealty.
Murdoch required three things of Blair: no repeal of the anti-union laws, no privacy legislation and no interference with cross-media ownership. New Labour obliged. [6]
The fact that Blair listens more to Murdoch than to the leaders of the TUC is not just a matter of his personal preference for the rich (although this is certainly the case), but rather of the shift in the balance of class forces accomplished by the Thatcher government. From this point of view, the defeat of the print unions at Wapping was one of the preconditions for New Labour.
New Labour’s embrace of a whole raft of big business leaders (Martin Taylor of Barclays Bank, David Simon of British Petroleum, Peter Davies of Prudential Insurance, Dennis Stevenson of Pearson, Bob Ayling late of British Airways and, of course, Lord Sainsbury, the second richest man in Britain) is part of this attempt to consolidate New Labour as the party of business. The private finance initiatives are all intended to have a similar effect: to reward business, to fill their mouths with gold, so that they come to identify the New Labour government as their government. Similarly with New Labour’s conversion to privatisation, a conversion that extends, so far, to air traffic control, state education, job centres, prisons and detention centres. Higher education is on the list for future sell-offs. What is particularly interesting about privatisation is that it is unpopular with the great majority of voters, but really popular with New Labour’s real target constituency: big business. It is only a matter of time before we have a former New Labour Home Office minister joining the board of a private prison corporation.
One last point is worth making before we move on to examine the books by Heffernan, Hay and Fairclough: Gordon Brown’s so called socialism by stealth. While only Polly Toynbee of The Guardian is really taken in by this, it is worth noticing a significant difference between the New Labour and Conservative strategies on welfare. New Labour has decisively resurrected the categories of deserving and undeserving poor. There are benefits for those in work (deserving), while for those out of work (undeserving) there is an increasingly punitive regime derived from US workfare. Brown has in the past floated everyday signing on as a way forward and one suspects that, if they think they can get away with it, food vouchers will prove irresistible as a way of stigmatising claimants and coercing people off the dole. The test of these measures will come when there is an increase in unemployment and large numbers of new claimants discover at first hand the real nature of New Labour’s reforms.
Let us look at Richard Heffernan’s New Labour and Thatcherism. As the co-author (with Mike Marqusee) of a useful book on Neil Kinnock and the Labour Party, Defeat From the Jaws of Victory, Heffernan’s new study was something to look forward to. Unfortunately it promises considerably more than it delivers. One of the reasons for this is quite simply that it is written as a contribution to academic debate rather than activist discussion, considering the transformation from Old Labour to New Labour, in terms of bourgeois political science rather than of class struggle and class politics. On the plus side, Heffernan has no hesitation in establishing New Labour’s Thatcherite credentials. He emphasises that the scale of the transformation ‘cannot be underestimated’ and then goes on to give shape to that transformation:
As leader, Blair made clear his commitments to the enterprise society fashioned in the 1980s and made no secret of his determination to both win the endorsement of businessmen and to forge a partnership with business: ‘The deal is this: we leave intact the main changes of the 1980s in industrial relations and enterprise. And now, together we address a new agenda for the 21st century: education, welfare reform, infrastructure, and leadership in Europe.’ ‘In pursuing this ‘accord’ with business, Labour’s unwillingness to closely associate with trade union rights was almost worn as a badge of courage. In a piece written for the Daily Mail in March 1997 Blair argued: ‘Even after the changes the Labour Party is proposing in this area, Britain will remain with the most restrictive trade union laws anywhere in the western world.’ Blair made clear that Labour would encourage, rather than limit, flexible labour markets: ‘Our proposals for change, including the minimum wage, would amount to less labour market regulation than in the US.’
Such is Tony Blair’s willingness to closely associate himself with business interests as part of his preparedness to embrace Thatcherite politics, New Labour has reached out well to the right of the Old Labour constituency. This has won Blair the warm private praise of Margaret Thatcher who has declared the country ‘safe in his hands’.
Heffernan’s focus is on how and why this transformation took place, and to this end he puts forward a sadly impoverished theory of party competition with Labour playing the role of catch-up party embracing a new consensus. What passes for theory here describes rather than explains, and leaves all the important questions unasked, let alone unanswered. Moreover, his approach is actually disabling. Heffernan’s focus is so determinedly electoral that, despite his very evident hostility towards Blairism, the book contributes nothing to the fight against it.
Early on he reveals the limitations of his analysis when discussing the structural and contextual constraints within which political parties operate. He identifies two levels: the economic – domestic fiscal constraints, the globalised economy, international capital markets and international institutions. This account of the economic actually involves accepting the neo-liberal account of the modern capitalist economy. Once you start from this premise, then New Labour really was inevitable and resistance, as they say, is futile. Even more problematic is his political level – electoral demands, electoral outcomes, governmental and administrative structures and international policy agendas. Here we have a narrow academic definition of the political without the capitalist class, without the working class, without class conflict. Indeed, these phenomena make no appearance in a book that pretends to explain political change in contemporary Britain. The weakness of this approach is best demonstrated by this one reference to the 1984–1985 miners’ strike. It is mentioned in the context of Neil Kinnock’s efforts to defeat the Labour left and consolidate his control over the party. And that is it. One of the great class battles of the 20th century is reduced to a minor problem for the Labour leadership, temporarily interrupting their efforts to shift the party to the right, rather than being recognised as a decisive factor in making that shift possible. There is no recognition of the increasing power and wealth of the capitalist class as the necessary context for New Labour because, of course, academic political science does not acknowledge the existence of a capitalist ruling class. Heffernan, in the best traditions of academic discourse, is studying the echo of the class struggle rather than the class struggle itself. [7]
More interesting is Colin Hay’s The Political Economy of New Labour, although this volume too has serious political weaknesses. Hay sets out to demonstrate that the Labour Party had in the early 1990s ‘ceased effectively to be a social democratic party’ and had instead committed itself to ‘a pervasive neo-liberal economic orthodoxy’ and to ‘a basic acceptance of the legacy of the Thatcher years’. If New Labour is revisionist it is not social democracy it is revising, but Thatcherism. Proof of this is provided by Blair’s endorsement of Conservative anti trade union laws and Brown’s support for workfare (Hay writes of New Labour’s ‘surprisingly punitive reforms’ which go further ‘than anything attempted by the Conservatives’). Where the Blairites are correct is in recognising that there can be no going back to the days of Old Labour, that the world has moved on and the Keynesian welfare state is no more. The left has to adapt. Hay sees people like himself, ‘the organic intellectuals of a resurgent and renewed left’, as having an important contribution to make in this respect. This is where the problems begin.
Hay has a party competition explanation for New Labour’s Thatcherism, which, at times almost reduces it to mere political opportunism. This is the conventional wisdom of academic political science. Once again, as with Heffernan, there is no recognition of the way that the change in the balance of class forces in the 1980s provided the necessary context for New Labour. Blair’s determination to make New Labour the party of business was not about winning votes, not an electoral strategy, but rather a recognition of the aggrandisement of the capitalist class, of their increased wealth and power. The traditional Labour government role of mediating between big business and the trade unions was no longer viable because of the increased strength of big business and the weakening of the trade unions. If Labour could not play this mediating role then it would have to become the party of business if it was to be allowed to govern. The way that Blair, Mandelson and Co have treated the trade union leaders makes this absolutely clear. Whereas Hay seems to think that it will be possible to persuade Blair that there are better policies, dare one say ‘organic policies’, for New Labour to introduce, the real task is to defeat them. The role of ‘organic intellectuals’ is to contribute to the rebuilding of the working class movement so that it can defeat New Labour’s attempts to continue the transformation of Britain into a Thatcherite paradise.
One of the most interesting sections of Hay’s book is his discussion of New Labour’s failure to come up with an industrial policy, with a strategy for safeguarding, let alone rebuilding, Britain’s shrunken manufacturing base. This seems particularly pertinent today, especially as I was reading that chapter when BMW first announced the closure of Rover. Certainly his criticisms of New Labour in this regard seem absolutely spot on. What he proposes as the role for socialist intellectuals confronted with this situation amounts to their convincing New Labour of an alternative economic policy fostering indigenous investment which will be better for British capital in the longer term. In effect, he proposes that the job for socialists is to try and save British capitalism from itself. Not only is such an enterprise absolutely futile, but it also detracts from the struggle to defeat New Labour, from the fight for jobs. [8]
This brings us to Norman Fairclough’s New Labour, New Language? – a book that seeks ‘to illuminate New Labour politics and government through a focus on language’. Of course, Fairclough is not the first person to notice the peculiar phenomenon of New Labourspeak. Peter Oborne, in his biography of Alistair Campbell, one of Blair’s right hand men, noticed the emergence of a New Labour prose style that was:
… a strange mixture of the gushing platitudes of Hello! magazine and those steely tributes to heroes of the Russian working class that used to appear in Soviet Weekly during the Stalinist years ... the stark use of words, the absence of humour, the poverty of language, the lack of interest in ideas, the sense of impatience with other points of view, the bustling determination to make everything appear in the best possible light.
According to Oborne, Campbell has invented a whole new way of lying and misleading, a new rhetoric of distortion, that has spread like ‘a disease’. He actually forecasts that this is a significant enough phenomenon to attract a future PhD student. [9] He was not far wrong because Norman Fairclough, Professor of Language in Social Life, has stepped forward to subject New Labour English to an extremely enjoyable academic (in the best sense of the word) dissection.
Fairclough makes his position absolutely clear:
The crucial starting point for the politics of New Labour is acceptance of the new international economic liberalism – ‘the new global economy’ in its own terms – as an inevitable and unquestionable fact of life upon which politics and government are to be premised. My interest in the politics and language of New Labour starts from my view that it is profoundly dangerous for my fellow human beings for this new form of capitalism to develop unchecked both because it dramatically increases inequality (and therefore injustice and suffering) and because it threatens to make life on earth ecologically unsustainable.
What he proceeds to do is show the way that New Labour’s language contrives to conceal what the New Labour government is actually about. The most important part of his argument concerns the way that New Labour constructs neo-liberalism and globalisation as givens. These are accomplished facts of life that are as far as possible taken for granted, assumed, seen as no more susceptible to human agency than the weather. Moreover, the role of multinational companies is rendered invisible. When New Labour politicians talk about the economy they talk about a mechanism that runs itself, where power is never exercised and profit is realised without any human intervention. Multinational companies are the ghost in this machine, an unspoken presence to which New Labour pays obsequious fealty but never publicly even acknowledges the existence of. This is particularly telling.
Fairclough’s conclusion is that for New Labour’s distinctively promotional style of government the management of perception has been particularly important. While the Conservative government certainly attempted this, it is more crucial to New Labour. Why should this be so? Certainly one likely reason is that, while we have a Thatcherite government, the membership of the Labour Party and the people who voted for it have certainly not embraced Thatcherism – indeed 1 May 1997 was a decisive rejection of Thatcherite policies which have had to be repackaged as the ‘Third Way’. Workfare becomes welfare to work and privatisation becomes the private finance initiative. Of course, it is already clear that no amount of perception management can indefinitely cover up what is really going on. New Labour’s current troubles derive from their implementation of the same policies that destroyed the Major government. [10]

Notes
1. A. Coddington and M. Perryman, The Moderniser’s Dilemma: Radical Politics in the Age of Blair (Lawrence & Wishart 1998), pp. 43, 45, 56, 160 and 166.
2. B. Simon, A Life In Education (Lawrence & Wishart 1998), p. 126.
3. Writing in New Statesman on 24 April 2000 Francis Beckett captured David Blunkett’s serial duplicity beautifully: ‘A reporter called Nicolas Barnard of The Times Educational Supplement phoned the anti 11-plus campaigners in Trafford (near Manchester). They mentioned a statement in their support from the education secretary, David Blunkett, which they’d been given by their local MP, Bev Hughes. Barnard – surprised because Blunkett, in office at least, has always refused to help the anti-selection campaigners – rang Hughes. She was furious. How did Barnard know about the statement? It was only for local newspapers, not for national papers. Blunkett wanted to keep local supporters sweet, but he didn’t want anyone in London to know about it.’
4. P. Hain, Ayes To The Left: A Future For Socialism (Lawrence & Wishart 1995), pp. 34, 234.
5. P. Flynn, Dragons Led by Poodles: The Inside Story of a New Labour Stitch-up (Politico’s Publishing 1999), p. 11.
6. P. Oborne, Alistair Campbell: New Labour and the Rise of the Media Class (Aurum Press 1999), p. 141.
7. R. Heffernan, New Labour and Thatcherism: Political Change in Britain (Macmillan 2000), pp. 14, 23–24.
8. C. Hay, The Political Economy of New Labour (Manchester University Press 1999), pp. 71, 121.
9. P. Oborne, op. cit., p. 173
10. N. Fairclough, New Labour, New Language? (Routledge 2000), p. 15.
 







China Miéville is the author of two acclaimed fantasy novels: King Rat (1999), a dark urban fantasy relocating the Pied Piper to contemporary London, and Perdido Street Station (2000), an epic tale of the teeming, multi-species city of New Crobuzon. China also contributed to the Britpulp! (1999) anthology. At the moment he is completing another New Crobuzon novel. He discussed his ideas on fantasy with John Newsinger at Marxism 2000.





JN: Why is fantasy literature of interest to socialists?
China: Fantasy’s of interest to me because I grew up on it, and – along with horror and science fiction (SF), three inextricably linked genres – it’s still the stuff that I love to read.
For socialists in general, it seems to me that there are three main reasons. The first is a question of mass culture. Look at a bestseller list: Stephen King, J.K. Rowling and Terry Pratchett are up there in neon lights. Tolkien is one of the most popular writers of the century. I think we should be interested in why certain artistic forms and genres are popular, and try to understand them.
The second factor is that fantasy, SF and horror are completely denigrated as vulgar and sub-literary by mainstream critics. I’d say that socialists’ antennae should be raised by counter-cultures, subcultures and alternatives to ‘polite’ taste. I’m suspicious any time the semi-official arbiters of ‘quality’ tell us, with thinly veiled snobbery, that something is beneath their dignity. (I’m not suggesting that marginality is an automatic badge of quality, of course.)
Finally, and most intriguingly, there seems to be an odd affinity between radical politics and fantastic fiction. There are a number of writers of fantasy and SF who have serious left politics of some stripe. Iain Banks is a socialist, Ken MacLeod and Steven Brust are Trotskyists, Ursula Le Guin and Michael Moorcock are left anarchists, and there are plenty of others, right the way back to William Morris and before. Look at Surrealism, arguably the high point of the fantastic in the arts, and a movement many of whose adherents saw systematic socialist politics as inextricable to their aesthetic. Of course, there are plenty of excellent fantasy writers who aren’t political, or who are right wing, but I think the size of the minority at least begs the question as to whether there’s something in the form of the writing that lends itself to radical or subversive aesthetics.
JN: What have Marxists had to say about fantasy and science fiction?
China: Probably the most influential Marxist position has been that of Darko Suvin, the theorist of SF, in Metamorphoses of Science Fiction (1979). He’s politically behind SF, seeing it as related to the progressive bourgeois project, especially in its infancy. He says that SF is characterised by ‘cognitive estrangement’ – it operates according to a rationalist/scientific mindset, but it involves estrangement from the here and now so that it can extrapolate creatively. Fantasy, in contrast, he used to argue was ‘a genre committed to the imposition of anti-cognitive laws into the empirical environment ... just another ghoulish thrill ... a sub-literature of mystification. Commercial lumping of it into the same category as SF is thus a grave disservice and rampantly sociopathological phenomenon.’
He’s changed his position these days, and he’s more open minded about fantasy, but his original formulation is still very influential. Speaking to socialists, I still find a lot of people sceptical or dismissive of fantasy because it’s got magic or ghosts or whatever in it, and because as Marxists we don’t believe in them. They see something dubious in literature that pretends they’re real. For me, that’s a misunderstanding of what art is. I’ve written ghost stories – it doesn’t mean for a minute I believe in ghosts. I’m writing a story that doesn’t pretend to be a direct representation of the real world. Suspension of disbelief is crucial.
The only other book length Marxist work on fantasy I know is José Monleon’s A Specter is Haunting Europe: A Sociohistorical Approach to the Fantastic (1990). He sees the fantastic as a reflection of the fact that, to quote the title of one of Goya’s most famous pictures, ‘the sleep of reason produces monsters’ (1799). I think this is a really useful starting point. Goya’s picture is of a sleeping man menaced from behind by a variety of fantastic creatures. Monleon says – rightly, I think – that Goya is establishing ‘a relation of cause and effect between reason and unreason’.
Capitalism’s early embracing of scientific thought was progressive compared to what went before, and on that basis it projects a claim that it is the triumph of systemic rationality, and that any forces which oppose it are therefore irrational or ‘anti-rational’. But we also know that capitalism throws up, absolutely inevitably, forces which can and must oppose it. It represses just about every human impulse you can mention, which are going to resurface in various forms. Most fundamentally it throws up and represses the working class, and its emancipatory political project. It pretends class conflict is inimical to it, but it’s actually integral. Monleon says, ‘The spectre of revolution, then, seems to be at the base of this reappearance of unreason in general, and of the fantastic in particular.’ So the ‘unreason’ of fantasy is a kind of neurotic counterpoint to capitalism’s ‘rationality’. Capitalism’s ‘reason’ produces its own monsters.
With that framework, he makes sense of the particular shape of the fantastic at different times. So Gothic fears of the ancient and pre-modern (old castles, forests, graveyards, etc.) is a reflection of the fact that, at the high point of Gothic in the late 18th century, the revolts spawned by capitalism were those of a working class still often rural or newly urbanised, whose revolts (like Luddism) were directed in an unclear way against the ‘modern’. Later on in the 19th century, when working class protest became more programmatic, the fantastic often located its ‘monsters’ in the heart of the city, or as a result of the scientific mindset (Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein is an excellent example).
I think the idea of ‘the sleep of reason’ is incredibly helpful in seeing how the fantastic is so tenacious at the heart of capitalism’s rationalism. It allows you to historicise the fantastic, and within the paradigm leaves you plenty of space for more specific analyses, either of particular modes of the fantastic or of individual works. I think Monleon’s book is invaluable for that.
But there are problems with Monleon: he’s too one-sided in focusing on fantasy that is about the ‘monstrous’. And, much more problematically, he uses a reductionist ‘dominant ideology’ theoretical paradigm, and judges fantasy literature on that basis. The paradigm is too simplistic, and it means his political judgement of fantasy is far too negative. He sees it as reflecting concerns but ‘subsuming’ them into literature, and therefore disarming the radical content – ‘a displacement took place that allowed dominant society to control or tame the image of unreason’. So the Gothic, for example, he sees as more or less straightforwardly ‘defending’ the status quo.
And after 1917, when capitalism in war and revolution turned to its own ‘savage irrationalism’ to defend its supposed ‘rationalism’, he sees the ‘irrationalism’ of fantasy as breaking its boundaries, generalising and being ultimately a reactionary reflection of irrationalist capitalism. It’s a Lukácsian position, and it’s artistically and politically philistine. He does hedge it a bit in the last chapter of his book, but it’s clear that he thinks fantasy ended up being sustained by capitalist irrationalism in a direct, almost nurturing way, and sustaining it back as if it was part of a reactionary bourgeois project: ‘The fantastic "reflected" very real threats; on the other hand, it created a space in which those threats could be transformed into "supernaturalism" and monstrosity, thus helping to reshape the philosophical premises that sustained the fantastic and effectively reorient the course of social evolution.’ His reading of the politics of the books is way too one-sided, and he grants fantastic literature social power I don’t think it has. (I wish!)
I think that fantasy’s expression of the tensions thrown up by capitalism in a particularly acute way makes it much harder than Monleon suggests to read it as either ‘reactionary’ or ‘progressive’ – which can be useful shorthand but are very schematic categories. The literature’s more ambivalent and complex, the relationship to irrationalism is less straightforward, and the space for the critical/subversive in the fantastic is much greater than he suggests.
JN: Why has fantasy literature so often appeared to be conservative with a small ‘c’?
China: The quick answer to why fantasy looks so conservative is that for a long time a huge amount of it has been. If you look at stereotypical ‘epic’ or ‘high’ fantasy, you’re talking about a genre set in magical worlds with some pretty vile ideas. They tend to be based on feudalism lite: the idea, for example, that if there’s a problem with the ruler of the kingdom it’s because he’s a bad king, as opposed to a king. If the peasants are visible, they’re likely to be good simple folk rather than downtrodden wretches (except if it’s a bad kingdom ...). Strong men protect curvaceous women. Superheroic protagonists stamp their will on history like characters in Nietzschean wet dreams, but at the same time things are determined by fate rather than social agency. Social threats are pathological, invading from outside rather than being born from within. Morality is absolute, with characters – and often whole races – lining up to fall into pigeonholes with ‘good’ and ‘evil’ written on them.
Although an awful lot of books do fit that stereotype to various degrees, it’s important to remember that you’re not talking about fantasy in general here, but about a particular historical stream within it – a stream which has got massive since the 1960s. You also have to remember that many works within that tradition question or undermine its more conservative aspects. However, it is true that the hold of that conservatism is strong in the genre, and it’s also true that that particular post-Tolkien stream is what most people these days mean when they talk about ‘fantasy’.
JN: How would you assess the contributions of J.R.R. Tolkien and Mervyn Peake?
China: Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings is undoubtedly the most influential fantasy book ever written. It is the paradigm for the kind of cod-epic, conservative secondary world fantasies discussed above. Obviously there were writers before Tolkien who were very influential – Robert E. Howard’s Conan books, for example, were written in the 1930s and they’re hardly politically radical either – but Tolkien brought various elements to fantasy that made him central. More than previous writers he constructed an elaborate history, geography, linguistics, mythology, etc. for his invented world, and fitted his narrative into that. Of course world creation had gone on before – Howard’s Hyboria, Fritz Leiber’s Nehwon, Clark Ashton Smith’s Zothique – but Tolkien saw the building of an internally consistent secondary world as central to the project of what he called ‘fairy’ and what we would now call fantasy.
The sometimes obsessive focus on the secondary world is typical of post-1960s fantasy. It’s easy to mock, but I think it can be a very interesting kind of project. It often involves great creativity and inventiveness, and it’s a very powerful way for effecting the particularly strong kind of suspension of disbelief that fantasy involves. That’s why fantasy fans are often so neurotic about the maintenance of consistency – authors who lose track of their own world and contradict themselves can’t get away with it. (It’s what I think of as ‘geek critique’: ‘In book two of the Elfmoon Quintilogy you said the Redfang mountains were two days ride north of the city, but in book four it takes Bronmor three days to get there ...’)
Tolkien’s worldview was resolutely rural, petty bourgeois, conservative, anti-modernist, misanthropically Christian and anti-intellectual. That comes across very strongly in his fiction and his non-fiction. Michael Moorcock has written brilliantly on this in his book Wizardry and Wild Romance (1987):
The little hills and woods of that Surrey of the mind, the Shire [where the protagonist ‘hobbits’ live], are ‘safe’ but the wild landscapes everywhere beyond the Shire are ‘dangerous’ ... Lord of the Rings is a pernicious confirmation of the values of a morally bankrupt middle class ... If the Shire is a suburban garden, Sauron [the ‘evil’ dark lord] and his henchmen are that old bourgeois bugaboo, the mob – mindless football supporters throwing their beer bottles over the fence – the worst aspect of modern urban society represented as the whole by the a fearful, backward-yearning class.
In opposing what he called the Robot Age, Tolkien counterposes it with a past that of course never existed. He has no systematic opposition to modernity – just a terrified wittering about ‘better days’. He opposes chaos with moderation, which is why his ‘revolt’ against modernity is in fact just a grumbling quiescence.
For Tolkien, the function of his fantasy fiction is ‘consolation’. If you read his essay On Fairy Tales you find that, for him, central to fantasy is ‘the consolation of the happy ending’. He pretends that such a happy ending is something that occurs ‘miraculously’, ‘never to be counted on to recur’. But that pretence of contingency is idiotic, in that immediately previously he claims that ‘all complete fairy stories must have it [the happy ending]. It is its highest function.’ In other words, far from ‘never being counted to recur’, the writer and reader know that to qualify as fantasy, a ‘consolatory’ happy ending will recur in every story, and you have a theory of fantasy in which ‘consolation’ is a matter of policy. It’s no surprise that this kind of fantasy is conservative. Tolkien’s essay is as close as it gets to most modern fantasy’s charter, and he’s defined fantasy as literature which mollycoddles the reader rather than challenging them.
In Tolkien, the reader is intended to be consoled by the idea that systemic problems come from outside agitators, and that decent people happy with the way things were will win in the end. This is fantasy as literary comfort food. Unfortunately, a lot of Tolkien’s heirs – who may not share his politics at all – have taken on many tropes that embed a lot of those notions in their fantasy.
Peake is just incomparably better. His writing is textured and lush, his ideas are complex, his characters defy pigeonholes. The politics embedded in the Gormenghast trilogy are sometimes tragic, and never simplistic. Peake is one of the few writers of fantasy that mainstream critics treat with respect. It’s true that Peake doesn’t fit neatly into the genre – though he’s revered by fantasy fans – and didn’t have the sense of writing in a genre tradition, unlike most fantasy writers. He’s inside and outside fantasy at the same time.
I think that’s what gave his writing such a sense of uniqueness – it’s hard to trace influences on Peake (in genre and out). And although his influence has been very strong, it’s been quite diffuse and nebulous. It’s nowhere near as strong, for example, as Lord of the Rings, which was easily and totally assimilated into the genre of fantasy.
The nicest thing anyone ever said about Perdido Street Station was that it read like a fantasy book written in an alternate world where the Gormenghast trilogy rather than Lord of the Rings was the most influential work in the genre.
JN: Is fantasy escapist?
China: This is the usual accusation levelled at fantasy by genre snobs, but also by leftists who disapprove of fantasy. This is the simple notion that fantasy is not about the real world, and is therefore worth little. At the same time a lot of those who want to defend fantasy accept that the genre is escapist but try to defend the whole project of escapism.
Again, this comes out of Tolkien. In On Fairy Tales he says, ‘Why should a man be scorned if, finding himself in prison, he tries to get out and go home? Or if, when he cannot do so, he thinks and talks about other topics than jailers and prison walls?’ The fantasy writer Terry Pratchett puts it very simply: ‘Jailers don’t like escapism.’ The trouble is that, as Michael Moorcock pointed out, jailers love escapism – what they don’t like is escape.
The problem with escapism is that when you read or write a book society is in the chair with you. You can’t escape your history or your culture. So the idea that because fantasy books aren’t about the real world they therefore ‘escape’ is ridiculous. Fantasy is still written and read through the filters of social reality. That’s why some fantasies (like Swift’s Gulliver’s Travels) are so directly allegorical – but even the most surreal and bizarre fantasy can’t help but reverberate around the reader’s awareness of their own reality, even if in a confusing and unclear way.
Take a book like Rats and Gargoyles by Mary Gentle. It’s set in a fantasy world, and it involves discussions of racism, industrial conflict, sexual passion and so on. Does it really make any sense to say that the book is inherently, because of its genre form more escapist than what Iain Banks calls ‘Hampstead novels’, about the internal bickerings of middle class families who seem hermetically sealed off from wider social conflicts? Just because those books pretend to be about ‘the real world’ doesn’t mean they reverberate in it with more integrity.
Precisely because you read and write books with society in your head, the ‘escape’ that Tolkien and others aspire to is doomed to fail. In fact, it’s precisely those kind of escapist books that take the real world for granted which are most shackled to thinly veiled and highly ideological versions of that world. The problem with most genre fantasy is that it’s not nearly fantastic enough. It’s escapist, but it can’t escape.
So no, I think it’s absurd to say that fantasy in general is inherently escapist. A lot of genre fantasy after Tolkien is escapist, but that’s nothing to do with the form of the literature itself.
JN: Is fantasy inevitably reactionary then?
China: No. Again, that’s to judge fantasy in general by the lowest common denominator of the modern genre. I’d say that writers like Mary Gentle, Mikhail Bulgakov, Jane Gaskell, Steven Brust, Gregory Maguire, Stefan Grabinski, M. John Harrison and loads of others should put paid to that idea instantly.
JN: What do you see as the relationship between literary production and revolutionary politics?
China: When I write a novel I do it to tell a story and describe a world that keeps readers interested in turning pages. My job in that book is not to convince people of socialism – a 700-page fantasy would be a spectacularly inefficient mode of propaganda. But obviously as a political writer of fiction it’s inevitable that I’m a writer of political fiction.
I certainly try to engage with political ideas in my books. By doing so in fantasy, which has such a conservative tradition, you’re engaging both with politics in general and with the politics of the genre you write in. There’s politics in my books because it gives the worlds texture for me, and because I like investigating the ideas. If people do take away some of the politics then that’s great, but I think I’d be setting myself up for serious disappointment as a socialist if that was my first aim with the novels. I don’t think there’s any replacement for traditional political activity and argument for pushing forward socialist politics.
I love weird fiction, ghost stories, horror comics and SF passionately, but they’re not going to change the world. That’s why I’m a novelist and an active revolutionary socialist.
JN: Can you be more specific about the relevance of fantasy to revolutionary socialism?
China: As I’ve tried to explain, my politics are central to my life, as is my fiction writing, but the relationship between the two isn’t one of direct, unmediated influence either way round.
I do think, though, that there’s something fundamentally important and radical about the ability to conceptualise the impossible – the fantastic – for the human mind. A lot of theorists of fantasy and SF try to get at this in idealist terms. Eric Rabkin says, ‘The glory of man is that he is not bounded by reality. Man travels in fantastic worlds.’ The paradox is that in fact you are trapped in reality in that model, so that when you think about the fantastic you transcend it. It’s a model which separates the fantastic and the real.
But look at Marx’s argument in Capital: ‘What distinguishes the worst architect from the best of bees is that the architect builds the cell in his mind before he constructs it in wax. At the end of every labour process a result emerges which had already been conceived by the worker at the beginning, hence already existed ideally.’ In other words, human productive activity is predicated on a consciousness of the not-real. You have to know how the world isn’t in order to transform it.
In the real world, the not-real separates into the possible, not yet possible and never possible, but you can’t always be sure of those distinctions in your mind. You might set out to do a task without being certain whether it’s possible or not – what you are sure of is that the desired effect is not-real when you start.
In other words, the model I take from Marx differs from the mainstream critics in that the not-real isn’t separated from the real. The real is shaped by a process of constant reference to the not-real. Our conception of what is and is not possible directly affects our transformative capacity. That capacity is generally about an oscillation of consciousness between the real and either the possible or not yet possible not-real.
Fantasy is different. When you tell a fantasy story you pretend that things that you know to be impossible are not only possible but real. In that way you create a mental space (a pretended world, or whatever) which redefines (or pretends to redefine) the impossible. That is a psychologically and aesthetically radical thing to do – it allows us a kind of sleight of mind, because redefine the ‘impossible’ and you’re changing the categories within the not-real. And what I’ve tried to argue is that because of the process of cross-reference that Marx describes, change the not-real and that allows you differently to think the potentialities in the real.
I think of this process as sleight of mind, because you’re not really redefining the impossible (fantasy’s predicates are definitionally impossible) but you pretend that you are (because those predicates are claimed to be true). All this is me theorising after the fact. For as long as I’ve read I’ve been in love with weird fiction and for as long as I’ve been conscious of politics I’ve been on the left – a process which led me seven years ago to Marxism and revolutionary socialism. I’m convinced that those facts about me are linked. I’m not sure I’ve got to grips with why, but I’m trying to grope towards an understanding.

Ten recommended fantasy/science fiction novels
This is not a list of the ‘best’ fantasy or SF. Many superb works are not on the list. Those listed below are chosen not just because of their quality, but because the politics they embed (deliberately or not) are of particular interest to socialists. Of course, other works – by the same or other writers – could have been chosen.
Emma Bull and Steven Brust, Freedom and Necessity (1997). Bull is a left-liberal and Brust is a Trotskyist fantasy writer. Freedom and Necessity is set in the 19th century of the Chartists and class turmoil. It’s been described as ‘the first Marxist steampunk’ or ‘a fantasy for Young Hegelians’.
Mikhail Bulgakov, The Master and Margarita (1938, trans. 1967). Astonishing fantasy set in 1930s Moscow, featuring the Devil, Pontius Pilate, the Wandering Jew, and a satire and critique of Stalinist Russia so cutting it is unbelievable that it got past the censors. Utterly brilliant.
Jane Gaskell, Strange Evil (1957). Written when Gaskell was 14. Though flawed in places it is still, however, extraordinary. A savage fairytale with fraught sexuality, meditations on Tom Paine and Marx, revolutionary upheaval depicted sympathetically but without sentimentality, plus the most disturbing baddie in fiction.
Ursula Le Guin, The Dispossessed: An Ambiguous Utopia (1974). The most overtly political of this anarchist writer’s excellent works. An examination of the relations between a rich, exploitative capitalist world and a poor, nearly barren (though high-tech) communist one.
Gregory Maguire, Wicked (1995). Brilliant revisionist fantasy about how the winners write history. The loser whose side is here taken is the Wicked Witch of the West, a fighter for emancipatory politics in the despotic empire of Oz.
Mervyn Peake, The Gormenghast Trilogy (1946–1959). An austere depiction of dead ritualism and necessary transformation. Don’t believe those who say that the third book is disappointing.
Philip Pullman, The His Dark Materials Trilogy (1995–). Only two volumes so far published (Northern Lights and The Subtle Knife). This series deals with moral/political complexities with unsentimental respect for its (young adult) readers and characters. Explores freedom and social agency, and the question of using ugly means for emancipatory ends.
Kim Stanley Robinson, The Mars Trilogy (1992–1996). Probably the most powerful centre of gravity for leftist science fiction in the 1990s. A sprawling and thoughtful examination of the variety of social relations feeding into and leading up to revolutionary change. (It’s also got Gramsci jokes in it ...)
Norman Spinrad, The Iron Dream (1972). An SF novel by Adolf Hitler ... Spinrad’s funny, disturbing and savage indictment of the fascist aesthetic in much genre SF and fantasy. What if Hitler had become a pulp SF writer in New York? Not a book about that possibility but a book from it: ‘By the same author: Triumph of the Will and Lord of the Swastika.’ Brave and nasty.
Michael Swanwick, The Iron Dragon’s Daughter (1993). Great work that completely destroys the sentimental aspects of genre fantasy. From within the genre – fairies, elves and all – Swanwick examines the industrial revolution, the Vietnam War, racism and sexism, and the escapist dreams of genre fantasy. A truly great anti-fantasy.
 



George Lipsitz
Rainbow At Midnight
Urbana 1994, £12.95
At the end of the Second World War the United States was gripped by the greatest strike wave in its history. Whereas the number of strike days a month had averaged less than 2 million in the first half of 1945, in September, after the end of the war against Japan, the figure was over 4 million, rising to over 8 million in October. When the new year of 1946 was welcomed in, there were over 2 million US workers, both men and women, out on strike. In January 1946 there were over 20 million strike days and in February 23 million. A comparison with 1937, the great year of labour revolt, demonstrates the significance of the post-war strike wave. In 1937 there were 4,740 strikes involving 1,861,000 workers for over 28 million days, by 1945 there were 4,750 strikes involving 3,470,000 workers for 38 million days, and in 1946 there were 4,985 strikes involving 4,600,000 workers for 116 million days. The US strike wave of 1945–1946 is one of the great episodes in working class history, a neglected turning point in the history of the class struggle, that played a decisive part in shaping the post-war world. George Lipsitz’s recently revised and republished classic, Rainbow At Midnight, is a marvellous study of the causes and consequences of this great explosion and of its impact on the lives of working class people. It is a book of great depth and insight that deserves reading and re-reading.
In his introductory chapter, Why Write About Workers, Lipsitz complains bitterly about the way that the ‘invisibility of labour in the present keeps us from comprehending its accomplishments and its errors in the past’. The working class has been effectively written out of US history and society, but he insists ‘working people have been a powerful force for democratic change in the United States’. It was political mobilisation by workers in the 1930s that ‘forced business and government to establish meaningful unemployment insurance, old-age pensions and home-loan assistance’ and it was the upheaval of the 1940s that ‘won a high-wage, high-employment economy responsible for what we have come to know as the American standard of living’. Nevertheless he points out that ‘the working class has always functioned as a subordinate force in American history, a group capable of winning concessions from those in power, but never capable of mobilising itself and its allies sufficiently to set the direction for the nation’s economic and political life’. What he hopes to do is ‘to draw out...the implications of labour’s struggles in the 1940s for what has happened since’. He believes that ‘today’s problems and tomorrow’s possibilities can come into clearer focus if we understand the ways in which the political battles in the post-war era shaped the contours of the country’s economic, cultural and political life’. Crucially, Lipsitz asks, ‘what can we learn from labour?’
Lipsitz’s own involvement with working class struggle began in the 1970s when he was working on an underground newspaper in St Louis and became involved with rank and file members of the Teamsters Union, who were campaigning to democratise their union. They provided him with ‘a wonderful education about social class, the workplace, and the nature of movements for social change...their eventual defeat also educated me about the painful costs of social struggle’. Rainbow At Midnight was originally written as part of an effort ‘to understand the origins of the problems facing that insurgent caucus of the Teamsters Union’. [1]
 
The war years
Lipsitz argues that wartime mobilisation transformed the US. Between June 1940 and September 1944 the US government paid $175 billion to some 18,000 companies in the form of military contracts. Of this huge sum, $117 billion went to just 100 companies and over $50 billion to the top ten. As he puts it, ‘The nation’s largest businesses clearly reaped the greatest benefits from one of the largest welfare projects in history – wartime industrial expansion.’ The US economy practically doubled in size in the course of the war with, as one would expect, most of the benefits accruing ‘to those who already had the greatest share of the nation’s wealth’.
This economic expansion led to a shift in the balance of power within the US ruling class. The conservatives, representative of small corporations traditionally opposed to big government and bitterly anti-trade union, were being eclipsed by the corporate liberals, the representatives of the giant corporations that benefited most from government military expenditures. Whereas in 1939 firms with less than 500 workers had employed 52 percent of the manufacturing workforce, by 1944 they employed only 38 percent. At the same time those firms with more than 10,000 workers increased their share of the manufacturing workforce from 13 to 31 percent. This expanding sector, with its greater ability to pass on costs, was prepared to recognise trade unionism as a way of controlling and regulating the workforce. Indeed, the corporate liberals were prepared to ally themselves with ‘responsible’ trade union leaders and government in the maintenance of a militarised economy and US world hegemony. The challenge to this corporate liberal utopia came not from the conservatives but from the working class.
The dramatic expansion of the economy transformed the working class: the number of women workers increased by 140 percent and the number of black workers employed in industry increased by over 1 million. Whereas in 1942 blacks made up 3 percent of the workers employed on war work, by 1944 they were 8 percent. This transformation in the composition of a growing working class was accompanied by a dramatic increase in trade union membership from 7.2 million in 1940 to 14.5 million by the end of the war.
While the union leaders promised industrial peace for the duration of the war, with the Communist Party leading the way, in industry after industry across the country, unofficial ‘wildcat’ strikes became a routine means of self protection for millions of workers. While most workers supported the no-strike policy in principle, in practice they never allowed it to interfere with the defence of their interests. Many wartime strikes were condemned by employers, union officials and the government as being over trivial issues: a study of Detroit between December 1944 and January 1945 showed that out of 118 strikes only four were over wages with most taking place over disciplinary issues and management prerogatives. Lipsitz’s discussion of this phenomenon is outstanding and worth quoting at some length:
A strike can serve as a tactic to obtain specific ends, but it can also function as a symbolic demonstration of power on the part of the workers. Accumulated grievances and resentments appear in all strikes in submerged form; they may not become negotiating points, and they may never appear in print as ‘causes’ of a strike, but any strike has a history hidden in past labour-management relations. And, of course, what seems trivial to management may have enormous importance for workers. During World War Two, unsettled grievances perpetuated onerous and perhaps dangerous working conditions while leaving company profits secure. Layoffs and production changes threatened to reverse wartime gains in employment, exploiting labour’s cooperation for the benefit of management. Eruptions of violence and displays of defiance released pent-up hostilities over the hours and conditions of work. Walkouts over disciplinary action expressed defiance of management prerogatives and voiced solidarity with other workers. Strikes to win the right to smoke on the job asserted the right to relax at work, and they denied to management the right to control personal habits. Demands for meat in cafeteria meals reflected anger over the inequalities of sacrifice that created huge profits for business but shortages of meat and consumer goods among workers.
Strikes that paralysed production graphically illustrated ‘the importance of workers to society’. In wildcat strikes across the country, ‘workers demonstrated their collective understanding of what only a few would articulate as individuals: that the emerging corporate-liberal state appeared particularly vulnerable to direct action and that workers had an outstanding capacity for such action’. Neither the union leaders, the employers or the government could afford to ignore this. [2]
While celebrating working class resistance, Lipsitz does not shy away from confronting the widespread ‘hate’ strikes that were also a feature of the war years. In many workplaces, white workers tried to resist the hiring and promotion of black workers in what were often vicious displays of racism. Black workers fought back, refused to be intimidated and demanded their rights. Lipsitz argues that it was this black determination to challenge the status quo, even in the face of sometimes violent opposition from white workers, that stimulated those same white workers to protest against inequality, exploitation and authoritarianism. This determination provided the essential groundwork for what he calls a ‘strategy of popular power’. Black workers’ success in claiming their rights actually empowered the whole working class, black and white, men and women, by showing that the way to win concessions and improvements was to take on the employers. It was the refusal of black workers to accept discrimination that broke down the age old divide and rule tactic and prepared the way for the wildcat strikes of the war years.
 
‘We will not go back to the old days’
With the end of the war the working class came under immediate attack. The ending of overtime meant a substantial reduction in take home pay and there were widespread layoffs. By the start of October 1945 there were already 2 million unemployed. Many employers moved to put an end to the gains the working class had made during the war. This provoked the greatest strike wave in American history. There were massive strikes in the car, steel, rubber, meatpacking, oil refining and electrical appliance industries. Lipsitz, however, focuses not on these great setpiece struggles but on the less well known rash of general strikes that were part of this working class revolt.
In Stamford, Connecticut, the town’s largest employer, the Yale & Towne lock company, withdrew recognition from the International Association of Machinists. An official strike began on 7 November 1945, accompanied by arrests and clashes on the picket line. There was a widespread fear in the city that Yale & Towne was spearheading an open shop offensive, preparing the ground for an attempt to make Stamford a non-union town. On 3 January 1946 there was a general strike in support of the machinists:
Workers all over Stamford reported to their jobs. But instead of going to work, they marched downtown to a mass rally. Many merchants closed their shops for the day. Others put signs in their windows announcing support for the strikers. Ten thousand people, accompanied by a band from the musicians union, paraded in front of the town hall, shouting slogans of support for Yale & Towne workers ... Downtown Stamford’s theatres, stores and streetcars closed down, while workers from industries in surrounding cities took the day off and sent contingents to the mass rally.
One prominent slogan on placards at the rally read: ‘We will not go back to the old days’.
The one day general strike did not win the dispute, but it encouraged the strikers and was followed up with support on the picket line and through collections and levies. Foremen going into work were assaulted, had their cars damaged and their houses stoned, while on one occasion the factory was sniped by an unknown gunman. At the end of March 1946 a series of mass pickets successfully closed the factory down and another general strike was threatened. The company finally surrendered in the first week of April, after five months, restoring union recognition and conceding a 30 percent pay rise.
Lipsitz goes on to provide graphic accounts of the protracted transport strike in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, that provoked a three day general strike in February 1946; of the general strike in Rochester, New York State, that put a stop to the city council’s union busting in May 1946; of the Pittsburgh general strike of September 1946 that forced the release of union leader, George Mueller, from prison; and of the general strike in Oakland, California, in December 1946.
Let us look at this last episode in more detail. A thousand shopworkers, mainly women, were on strike at two city stores, Kahn’s and Hastings. Local teamsters were refusing to cross their picket lines and so on 2 December 1946 a convoy of scab lorries was brought in to supply the strikebound stores. The union had advance warning:
[200 pickets] blocked the entrance to Hastings store when the first truck drove up to it at 6 a.m. Anticipating trouble, the Oakland police force despatched 250 foot patrol officers, 12 motorcycle riders and 12 squad cars to shepherd trucks through the picket lines at both stores. As word spread that city police were protecting strikebreaking truckers, demonstrators began to pour into the downtown area. Workers travelling to their jobs learned of the police action and took to the streets, stopping buses, streetcars and cabs. The Alameda County AFL [American Federation of Labour] Labour Council announced a general strike … but no announcement was necessary. The strike had already started in the spontaneous decisions by thousands of workers ... In less than 24 hours, over 100,000 workers joined the Oakland general strike.
The city was to all intents and purposes in the hands of the strikers. As far as the official union leaderships were concerned the situation had got seriously out of hand and they moved to put a stop to what amounted to a working class revolt. Indeed, Teamsters’ leader Dave Beck condemned events in Oakland as ‘more like a revolution than an industrial dispute’. After three days, under considerable pressure, the AFL Labour Council called the general strike off despite rank and file protests. [3]
The post-war strike wave, Lipsitz argues, ‘presented the possibility of a significant break with the past’, but in the end it failed to ‘translate momentary victory into permanent gains’. Instead of mounting a successful working class challenge to the power of the American ruling class, the movement was successfully contained. The strike wave showed conclusively that a conservative open shop strategy to smash the unions, which had followed the First World War, was no longer a viable proposition. The unions were too strong and their members were too confident and determined. Instead, the unions had to be contained and their leaderships co-opted, welcomed into an unequal alliance with business and government. The union leaders had to be enlisted on the side of corporate America so that a rebellious rank and file could be brought to heel. This was the triumph of corporate liberalism.
 
The triumph of corporate liberalism
The containment of the post-war strike wave and of the threat it posed involved four initiatives by the US ruling class: first the Taft-Hartley Act to curb the rank and file and strengthen the union leaders; second the Marshall Plan combined with an urgent determination to restore world markets and third the red scare which aimed to eliminate the left and make possible the fourth initiative, the continuation of the militarised war economy into the post-war era. These initiatives are all obviously inter-related, and informing them all was the fear of the labour revolt of 1945–1946 and the potential threat it posed to the power of the ruling class. The unions were too strong to be broken, they had to be contained. This presupposed not just measures to curb the rank and file, strengthen the position of the union leaderships and purge the left, but also the maintenance of full employment and of a high wage economy. The alternative was the risk of unprecedented social unrest with the possibility of a political alternative to the establishment emerging. Lipsitz establishes the extent to which fear of the likely consequences of this unrest lay behind US government policies in the opening years of the Cold War; this is one of the book’s great strengths.
Lipsitz’s discussion of the Taft-Hartley Act of 1947 is particularly interesting. He sees this as the outcome of a struggle between conservatives and liberals over how best to deal with union strength. Even the conservative senator Robert Taft actually came round to see the need to strengthen the position of union leaders. As Taft put it, ‘I think the men are more radical than their leaders in most cases.’ The act was intended to increase the power and authority of the union leaders and to compel them by means of legal sanctions to restrain and discipline their members. Another important aspect of the act was that it denied legal protection to attempts to unionise foremen and supervisory workers. This was an important setback for the labour movement. Most union leaders were quite prepared to accommodate themselves to the act, however much they might condemn it in public. Indeed, they accompanied it with their own purge of the left from the unions, a purge that brought organising new workplaces to a virtual halt and killed off Operation Dixie, the attempt to organise the South. This is a neglected aspect of what was to be more generally known as McCarthyism. Lipsitz provides detailed accounts of this purge of the labour movement in the cities of Evansville and Fairmont which bring home how it reached down to the shopfloor. It was, as Lipsitz insists, one of the decisive moments for the working class. [4]
The boom years of US capitalism, the years of the permanent arms economy, saw organised workers successfully fight for a high and improving standard of living. As Lipsitz points out, military spending rose from $14 billion in 1950 to $53 billion in 1953 and thereafter fluctuated between $34 and $40 billion for the rest of the decade. This, he writes, ‘helped launch an age of US supremacy in the world economy and led to one of the greatest growth periods in the history of world capitalism’. It also, he goes on, ‘sowed the seeds for social and economic crises to come’. [5]
The great post-war boom made possible by the permanent arms economy provided the basis for an accommodation between unions, business and government. Organised US workers were to reap material benefits from the boom, although not without struggle, but the unorganised workers, mainly women and blacks, were left out in the cold. Nevertheless the boom saw a great increase in the size of the black working class and this made possible the challenge of the civil rights movement in the 1950s and the urban revolts of the 1960s. The union bureaucracies, however, clung desperately to their sweetheart relationship with employers and government, a relationship that was increasingly unrequited. By the time corporate liberalism was overthrown by the conservative revival of the 1980s, the unions were too bureaucratised, too weak, too corrupt and too compromised to offer effective resistance. The lessons of the great strike wave of 1945–1946 have got to be learned again.
 
The politics of spontaneity
The condition of the working class during the war, the post-war strike wave and its successful containment, are at the core of Rainbow At Midnight. Lipsitz also provides stimulating, provocative chapters on the rise of consumerism, Hollywood and the working class, and the class origins of rock and roll. These deserve a review in themselves, but we shall end here with a consideration of the book’s politics. While Lipsitz provides a tremendous celebratory account of working class culture and revolt, the politics that inform his account are the politics of spontaneity. The working class offers spontaneous resistance to class oppression on a day to day basis and on occasion in great revolts like the 1945–1946 strike wave. His own account recognises the limitations of that spontaneity, but he still rejects the need for political organisation and leadership, for a revolutionary party. As far as he is concerned vanguardist parties are discredited by the performance of the US Communist Party in these years and by the grim reality of ‘the Leninist states’ in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.
The first point is, as his own account shows, that the Communist Party was not a revolutionary party. Secondly, the various state capitalist regimes had nothing in common with Lenin or with Bolshevism. A revolutionary party would not make the revolution for and over the working class but would be the organisation of the most advanced workers both learning from and leading the class in struggle. Only such a party can prevent the spontaneous resistance of the working class being either defeated or contained. All of Lipsitz’s own evidence points to this conclusion but he has allowed the terrible legacy of Stalinism to prejudice him against the need for revolutionary politics.
Since the original publication of the book in 1981, he has published the award winning A Life In The Struggle, the biography of Ivory Perry, a rank and file, working class civil rights activist in St Louis. In 1990 he published Time Passages, a study of American popular culture and collective memory since 1945. This volume flirts with postmodernism but still places class at the centre of its discussion of TV, film, music and fiction. He argues that ruminations on the past in the films of John Sayles, in television programs like Crime Story, in the novels of Eudora Welty and Toni Morrison, or in the music of John Cougar Mellencamp, equal or exceed the quality of historical acumen represented in most political speeches or history textbooks. They might not, he argues, hold the answer to the crisis in historical thinking but they go a long way to show where the answer might be found.
Most recently, Lipsitz has published Dangerous Crossroads, an often dazzling account of international popular music and its relationship to ethnicity, social conflict and globalisation. Here the discussion is compromised by an enthusiastic and uncritical embrace of postmodernism, although there is still much of interest. The discussion ranges from the Haitian band Boukman Eksperyans to Apache Indian, from the Neville Brothers to Fela Kuti, from Paul Simon to Queen Latifah. Somewhat surprisingly there is no discussion of Rock Against Racism and the Anti Nazi League. He dedicates Dangerous Crossroads to the members of United Auto Workers Local 879 at the Ford plant in St Paul, Minnesota. In 1994 this local pledged $300 a month from shopfloor collections to pay the wages of a union organiser in the Mexican car industry. This was part of the Cleto Nigmo Memorial Agreement in honour of the Mexican Ford worker of that name shot dead by police during protests against wage cuts in Mexico in 1990. [6] Lipsitz is still clearly committed to the working class and the likelihood is that the coming resurgence of working class struggle will see the postmodernism he has adopted consigned to the dustbin.

Notes
1. G. Lipsitz, Rainbow At Midnight (Urbana 1994), pp. 4–5. This is the revised edition of a book first published in 1981.
2. Ibid., ppp. 88–89.
3. Ibid., pp. 120, 148–150.
4. Ibid., pp. 172.
5. Ibid., p. 188.
6. G. Lipsitz, A Life In The Struggle (Philadelphia 1988); Time Passages (Minneapolis 1990); Dangerous Crossroads (London1994).
 




Stephen G. Rabe
US Intervention in British Guiana: A Cold War Story
University of North Carolina Press, 2005, £14.50
In the early 1960s both Conservative and Labour governments in
Britain were complicit in CIA efforts to destabilise the elected
government in the South American colony of British Guiana. This CIA
campaign culminated with a constitutional coup, planned by the
Conservatives and implemented by Labour, a coup that removed Cheddi
Jagan and the People’s Progressive Party (PPP) from power and
installed the United States’ candidate, Forbes Burnham, a man known
to be a corrupt racist and a gangster. At US insistence the newly
independent Guyana was handed over by Harold Wilson’s Labour
government to the tender mercies of Forbes Burnham in May 1966. His
gangster regime oppressed and pillaged the country, turning it into
‘an economic facsimile of Haiti’, into the 1990s. This sorry tale
is the subject of Stephen Rabe’s exemplary study, US
Intervention In British Guiana, a book that reveals that neither
British subordination to the United States nor British complicity in
the crimes of the CIA is anything new.
The instigator of Cheddi Jagan’s downfall was President Jack
Kennedy, a man obsessed with the threat that the left posed to US
domination over South America. He fervently believed that Jagan was a
stalking horse for Fidel Castro and that consequently he had to be
overthrown, no matter what. Although Jagan had been regarded by the
British as dangerously left wing in the early 1950s, by the closing
years of the decade he was acknowledged as a moderate reformist who
posed no threat to British interests. Where Jagan fell foul of the
Americans was in his adoption of a neutralist stance with regard to
the Cold War, in his refusal to commit himself to the US side. This
was completely unacceptable to Kennedy. Indeed, in April 1960 Jagan
actually had the temerity to visit Cuba as Castro’s guest,
soliciting economic aid. The fact that he was also seeking economic
aid from the US was neither here nor there as far as the Americans
were concerned. Neutralism was grounds for overthrow. As Rabe points out:
‘In the name of anti-Communism, the Kennedy
administration took extraordinary measures to deny the people of
British Guiana the right to self-determination. US officials and
private citizens incited murder, arson, bombings and fear and
loathing in British Guiana. Indeed, the covert US intervention
ignited racial warfare between blacks and Indians. By the end of
1962, the United States had forced the United Kingdom to accede to
its demands to find a way to deny power to Cheddi Jagan.’
The British initially tried to persuade the Americans that the PPP
was not a danger. On one occasion the British colonial secretary,
Iain Macleod, told Dean Rusk, the US Secretary of State, that not
only was Jagan not a threat to the West, but that if he had to live
in British Guiana, he would certainly prefer to have Jagan in power
rather than Forbes Burnham. The Americans, however, produced a stream
of fake, manufactured intelligence identifying Jagan as a communist,
none of which proved to have any substance. In February 1962 the
British were informed that a Cuban freighter was smuggling 50 tons of
weapons into the country to arm Jagan’s supporters. When the ship
was searched, it was found to be carrying second-hand printing
equipment. The CIA has apparently always had trouble finding weapons!
Nevertheless, the British government stood by while the CIA,
working through the US trade union bureaucracy, the AFL-CIO
apparatus, poured money and agents into the colony. They suborned
corrupt elements within the local trade union movement and financed
Jagan’s rivals. Every effort was made to build up Forbes Burnham’s
People’s National Congress (PNC) and to exploit divisions between
black and indian workers. Whereas Jagan’s PPP did its best to unite
the working class (in the 1961 general election 12 of the PPP’s 26
candidates were black), Forbes Burnham whipped up race hatred and
communal violence. This was, and remains, a classic CIA strategy. The
result was serious rioting in the capital, Georgetown, in February
1962, intended to stop the British declaring the colony independent
with Jagan in power.
The Macmillan government in London capitulated to American
pressure. Only days after the outbreak of the CIA sponsored rioting
Dean Rusk told the British that ‘it is not possible for us to put
up with an independent British Guiana under Jagan’. He warned of
‘strains on Anglo-American relations’. In response to what was,
in effect, an ultimatum, the British came up with a strategy to
remove Jagan, hopefully without showing their hand openly.
Independence was postponed and in October 1962 the British announced
that they were introducing a system of proportional representation
that would allow the removal of the PPP from power without the
appearance of a coup having taken place. With US support and
financial backing, Jagan’s opponents would be bought together under
Forbes Burnham’s leadership and hopefully secure a majority.
Meanwhile, CIA efforts at destabilisation, with British connivance,
were stepped up. Prime minister Macmillan actually met CIA director
John McCone to discuss the situation in British Guiana – an
unprecedented step.
The CIA campaign culminated in a general strike against the Jagan
government that lasted from 18 April until 8 July 1963. It was
accompanied by considerable violence, including bombings and
shootings, with Forbes Burnham’s supporters once again whipping up
race hatred. The CIA financed the strike to the tune of $1 million,
in the hope of plunging the colony into disorder on such a scale that
the British would have to remove Jagan and take over. Indeed, Kennedy
urged Macmillan to use the strike as a pretext to intervene, but the
British refused. The disagreement was only over timing, however.
American hostility to Jagan was such that Kennedy actually warned
Macmillan that if independence was granted with the PPP still in
power this would provoke a US attack on Cuba. Indeed, in February
1964 the United States actually prepared their own plans for direct
military intervention in the colony to remove Jagan. Their pressure
secured the removal of the colony’s governor, Sir Ralph Grey, who
was openly sceptical of US fears, opposed the proportional
representation ploy and considered Forbes Burnham to be unstable.
The election of Harold Wilson’s Labour Party into government in
London in October 1964 gave heart to the embattled Jagan. In
opposition, Wilson had condemned the Conservatives’ constitutional
coup, and Jagan hoped that the Labour government would come to his
aid. While Wilson undoubtedly had some sympathy for Jagan (they were
after all both reformists), the bottom line was that relations with
the United States came first. Jagan was given the brush-off and
Wilson went ahead and implemented the Conservative plan. In December
1964 a general election was held in British Guiana under proportional
representation, accompanied by violence, intimidation and electoral
fraud. Jagan’s opponents were generously funded by the CIA, and the
threat of US intervention was always in the background. Even so, the
PPP increased its share of the popular vote, but not by enough. Under
the new electoral system, the PPP won only 24 of the 53 seats. Forbes
Burnham was appointed prime minister. Harold Wilson’s Labour
government presided over the installation in power of a corrupt
gangster regime that was to oppress and pillage the Guyanese people
for the next 25 years.
Learning from history is easy when so little changes. Today US
attempts to destabilise and overthrow the Chavez government in
Venezuela have the full support of Tony Blair’s New Labour
government. There are differences, however. Whereas Wilson bowed down
to the Americans reluctantly and with some regret in 1964, Blair and
Co. are unreservedly on side.
 




Alvin O. Thompson
Flight To Freedom: African Runaways and Maroons in the Americas
University of the West Indies Press, 2006, £27.95
Black resistance to slavery in the Americas was continuous. It
began even before the enslaved were loaded on board ship, continued
during the horrific voyage to the Caribbean, South America or the
United States, and was a permanent feature of plantation life. This
resistance manifested itself in a petty day to day opposition to the
slave regime, but on occasions broke out into full-scale rebellion.
While the great Haitian Revolution (1791–1804) is history’s only
instance of a successful slave revolt, there can be no serious doubt
that the Jamaican revolt of 1831, even though it was brutally
suppressed, signed the death warrant of slavery in the British
Caribbean. In this important book Alvin Thompson chronicles a form of
resistance that lay between petty day to day opposition and
full-scale rebellion: the resistance of the runaway and the
establishment of hidden Maroon communities.
Thompson establishes the importance of ‘running away’ as a
phenomenon central to slave societies. He estimates that hundreds of
thousands of slaves ran away throughout the Americas, some for only a
short time as an act of petty resistance, but for others it was a
‘flight to freedom’. In Haiti between 1764 and 1793 some 48,000
slaves escaped their enslavers, and while these figures are inflated
by those who ran away more than once, most were never recaptured. The
youngest runaways were children aged ten, while the oldest he has
found a record of was ‘a 90 year old unnamed Fulani man in Haiti’.
Most were under 35 years of age, and they included both men and women.
Once they had made good their escape, the runaways established or
joined hidden Maroon communities that existed everywhere where
slavery operated. Thompson argues for the existence of thousands of
these communities throughout the history of slavery in the Americas.
The first were established in Mexico, the Dominican Republic and
Brazil in the early decades of the 16th century. As early as 1503 the
Spanish authorities were complaining of Maroon activity in the
Dominican Republic.
As soon as black slaves arrived, they began escaping and trying to
establish communities of free men and women. Sometimes these
communities remained hidden and sometimes they waged war against the
slave regimes. Generally the Maroon communities were small, but some
became substantial settlements with fortified towns, farming hundreds
of acres.
The largest was the Republic of Palmares, a federation of Maroon
communities established in Brazil in the 17th century. At its height,
Palmares had a population of 15,000 to 30,000 people and its capital
city, Cerca do Macao, was a fortified stronghold with over 2,000
houses. One historian has written of ‘the new socialist form of
life and work which the settlement of Negroes in Palmares assumed’.
When Palmares was finally destroyed by a Portuguese military
expedition in 1695 most of its inhabitants made good their escape,
establishing new hidden communities that continued to alarm the
slave-owners into the 19th century.
The danger that the runaway posed to the slave regimes was
demonstrated by the ferocity of the punishment for the offence. In
Mexico in 1590 30 lashes were prescribed for even one night’s
absence. The punishment for a second offence was 200 lashes and the
amputation of both ears, for a third 200 lashes and the amputation of
a limb, and for a fourth offence death. The French Code Noir
of 1685 prescribed death for the third offence. In Peru absence for
more than six days was punished by castration. As Thompson points
out, castration was not unique to Peru, but was used as a punishment
in many other slave societies – Brazil, Mexico, the British
Caribbean and the US. In Barbados in 1692 the authorities paid a
certain Alice Mills ten guineas for castrating 42 slaves implicated
in a revolutionary conspiracy. In 1697 three runaways were castrated
in South Carolina and in 1722 that colony’s legislature prescribed
castration for a fourth offence. As late as 1831 a Louisiana jailor
advertised that he had in custody a runaway who was recently
castrated and not quite healed.
Castration was by no means the worst punishment in a slave
regime’s armoury. Captured Maroons were often tortured to death in
the most brutal fashion. In 1795 the Maroon leader, Amsterdam, in the
Dutch colony of Demerara was forced to watch his followers executed
and then to walk over their bodies to his own place of execution. He
was horrifically tortured and then burned alive. As Thompson
recounts, many Maroons committed suicide rather than fall into the
hands of their oppressors. When Palmares fell in 1695, some 200 of
the inhabitants, who could not make good their escape, killed
themselves rather than return to slavery.
Many Maroon communities waged war against the slave regimes. Most
famously, the Jamaican Maroons fought the British for 70 years before
their freedom was recognised in the treaties of 1739. In Suriname the
Dutch similarly fought the Maroons for years but eventually in the
1760s concluded treaties that recognised their freedom. One
community, the Aluku Maroons, were excluded from the treaties. Under
their leader, Boni, they became a major threat to the Dutch that was
only eliminated after two brutal wars. The second war of 1789–93
saw Boni himself killed and his followers escaping into French
Guiana. One of the participants in this war was the British mercenary
John Gabriel Stedman, whose Narrative was illustrated, in
part, by William Blake.
In many ways the most remarkable of the Maroon wars was that
fought out in Florida where black runaways allied themselves with the
Seminole Indians, becoming perhaps a third of the tribe. The Second
Seminole War (1835–42) was at least in part an American attempt to
eliminate this sanctuary for runaway slaves and to re-enslave those
who had already made the flight to freedom. Escaped slaves played a
major role in the armed struggle against the US, which cost the lives
of some 1,500 American soldiers and militia, and was the most
hard-fought of the so-called ‘Indian Wars’. The Seminole Maroons
remained free.
One last point is worth making here. A number of the Maroon
communities that concluded treaties with the slave regimes actually
became part of the security apparatus that helped sustain them. In
Jamaica in 1739 the Maroons agreed to return future runaways and went
on to serve as slave catchers for the British, hunting down runaways
for a bounty. They played an important role in suppressing slave
revolt, most notably the great slave revolt of 1760, ‘Tacky’s
revolt’. Similarly in Suriname, the Ndjuka Maroons, allied with the
Dutch, were decisive in the defeat of Boni’s Aluku Maroons. Without
any doubt this coming to terms with the slave regimes was an
important feature of Maroon history, but it must not be seen as an
inevitable development. Most Maroon communities never entered into
such pacts and, as Thompson insists, one has to remember the part
that the Haitian Maroons played in unleashing the great Haitian Revolution.
Thompson’s admirable volume is a welcome addition to the select
library of recommended books on the resistance to black slavery in
the Americas, alongside C.L.R. James’s The Black Jacobins,
Robin Blackburn’s The Overthrow of Colonial Slavery, Michael
Craton’s Testing the Chains, Richard Hart’s Slaves Who
Abolished Slavery and Emilia Viotta da Costa’s Crowns of
Glory, Tears of Blood. It deserves the widest possible readership.
 



Comrade Trench appears to reject the ‘Two Nations’ theory on two main grounds, firstly that it is historically unfounded and secondly that the political conclusions that must inevitably be drawn from it are reactionary, even counter-revolutionary. Perhaps the best starting point for considering his objections is to restate one contemporary reality that he appears to have overlooked: at the present time the Protestant population of Northern Ireland is wholly against inclusion in a united Ireland. This has been the case for many years. The Protestants consider themselves to be British. They have a national consciousness which is different from and at the present time antagonistic to that of the Catholics. How has this come about?
 
Origins of Protestant Nationalism
The national consciousness of the Protestants has its origins in the uneven development of the Irish economy, The Protestants in the North were always a separate community but whereas in the last decades of the eighteenth century they spearheaded opposition to British rule, in the nineteenth century they became fanatical loyalists. The transformation was brought about by one overriding factor: the economy of the northeast industrialised as an integral part of the British economy and the Protestant bourgeoisie was successfully integrated into the British Establishment. The Protestant bourgeoisie carried out the historical tasks of the capitalist class in the northeast of Ireland, they hammered the working class into shape. In these circumstances it was inevitable that the Protestant working class should at its birth be ideologically subordinate to the Protestant ruling class, that it should possess the same national consciousness as the Protestant bourgeoisie developed. This may well have been unfortunate from the point of view of the republican struggle, but it is a fact, and as Marxists we have to deal with the facts and not with the wishful thinking of romantic republicanism.
In his discussion of this question Comrade Trench reduces this Protestant national consciousness to nothing more than a demonstration of ‘their particular privileged position within the Irish nation’, although he does admit that this has ‘traits of a national consciousness’. This is just not adequate. The distinctive national consciousness of the Protestant working class cannot be simply reduced to their being bought off. The historical process is much more complex than this allows for. This is the sort of childishness that we expect from the IMG. Of course to be fair Comrade Trench does go some way towards appreciating this. He writes that ‘the explanation of this phenomenon involves considerable conceptual problems. I think it suggests the need to develop a concept of the relative autonomy of ideology and consciousness’. What exactly Comrade Trench is on about here is beyond me but it seems to be a complicated way of admitting that he doesn’t know.
 
On the Democratic Validity of Northern Ireland?
Comrade Trench then goes on to talk about the reactionary political conclusions that inevitably follow from this particular reading of Irish history. He asks ‘how does one challenge the chauvinism of workers in Britain by saying that the British Army has a right to be in Northern Ireland to defend that “democratically valid” state? This is where the two nations theory leads’. Now unfortunately for Comrade Trench nowhere in my contribution to the Internal Bulletin did I write that the British Army have a right to be in Northern Ireland and nowhere did I use the phrase ‘democratically valid’ which he quotes as if I had. What I actually wrote was that the Ulster Unionists had ‘seized control of as much territory as they thought they could hold regardless of the wishes of the local population. The two counties of Fermanagh and Tyrone, both of which had nationalist majorities were incorporated into the Ulster State against the express wishes of a majority of their population. This created a large Catholic minority within Ulster which could only be reconciled to its fate by violent repression and the maintenance of a police state’. Now such a statement of events would by implication seem to preclude any belief in the democratic validity of the Ulster State – but not to Comrade Trench. In fact to Comrade Trench this is ‘apologising for repression’! This is a downright slander. Discussion and debate between revolutionaries should take place in a manner that clarifies differences. Distortion and slander are a cheap way of scoring points, they can contribute nothing to our understanding of the situation on Northern Ireland.
 
Conclusions
The partition of Ireland was carried out in such a way as to include a large Catholic minority in the Northern State. This was in violation of any ‘democratic’ principle and was only achieved by brute force. The Ulster State was founded on the denial of the national rights of the Catholic minority. It has only survived by means of the continued and continuing repression of this minority. Clearly this is something that has to be condemned and fought by revolutionary socialists.
The programme that Comrade Trench puts forward in order to do this calls for the establishment of a 32 county socialist republic. The trouble with this is that it ignores one of the crucial determining features of the situation: the Protestant working class is at the present time and has been for many years wholly opposed to its inclusion in a united Ireland of any social description. This has got to be faced. It is no good hoping that the Protestants will go away or that somehow they will be miraculously transformed into Catholic nationalists. We have to deal with the existing reality. Our programme has to be formulated so as to take the working class as it is and carry it forward towards independent political organisation, towards socialism. The call for a 32 county socialist republic does not do this. It is not based on a scientific understanding of the realities of Irish society or of working class consciousness, rather it represents a failure to break with the ideology of romantic republicanism. To paraphrase Marx, Comrade Trench is substituting the evacuating motion of his own mind for the historical development of Irish society. The consequences of this are that his programme is self-defeating. It will not help break this Protestant working class from their unnatural alliance with the Protestant ruling class, it will reinforce it. For socialists to deny the Protestant working class the right of self-determination will only serve to drive them further into the hands of Ian Paisley.
In practical terms the call for a 32 county socialist republic without allowing the Protestant working class the right to opt out, is a call to replace the oppression of the Catholic national minority by that of a Protestant national minority. At the present time the only way the Protestant working class will be incorporated into a united Ireland is through physical coercion. We must be quite clear about this. The IMG with their almost touching ultra-left innocence recognise, indeed welcome this logic with their proposals to treat the Protestant workers as scabs (Red Mole, No. 30). This is politics for infant schools. It has nothing in common with Leninism. Of course Comrade Trench does not go as far as this but I would argue that it is in fact implicit in his position.
We have to fight for the right of self-determination of both Protestant and Catholic. The Ulster State which is founded on sectarianism must be destroyed. The workers of Northern Ireland must be allowed to settle their own national destinies. We must oppose any attempt by the British State to impose another unjust settlement on Northern Ireland. In practical terms all of this would mean a repartition.

Footnote
As an afterthought it is worthwhile forestalling any claims that ‘Comrade Newsinger has called for the forced exchange of populations’. This is not implicit in a call for repartition. It is something that we as socialists would oppose. Instead we would fight for the recognition of the democratic rights of national minorities.



 


John Newsinger
Hull IS






A History of the French Working Class (2 volumes)
Roger Magraw
Blackwell £40 each
There are a host of historians busily employed in denying a revolutionary role to the working class. These two marvellous volumes are a powerful rebuttal to those who have attempted to pacify the history of the French working class, to either excise altogether or to deny the significance of working class resistance and revolt.
As Magraw insists, ever since the revolution of July 1830:
‘French workers continued, at regular intervals, to behave in ways which, to put it mildly, disturbed the complacency of the dominant bourgeoisie. No amount of revisionist rewriting of history can explain away 1848, the Paris Commune, revolutionary syndicalism, the strike waves of 1917–20 and of 1936, the rise of the mass Communist Party.’
His two volumes seek to analyse and explain the trajectory of French working class militancy from 1830 through to 1939. He decisively reasserts and celebrates the French working class revolutionary tradition.
The revolution of 1830 saw a popular insurrection in Paris overthrow the Bourbon monarchy. Although Parisian artisans played the major role in the barricade fighting (nearly a third of those killed were building workers) they were nevertheless successfully excluded from power. After the installation of the new Orleanist monarchy, workers ‘petitioned ministers in confident expectation that they would introduce job creation schemes, fix wage levels, protect workers against new machinery, permit the organisation rights and shift fiscal burdens away from indirect taxes.’ Instead they met with repression.
Later the economic depression of 1845–47 threatened to create such widespread popular unrest as to call into question the maintenance of capitalist hegemony in France. One focus of working class unrest was, according to Magraw, carnival processions and celebrations. These were turned into demonstrations against the regime with floats carrying effigies caricaturing Orleanist notables, condemning their greed and corruption. The revolution of February 1848 broke out in Paris at the time of the carnival and the bodies of those killed by the troops were carried through the streets on carnival floats.
This time the working class did force concessions from a reluctant, scared and hateful middle class, most notably the National Workshops that provided relief for the unemployed. As soon as the new Republican government was ready, the National Workshops were closed and, when over 50,000 workers took to the barricades, troops were sent in. The June insurrection was brutally crushed with 1,500 killed (many prisoners were summarily executed by the army) and another 12,000 arrested. This, as Magraw says, was ‘naked class war’.
He goes on to recount the history of the working class under the Bonapartist dictatorship that took power in December 1851 and survived until war with Germany in 1870. He provides an excellent account of the Paris Commune and of subsequent developments under the Third Republic.
The second volume ends with the French working class rallying against fascism in the mid-1930s and in 1936 carrying the Popular Front government to power. This unleashed a great wave of factory occupations, but instead of this upsurge of working class anger and militancy being used to smash the power of the ruling class, it was successfully smothered and demobilised by the Socialist-Communist alliance. In this fashion, the Popular Front government accomplished its own defeat, undermined from within by a ruling class that had been left with its wealth and power intact. Once again working class hopes and expectations were to be shattered.
In November 1938, the 40-hour week conceded in 1936 was abolished, provoking widespread strikes and occupations. Symbolic was the occupation of the Renault factory. This was ended by military intervention with the workers being removed from the factory in groups of four and forced to give the fascist salute in front of hundreds of jeering police. A general strike on 30 November saw 3 million workers walk out, but the employers had regained their confidence and were on the attack. They responded with lockouts that ended with over 20,000 workers sacked and another 800 in prison. Even before the French defeat at the hands of the Nazis in the summer of 1940, French workers found themselves living in a right-wing police state that had successfully ground them down.
Throughout both volumes Magraw devotes considerable space to the development of socialist ideas and organisations, to the experience of women and immigrant workers, and the development of working class culture. We can only hope that Magraw’s labours will not end here and that a third volume is on the way, taking the history of the French working class up to 1968 and beyond.
 



On 19 May 1920 a party of 12 Baldwin-Felts private detectives led by Albert and Lee Felts arrived in the small town of Matewan, West Virginia. They had been busy evicting the families of striking miners from company housing on behalf of the Stone Mountain Coal Company and were now on their way back to the Baldwin-Felts headquarters in Bluefield. Their presence in Matewan was deliberately provocative. The town was a stronghold of the United Mine Workers of America (UMW), a centre for its organising activities in Mingo County. Only a fortnight earlier the union had held a rally attended by over 3,000 miners, black and white, in the town. Now an armed confrontation was to take place on the main street between the Baldwin-Felts men and Matewan’s mayor, Cabell Testerman, and chief of police, Sid Hatfield, both former miners and staunch UMW supporters. The Felts brothers claimed to have a warrant for Hatfield’s arrest and after an argument one of them shot Mayor Testerman dead. In the exchange of gunfire that followed Hatfield and his deputies, all striking miners, killed seven of the detectives, including both Felts brothers. Two striking miners, Robert Mullins and Tot Tinsley, were killed. [1]
This gunfight was celebrated as a great victory by the UMW in West Virginia and led to a dramatic increase in membership. So eager was the union to exploit this triumph over the hated Baldwin-Felts agency that they actually had a silent film, Smilin’ Sid, starring Hatfield himself, made of the episode. The film was shown to enthusiastic, cheering miners throughout the West Virginia coalfield. [2] Over 60 years later, in 1987, the gunfight was to be the subject of another film, Matewan, written and directed by the radical independent film maker, John Sayles.
The so called ‘Matewan Massacre’ was, however, only one episode, and by no means the most dramatic, in the long bloody struggle to organise West Virginia. This particular phase, immediately after the First World War, was to culminate in the march on company controlled Logan County by over 15,000 armed miners and in the week long battle for Blair Mountain which only came to an end with the intervention of federal troops. According to one historian the Blair Mountain battle ‘was the largest single armed conflict between labour and capital in American history. In this confrontation blacks and whites fought side by side for a common cause’. [3]
This article hopes to achieve two objectives: first of all to discuss the Sayles’ film, both its strengths and its weaknesses, and second to examine the UMW’s great historic attempt to organise the West Virginia coalfield in this period. Although discrepancies between the film and the historical record will be mentioned, it is not the intention to criticise Sayles for deviating from the ‘facts’. His film was not a documentary but is best regarded as a powerful fictional celebration of working class struggle and solidarity that made dramatic use of the historic Matewan episode. It has to be judged in these terms. At the same time it will also be argued here that the UMW’s defeat in West Virginia was one of the decisive struggles in post First World War America. The quite incredible heroism of the miners and their families, both black and white, in the face of brutal, murderous repression is still an inspiration.
 
John Sayles, radical film maker
John Sayles is without doubt the most important radical film maker at work in the United States today. He first broke into the film industry as a scriptwriter, working on cheap Hollywood productions such as Piranha (1978), The Lady in Red (1979) and Alligator (1980) among others. All these scripts have ‘subversive elements’: ‘government-released piranhas in domestic waters, unionisation and feminism, corporate corruption and pollution.’ According to Sayles himself, his original idea for Alligator was to have the monster that emerges from the Milwaukee sewers eat ‘its way through the socio-economic system’. [4] His earnings from scriptwriting financed his own early films (his first film cost $60,000 to make and his second $300,000), but since then he has been able to raise more substantial sums: Matewan, for example, cost $4 million to make. Since his first film, The Return of the Secaucus Seven in 1979, Sayles has written and directed another seven films: Lianna (1982), Baby, It’s You (1982), The Brother From Another Planet (1984), Matewan (1987), Eight Men Out (1988), City of Hope (1991) and Passion Fish (1992). At the time of writing, another film – The Secret of Roan Irish – is in post-production. He has also directed a number of rock videos for Bruce Springsteen and wrote and produced the American TV series Shannon’s Deal. Sayles is also an accomplished novelist and short story writer. His best novel is the outstanding Union Dues, first published in 1977, but more recently he has published a controversial anti-Castro novel, Los Gusanos (1991). [5]
Why did Sayles decide to make a film about a miners’ strike in West Virginia in the early 1920s? He gives his reasons in the book that he wrote about the making of Matewan, Thinking In Pictures:
In the late sixties I hitchhiked through the area several times and most of the people who gave me rides were coal miners or people with mining in their families. They spoke with a mixture of pride and resignation about the mining – resignation about how dark and dirty and cold and wet and dangerous it was and pride that they were the people to do it, to do it well. The United Mine Workers were going through heavy times then. Their president, Tony Boyle, was accused of having his election opponent, Jock Yablonski, murdered. The coal companies and most of the political machinery that fed on them and even the UMW hierarchy denied even the existence of black lung disease and refused any compensation for it. All this was added to the usual mine accidents and disasters and wild fluctuations in coal prices. But every miner I talked to would shake his head and say, ‘Buddy, this ain’t nothin’ compared to what used to go on. I could tell you some stories’. The stories would be about their grandfathers and uncles and fathers and mothers, and the older men would tell their own stories from when they were young.
He goes on:
If storytelling has a positive function it’s to put us in touch with other people’s lives, to help us connect and draw strength or knowledge from people we’ll never meet, to help us see beyond our own experience. The people I read about in the history books and the people I met in the hills of Kentucky and West Virginia had important stories to tell and I wanted to pass them on. [6]
 
Matewan the film
Matewan tells the story of an incident in the struggle to unionise Mingo County in the West Virginia coalfield. The film begins underground with a coalface being blown. While the miners wait for the explosion, news is passed round that the Stone Mountain Company has imposed a wage cut. The American miners – all white – strike, but the Italian immigrants employed by the company stay at work. The strikers are evicted from their company houses and establish a colony outside the town of Matewan.
Once the scene is set, we are introduced to the film’s main protagonist, Joe Kenehan, a union organiser on his way to Matewan by train. Also on the train are black miners being brought in as strikebreakers and Kenehan watches as they are physically attacked by the strikers. Kenehan’s first successful intervention in the conflict is to persuade the strikers that the way to defeat the company is to ally with the black and Italian miners rather than trying to drive them out. Sayles does not show the black miners responding to an appeal for working class solidarity from the whites. Instead Kenehan challenges the racism of the white miners and succeeds in persuading them to accept the appeal for working class solidarity made by the black miners who were unaware that a strike was in progress and make it clear that they are not scabs. His strategy works, and in a dramatic scene both the Italian and the black miners join the strike under the guns of the company guards.
Kenehan preaches a doctrine of working class solidarity and consistently argues against recourse to force. The strikers, he insists, must not allow themselves to be goaded into violence, no matter what the provocation. Instead they have to rely on their unity to bring them victory.
Much of the film deals with the conflict between the company spy and agent provocateur, C.E. Lively, who advocates the dynamiting of company property and armed attacks on the company guards, and Kenehan, who continues to urge restraint. Lively nearly succeeds in framing Kenehan as a spy, but is himself unmasked and forced to flee for his life. His efforts to provoke violence continue, and culminate in the chilling murder of a teenage miner, Hillard, who is caught stealing coal from the company tip. This killing is one of the causes of the climactic gunfight in Matewan.
Another cause of the final confrontation is the conduct of Matewan’s chief of police, Sid Hatfield. Much to Kenehan’s amazement, he does not side with the company. Although he is not shown as a union man, Hatfield nevertheless protects the rights of the miners against the company gun thugs. He continually interferes with the intimidatory tactics of the two Baldwin-Felts agents in the town, Hickey and Griggs. The decision is taken to eliminate him.
The gunfight on the main street of Matewan ends with the Baldwin-Felts agents either dead or driven off, but this victory is marred by the death of Joe Kenehan. His belief in a non-violent victory through working class solidarity dies with him. Although the film ends here, the narrator, the young miner Danny, tells of how the union went down to a violent defeat as Kenehan had foretold, but reaffirms his own commitment to the union cause.
Sayles quite deliberately decided to make Kenehan a pacifist. His intention was to give the film a parable quality, a moral dimension that questioned both the use of violence to win the strike and the viability of pacifism when confronted by the Baldwin-Felts agents. The first decision he made in writing the script:
... was not just to pick a side and then root for that side to be left standing when the smoke cleared, but to question the violence itself, to question it politically, strategically, morally ... To bring the questioning of this violence to the foreground I made the fictional protagonist of the story, the union organiser Joe Kenehan, a pacifist. Not a reformed gunslinger who pulls his holster and guns off the wall in the last reel to wipe out the bad guys and thrill the audience, but a real pacifist, a guy who does not kill people no matter what. A guy trying to preach turning the other cheek in the land of an eye for an eye. And in having Joe question violence, pacifism is also questioned.
For Sayles, ‘the backbone’ of the film is whether Kenehan can get justice for the miners ‘without a gun’. There are other questions, issues and themes in the film but ‘that is the spine you have to keep coming back to, the central question that drives the plot’. [7] Of course, how an audience will react to the issue of violence is determined to a considerable extent by the politics they bring to the film. A liberal audience, for example, would regard both company and union violence as equally appalling, while a revolutionary socialist audience would regret that the miners weren’t better armed and that some of the Baldwin-Felts agents got away. Nevertheless the film does make it absolutely clear that, whatever Kenehan’s beliefs, his own survival is in fact dependent on other men having guns and being prepared to use them, on Hatfield, on the striking miners and, on one occasion, on the intervention of the hill people. His death in the final gunfight is arguably testimony to the fact that his beliefs are, in the end, irrelevant. Once again, however, one’s view derive from one’s politics.
Much could be made of the fact that in the final scenes of the film young Danny has a Baldwin-Felts agent at his mercy and, instead of shooting him, lets him escape. This apparent endorsement of Kenehan’s pacifism has to be balanced against the fact that Danny’s mother, Elma, has just shot and killed Hickey, another Baldwin-Felts agent. The man Danny could not bring himself to shoot was unarmed and running for his life. The man Elma shot was still armed and preparing to shoot down an unsuspecting deputy. Danny’s act of mercy was only made possible because Hatfield and his deputies had already shot it out with the Baldwin-Felts agents and won. The test of pacifism is not sparing the unarmed agent but sparing Hickey and accepting the consequences that would have followed. At the very least, however, the film succeeds in raising important issues for thought and discussion.
One other point worth making here is that the whole question of pacifism which Sayles makes the backbone of the film would in fact have been altogether incomprehensible to the miners struggling to build the union in West Virginia in 1920. In circumstances where activists and organisers were routinely beaten and killed by company guards and private detectives, the readiness and ability to defend oneself was essential for survival. According to one union organiser, carrying a gun became ‘automatic, like putting on a tie or lacing one’s shoes’. [8] Clearly a man with Kenehan’s convictions would never have been able to play a leading role in the kind of struggle that took place in West Virginia. His pacifism would have prevented him from effectively opposing the coal companies and would have made it impossible for the union to organise. Only the fact that the striking miners were armed prevented the coal companies driving them back to work at gunpoint. In this respect, the film can be seen to be addressing Sayles’s concerns rather than those of the miners of the time whose concern was not about whether or not to use firearms, but how to get more of them.
It is worth briefly noting here a number of other ways in which Sayles has adapted the historical record for dramatic purposes. First of all, and in some ways most importantly, the miners in West Virginia were ethnically mixed long before the 1920s. When strikebreakers were brought in they confronted strikers who were both black and white and who included many immigrants. Sayles dramatises to good effect the achievement of black and white unity against the bosses whereas in fact this was not an issue in the West Virginia coalfield at this time. A related point is that the leader of the black miners, ‘Few Clothes’ Don Chain, marvellously played by James Earl Jones, was a historic figure, but in the earlier 1912–1913 strike, not in the post-war conflict.
Joe Kenehan is, of course, a fictional character, but more to the point is the fact that outside organisers did not play a leading role in the conflict which was locally led by men like Frank Keeney, Fred Mooney, Frank Ingham, Bill Blizzard and Sid Hatfield. Hatfield’s role in particular was crucial: far from being an even handed mediator enforcing the law, he was an active UMW supporter, a key figure in the union’s early successes in Mingo County and tremendously popular with the rank and file miners. Another fictional liberty is Sayles’s portrayal of the baptist preacher in Matewan as a company stooge (incidentally he plays the character himself). This was indeed the case in company towns, but not in Matewan, an independent town with elected officials, where the baptist church served as a union meeting place. Unfortunately C E Lively was a historic figure.
One critic of Matewan, Stephen Brier, has argued that the film:
lacks any sense of capitalism as a system, or of individual capitalists as human agents. Many of the actual coal operators Justus Collins and W.P. Tams are but two examples – lived in the area in new baronial splendour, dominating the official culture and politics of the region for nearly half a century. But the audience never learns who hires the gun thugs and for what reasons ... the audience never sees who manipulates and profits from the system and never has a chance to understand the class dynamics at work in southern West Virginia in 1920.
There does seem some validity to this particular criticism, but Sayles chooses to focus on developments within the ranks of the strikers, on the community they establish. Brier goes on to criticise the film for neglecting the aftermath of the Matewan episode, for not having more to say about the march on Logan County and the battle for Blair Mountain. [9] Certainly the story is incredible enough for any number of films, with armed miners hijacking trains, company aircraft bombing the tent colonies and an army of over 15,000 workers trying to fight their way into Logan County with the express intention of hanging the sheriff, Don Chafin. As Sayles has himself pointed out, however, to have carried the story further ‘would have sent us into David Lean territory, three hours with an intermission’. [10] The finance necessary for such a project could only have been raised at the cost of surrendering his control over the film which would inevitably have had an effect on its politics.
Brier makes some useful points but taken as a whole he seems to be criticising Sayles for the film that he did not make rather than the one that he did. Instead Matewan has to be welcomed as a celebration of working class solidarity and struggle made at the height of the Reagan-Bush era. A number of US video chains refused to carry Matewan. What higher praise could there be?
 
Class war in West Virginia
It is important not to regard the miners’ struggle in West Virginia as some sort of backwoods conflict that, no matter how terrible the circumstances, had no direct relevance to the American capitalist class or to the American labour movement. This was not the case. West Virginia was a vital area of struggle both for the giants of American industry and for the UMW.
The UMW had been established in 1890 by a merger of the Knights of Labour District Assembly No. 135 and the National Union of Miners and Mine Labourers. Previous attempts at union organisation had ended in often bloody defeat, but in July 1897 the UMW with only 10,000 members called a strike in the bituminous or soft coal mines across America that brought out 150,000 miners. This resulted in January 1898 in the establishment of the Central Competitive Field. The soft coal mine companies in Indiana, Illinois, Ohio and Pennsylvania were forced to accept a ‘landmark’ agreement that conceded ‘the eight-hour day, a standard wage for men who worked on a daily basis, and a standard tonnage rate with local wage differentials’. [11] The Central Competitive Field agreement was, according to David Montgomery, ‘the foundation of the UMWA’s accomplishments’, but, as he goes on to insist, ‘almost from the day the 1898 trade agreement was signed it suffered erosion at the geographic frontiers of the CCF. Non-union coal was available from Colorado and Alabama and above all from West Virginia.’ [12]
At the end of the 1890s the Morgan Trust built a new rail network to open up the West Virginia coalfield. This led to a massive expansion of the industry: in 1867 West Virginia produced 489,000 tons of coal, in 1887 it produced 4,882,000 tons and in 1917 it produced 89,384,000 tons. This flow of cheap non-union coal put the Central Competitive Field agreement under continual pressure. As the UMW president, John Mitchell, pointed out to his members:
The strength of your union is not the best organised districts. Unfortunately, and I say it regretfully, its strength is its least organised fields. You cannot be permanently safe, you cannot rest in security until West Virginia, the Irwin field, the Connellsville and Meyersdale regions of Pennsylvania, are organised. [13]
Mitchell’s solution was not an organising drive to carry the union into the non-union fields, but a strategy of class collaboration, accepting wage cuts, deteriorating conditions and fragmenting agreements in the Central Competitive Field. This provoked a rank and file revolt that led to the political radicalisation of the union: at the 1908 UMW convention over 400 of the 1,000 delegates were members of the Socialist Party. The union determined to resist further encroachments on the Central Competitive Field agreement and also to make a determined effort to organise the non-union fields.
The attempt to break into the non-union fields produced bloody conflicts in both Colorado and West Virginia. In both states the UMW met with the most fierce resistance. Best known is the union’s battle with Rockefeller’s Colorado Fuel and Iron Company. On 20 April 1914 company guards and state militia attacked a union tent colony at Ludlow, killing three strikers and 13 women and children. One of the dead miners was the union organiser, Louis Tikas, who was captured by the militia, beaten and summarily executed. By the time the union admitted defeat, nearly 70 people had been killed in this conflict. [14]
Equally bloody was the conflict in West Virginia. Here the UMW had already achieved a foothold in Kanawha County but in April 1912 this came under attack when the mine companies refused to renew agreements. After a two month strike most gave in, but in Paint Creek and Cabin Creek where nearly 100 pits employed 7,500 miners the employers continued to resist. Here the mine companies employed the Baldwin-Felts agency to break the strike and precipitated a small scale war. [15] According to David Corbin in his classic study of the West Virginia miners, Life, Work and Rebellion in the Coal Fields:
Armed and organised, the striking miners unleashed their rage upon the Baldwin-Felts guards. They hid in the hills and sniped at individual guards, and squads of miners attacked companies of Baldwin-Felts men. In one instance, miners surrounded a camp of guards during the night, cleared away the underbrush, and silently waited till dawn. When the guards awoke and began preparing breakfast, the miners opened fire, killing 13 to 15 of them ... The miners blew up the tipples of operating mines and the trains carrying coal that had been mined by scabs. They met trains that were bringing strikebreakers to the strike zone and forced the potential scabs to evacuate – an action that often pitted black strikers against black strikebreakers and immigrant strikers against immigrant strikebreakers. The solidarity of black and white, Protestant and Catholic, immigrant and native miners was unbreakable.
Hatred of the company guards and private detectives was ferocious. The coffin of one Baldwin-Felts man was decorated with the sign: ‘GONE TO HELL. MORE TO GO. DAMNED THUGS’. And on another occasion Mother Jones, a powerful agitator in the union cause, held up a company guard’s bloodstained jacket and told the assembled miners that this was ‘the first time I ever saw a goddamned mine guard’s coat decorated to suit me’. [16]
Despite blanket court injunctions that made union activity illegal, the murderous activities of the Baldwin-Felts agents, the proclamation of martial law, intervention by the National Guard, mass arrests, the suppression of the socialist press and an attempted sell out by UMW officials, the miners emerged victorious. It was this tremendous struggle against all the odds that inspired a Wobbly, Ralph Chaplin, to write the union song Solidarity Forever. As he wrote at the time, ‘Solidarity is something more than a word in Kanawha County; it is a tremendous and spontaneous force – a force born in the hot heart of the class struggle.’ [17]
But while the union succeeded in consolidating its position in Kanawha County with 16,000 members, southern West Virginia – the counties of Mingo, Logan and McDowell – remained non-union, controlled by company guards, Baldwin-Felts agents and sheriff Don Chafin.
Clearly West Virginia was of crucial importance to the UMW. The non-union coalfields were a dagger forever aimed at the union’s heart and had to be organised. What this involved, however, was not a confrontation with backwoods mine companies, petty local tyrants who had never heard of industrial relations, but with corporate interests at the heart of American capitalism. Over 90 percent of the land in Mingo and Logan Counties was owned by outside interests. The powerful Mellon family owned mines in the area, but the dominant interest was the fiercely anti-union corporation, US Steel, that owned over 32,000 acres in Mingo and Logan and another 50,000 acres in McDowell. British companies also had extensive holdings. The fact was that southern West Virginia was not owned and controlled by local capitalists but by capitalists resident in New York, Philadelphia, Boston, Baltimore and London. The decision to wage murderous war on the union was taken by these men.
 
Post-war struggles
The year 1919 saw a dramatic explosion of industrial unrest throughout the United States. Over 4 million workers were involved in 3,630 strikes. In February there was a general strike in Seattle. Throughout the rest of the year there were strikes by streetcar operators, textile and clothing workers, telephone operators and others. Then in September the Boston police went on strike. The decisive struggles, however, were the great steel strike that began in September and the great miners’ strike that began in November. The American ruling class responded to this explosion with a ‘red scare’ campaign and a drive for the ‘open’ or non-union shop.
The steel strike was, in Philip Foner’s phrase, ‘the pivotal industrial conflict in the post-war period’. [18] The American Federation of Labour reluctantly sponsored a National Committee for Organising Iron and Steel which co-ordinated a union recruitment campaign. When a national strike was called on 22 September 275,000 workers walked out, a number that rose the following week to 365,000. The employers, dominated by US Steel stood firm, refused to recognise the unions and resolved to starve and intimidate the strikers back to work. The strike began to crumble. By mid-December the number of workers still out had fallen to 100,000 and the strike was finally called off on 8 January 1920. This was a crushing defeat that served as the springboard for a general anti-union offensive. Between 1920 and 1923 union membership in the United States was to fall by 1.5 million. [19]
Discontent was also building up among the miners with a rash of unofficial strikes in the summer of 1919 and demands for a general strike to secure the release of Tom Mooney [20], a revolutionary socialist framed for a bombing in San Francisco in 1916. This unrest came to a head at the UMW convention in September when delegates voted to demand a six hour day, five day week (at that time miners worked an eight hour day and a six day week, so this would have required an 18 hour reduction) and a 60 percent wage increase. Failure to concede would result in a national strike on 1 November. Inevitably the Democrat president, Woodrow Wilson, sided with the employers and his attorney general, A. Mitchell Palmer, secured a court injunction preventing the UMW from implementing the strike decision. The union president, John L. Lewis, complied but on 1 November 394,000 soft coal miners walked out on strike regardless. On 8 November the court ordered the union to secure a return to work. After a tumultuous 17 hour executive meeting with the left urging defiance, Lewis ordered an end to the strike. The strike continued and it was not until the end of December that a general return to work had taken place. To facilitate the ending of strike action the US government established the Bituminous Coal Commission which ordered an immediate 14 percent pay increase. When the commission made its final award in March 1920 the average pay rise was 27 percent, but nothing was conceded on hours. This was certainly a partial victory but it failed to exploit to the full the opportunities offered by the militancy of the times. Moreover, continued unrest and widespread unofficial strikes throughout the summer of 1920 secured a further increase in August 1920 that put miners in the organised coalfields on $7.50 a day. [21]
What of the threat of the non-union fields? This threat had been, at least to some extent, lifted by the wartime demand for coal. It now returned with a vengeance. In Alabama the mine owners refused to implement the commission awards and instead imposed wage cuts. Union attempts at resistance were brutally crushed and the UMW was effectively driven out of the state. [22] What of West Virginia?
 
Bloody Mingo
West Virginia UMW District 17, under the leadership of Frank Keeney and Fred Mooney, both socialists, had successfully consolidated its hold in the northern and western districts. By the end of 1918 they claimed a union membership of 22,000 out of a mine workforce of 100,000, uniting black and white, native and immigrant, in the face of the most brutal repression. According to Fred Mooney, the union had recruited ‘men from many countries. Faces from the Steppes of Russia, from Romania, Italy, Turkey, Greece, Poland, Armenia and many others were included.’ He helped organise a union local at Monogah ‘in which about 27 different languages were spoken’. [23] Racial barriers between black and white workers were broken down by the severity of their common exploitation and oppression. Although racism still infected the consciousness of some white miners, it was overlaid by the need for and achievement of working class unity. Black miners were elected onto District 17’s executive, appointed as organisers and served as officers of union locals (one local had a black president, vice-president and secretary). They were in the forefront of the fight against the mine owners. [24]
Throughout the 1919 strike ‘long coal trains rumbled every day from the southern Appalachians’, clearly identifying southern West Virginia as the ‘one major fault’ in the UMW’s national position. [25] Rank and file miners throughout the country demanded that the hold of the mine owners and their company guards be broken and the region organised. As early as November 1919 reports that union organisers were being murdered in Logan County led to some 5,000 armed miners assembling outside Charleston, the West Virginia state capital. They intended to liberate Logan, drive out the company guards and establish union control. District 17’s president, Frank Keeney, persuaded them to disperse. Nevertheless, the UMW was determined to establish itself throughout the state.
Early in 1920 the UMW began organising in Mingo County, using the independent town of Matewan, with its union mayor and chief of police, as a centre of operations. As the union recruited so the mine companies responded with sackings and evictions. What transformed the situation, however, was the unsuccessful attempt by Baldwin-Felts agents to take over Matewan. First Sid Hatfield was offered bribes to allow the agency to establish a guard post equipped with machine guns in the town and then on 19 May the attempt was made to kill him. Hatfield’s devastating victory ended the climate of fear maintained by the Baldwin-Felts agents and thousands of miners flooded into the union. By the end of June over 90 percent of the county’s miners were enrolled in 34 locals and the union’s state wide membership had risen to over 50,000. On 1 July the UMW called its members in Mingo County out on strike.
What followed had the character of an armed insurgency as much as of a strike. Throughout the county armed miners fought it out with company guards and state police, enforcing the closure of the mines. At Mohawk, for example, union delegations were sent into the town on three occasions to persuade the company to remove imported strikebreakers and close the mine. They were unsuccessful. On the fourth occasion hundreds of miners opened fire on the town from the surrounding hills until the company complied. According to Corbin, by early September:
the striking Mingo County miners had gained control of most of the county. The state police and company guards did not try to reopen the closed mines. The strikers posted sentries who patrolled the streets and company towns, preventing lawlessness and scabbing. Telephone repairmen were forced to ask the strikers’ permission to fix telephone lines that had been shot down during one of the gun battles. [26]
Victory was snatched away on 14 September when the governor declared martial law and sent troops in to occupy Mingo. The mine owners reopened the mines and imported strikebreakers, while the striking miners suffered a hard winter living in their tent colonies. A guerilla campaign continued throughout the winter months in which a number of soldiers were killed, but the union had lost the initiative and faced defeat by attrition. Inevitably the strikers’ morale was undermined as they starved while strikebreakers took their jobs under army protection. Keeney was determined that this should not happen and threatened to extend the strike throughout the whole West Virginia coalfield if the troops were not withdrawn. On 15 February the Governor gave in and the troops were pulled out. The miners now attempted to regain the initiative.
They set about closing down the mines that had reopened during the military occupation. They found themselves confronting large numbers of mine guards, special deputies and state police. A large scale confrontation took place at Merrimac in May. Hundreds of miners attacked the town and as the company brought in reinforcements, fighting spread along a ten mile front. The battle lasted three days and left at least 20 men dead. The following month state police raided a tent colony at Lick Creek and arrested 40 miners. Alex Breedlove, a black miner who had been one of the first men in Mingo to join the union, was singled out and summarily executed. News of this killing outraged union opinion. Clearly the UMW faced an uphill struggle.
Meanwhile pressure was building up for decisive action to support the Mingo miners. Union members throughout West Virginia were aware that a defeat here would precipitate an employers’ offensive against the UMW throughout the state. One incident brought this pressure to a head. Sid Hatfield, still a key figure in the union campaign in Mingo, had been charged with organising the attack on Mohawk the previous year and was due to appear in court in the town of Welch in McDowell County. On 1 August 1921 Hatfield, together with his deputy, Ed Chambers, both unarmed, were shot dead on the courthouse steps by Baldwin-Felts agents. Hatfield was shot 15 times when C.E. Lively walked over, in front of a crowd of onlookers, to finish him off with a bullet in the head. None of those responsible were ever brought to trial. When Hatfield was buried in Matewan 2,000 mourners followed his coffin.
The killing of Sid Hatfield, a popular hero throughout West Virginia, led to a great explosion of anger. On 7 August Keeney told a meeting of 3,000 miners in Charleston, ‘You have no recourse except to fight. The only way you can get your rights is with a high-powered rifle, and the man who does not have this equipment is not a good union man.’ [27] Meetings were held throughout the organised areas and the miners were urged to assemble in arms at Lens Creek, ten miles south of Charleston on 20 August. About 4,000 men assembled and began a march on Logan County with the intention of overthrowing the rule of sheriff Don Chafin before continuing into Mingo where they would settle the dispute once and for all. Once the march got under way, numbers increased to over 15,000 men, not just miners but other workers as well, coming to strike a blow against the mine companies. According to one account:
The strikers constituted a fully fledged proletarian army, complete with a uniform consisting of overalls with a red bandanna, with red flags tied to their guns, a medical corps, and a variety of arms including one machine gun. Bill Blizzard, a union official, was ‘General’ of the army. [28]
The marchers, who included some 2,000 ex-soldiers, were formed into disciplined units, many of them commanded by former officers from a variety of armies. They effectively took control of the area from south of Charleston up to the mountain range surrounding Logan and Mingo Counties.
Meanwhile in Logan County sheriff Don Chafin, the local Democratic Party boss who ran the county on behalf of the mine owners, prepared to resist the invasion. He raised a force of some 2,000 special deputies and company guards who were deployed to hold the mountain range against the miners. Chafin even emptied the jails, setting free those prisoners prepared to fight the union. At least one prisoner, a bricklayer named Comiskey, arrested carrying an IWW card, was shot dead on the spot when he refused to take part. [29]
On 31 August the miners’ army attempted to break through into Logan County at Blair Mountain and fighting flared up along a 20 mile front. Chafin hired private aircraft to drop bombs on the miners’ camps. Slowly the miners pressed forward in a series of outflanking attacks until they had captured half the mountain ridge. It was only a matter of hours before Chafin’s army disintegrated. On 3 September the day was saved by the arrival of over 2,000 US troops sent in by President Harding. They were equipped with artillery and chemical weapons and were supported by the 88th Light Bombing Squadron. [30] They found Chafin and his lieutenants blind drunk. Coincidentally, Harding’s secretary of the Treasury, Andrew Mellon, one of the richest men in America, was himself a substantial mine owner in Mingo and Logan Counties.
The union army retreated and dispersed. The attempt to organise southern West Virginia had failed. How many men were killed in the march on Logan and the battle for Blair Mountain is not known. The official estimate was four, but both sides deliberately concealed their casualties and buried their dead in secret. The union’s defeat was now followed by a legal offensive. Between September and October 1921 grand juries in Logan County brought in 1,217 indictments for complicity in the insurrection including 325 charges of murder and 24 indictments for treason. Hundreds of miners including Keeney, Mooney and Blizzard were thrown into jail. The trials were held in the courthouse where John Brown had been convicted in 1859. Blizzard was singled out as an example but after a trial lasting over a month he was acquitted in May 1922. The great majority of charges were later dismissed but two miners, a baptist minister, the Reverend J.E. Wilbur, and his son, were convicted of murder for shooting a special deputy. The last case was not heard until 1924. Writing 50 years later, Art Shields, a socialist journalist who had reported the march on Logan County, summed up ‘the biggest armed struggle in US labour history’:
It was a grass-roots movement, to use an old phrase. It was a movement of men united by strong class feelings. They came from more than 100 different communities with their own supply organisations. The march demonstrated some of the creative qualities of a militant working class that will in time take power. And it left behind a feeling of pride that persists after 50 years. [31]
The harsh reality of the situation in southern West Virginia was that the employers’ determination to resist union organisation was so great they were prepared to mobilise on a scale the miners could not hope to defeat. The intervention of the army in September 1921 made clear that the mine owners’ uncompromising stand against the UMW had the full backing of the capitalist state. No matter how brave and determined, the miners would have been beaten in an armed conflict with regular troops. This does not mean that defeat was inevitable. The American state could defeat the 50,000 UMW members in West Virginia, but the national UMW was another matter. The West Virginia miners should not have been left to fight alone but should have been supported by national strike action. This was not an empty pipedream.
On 1 April 1922 ‘the largest single coal miners’ strike in United States’ history’ began. [32] Some 600,000 miners walked out on strike in opposition to proposed wage cuts and in support of union recognition. Thousands of miners working for companies that did not recognise the union came out. This became the central issue of the dispute because of recognition that the union’s long term survival depended on organising the non-union fields. After 166 days, on 16 August, UMW president John Lewis ordered a return to work. The $7.50 a day had been safeguarded but the question of union recognition was conceded. Those thousands of miners who had walked out of non-union mines were left to fight alone and to secure whatever terms they could. This was a disaster. Lewis’s betrayal of the 1922 strike was to condemn the UMW to fight a losing war of attrition throughout the 1920s as the unorganised fields succeeded in undermining the organised. By 1928 UMW membership nationally had fallen to 80,000 with Illinois the only area where it had any real strength. Lewis fought off all rank and file challenges to his leadership by a strategy of red baiting, corruption, ballot rigging and gangsterism. [33]
For the miners of West Virginia the 1922 strike was too late. The organising campaign in the southern counties had been defeated and the mine owners followed up their victory by driving the union out of the rest of the state. By 1925 union membership was down to 10,000 of whom over 7,000 were unemployed. The unity between black and white miners was in serious danger as the Ku Klux Klan made headway within the union, a consequence of defeat. [34] The UMW both locally and nationally, was not to recover from these defeats until the great explosion of labour unrest in the 1930s. [35]
 
Conclusion
John Sayles’s film Matewan is a marvellous celebration of working class solidarity and courage in the face of the most brutal employers. It focuses on the rank and file experience of the 1920 strike with the intention of inspiring similar solidarity and courage among the working class today. This is to be wholeheartedly welcomed.
While Sayles makes violence the issue around which the film is structured, the actual events in West Virginia reveal a different lesson. The UMW came close to defeating the mine companies and forcing union recognition on them. This was despite the murderous activities of the company guards and private detectives. What turned the tide was the intervention of the federal government and the arrival of troops and bomber aircraft to crush the miners’ army at Blair Mountain. Victory was still possible. National action by the UMW and solidarity action from other unions could still have won the day. Instead the struggle remained localised and despite all their courage, sacrifice and endurance, the miners went down to defeat in West Virginia.

Notes
1. H.B. Lee, Bloodletting in Appalachia (Morganstown, West Virginia 1969), pp. 55–56.
2. Ibid., p. 57.
3. R.L. Lewis, Black Coal Miners in America (Lexington, Kentucky 1987), p. 164.
4. J. Hillier, The New Hollywood (London 1993), p. 47.
5. Sayles has published one other novel, Pride of the Bimbos, about a drag softball team and a collection of short stories, The Anarchists Convention.
6. J. Sayles, Thinking In Pictures (Boston 1987), pp. 9–11. This is Sayles’s own account of the making of Matewan and includes the screenplay.
7. Ibid., pp. 16–17.
8. D.P. Jordan, The Mingo War: Labor Violence in the Southern West Virginia Coal Fields 1919–1922, in G.M. Fink and M.E. Reed (eds.), Essays in Southern Labor History (Westport, Connecticut 1976), p. 119.
9. S. Brier, A History Film Without Much History, Radical History Review 41 (1988), pp. 123, 125. Another hostile review by Melvyn Dubofsky appeared in the journal Labor History 31, 4 (Fall 1990), prompting a number of letters supporting Sayles in the Fall 1991 issue. For sympathetic reviews of the film see in particular P.S. Foner, Matewan: The story behind the movie, Political Affairs (January 1988) and R. Lewis, Matewan, Journal of American History 75 (1988).
10. J. Sayles, op. cit., p. 34.
11. J.P. Johnson, The Politics of Soft Coal (Urbana, Illinois 1979), p. 26.
12. D. Montgomery, The Fall of the House of Labour (New York 1987), p. 342.
13. A.F. Hinrichs, The United Mine Workers of America and the Non-Union Coal Fields (New York 1923), p. 119.
14. See Z. Papanikolas, Buried Unsung: Louis Takas and the Ludlow Massacre (Lincoln, Nebraska 1991).
15. The Baldwin-Felts agency had been established in the 1890s and was fast used to strikebreak in the West Virginia coalfield in 1902. See R.M. Hadsell and W.E. Coffey, From Law and Order to Class Warfare: Baldwin-Felts Detectives in the Southern West Virginia Coal Field, West Virginia History 4 (Spring 1979). The professional strikebreaker or ‘fink’, whether working as a spy or strongarm man was very much an American phenomenon. Studs Terkel gives a good indication of the hatred with which finks were regarded in his autobiography, recalling his days working in agit-prop theatre in the 1930s: ‘A union hall. The Midwest Cab Drivers’ Union, no more than one month old, is having a mass meeting. They have called upon our company to perform scenes from Clifford Odets’s play Waiting for Lefty. It is highly appropriate, dealing as it does with a cab drivers’ strike. Its locale is poetically enough a union hall. Something happens this evening wholly unplanned. In the play, a striker exposes his brother as a fink. The actor, portraying the fink, runs off the stage, through the aisle, and out. On this occasion, he doesn’t quite make it. The realism is too much for the striking cabbies in the audience. Several reach out and clobber the unfortunate actor. I, playing the role of his brother, holler, "Don’t slug him, don’t slug him, he’s only an actor!"’ From Studs Terkel, Talking To Myself (London 1986), p. 120.
16. D. Corbin, Life, Work and Rebellion in the Coal Fields (Urbana, Illinois 1981), pp. 90–91. This is a volume in the University of Illinois Press’s excellent The Working Class in American History series which is unfortunately not distributed in this country.
17. Ibid., p. 91.
18. P.S. Foner, History of the Labor Movement in the United States: Postwar Struggles 1918–1920 (New York,1988), p. 148.
19. For the 1919 steel workers’ strike see D. Brody, Labor in Crisis: The Steel Strike of 1919 (New York 1965).
20. Mooney had been involved in an unsuccessful attempt to organise San Francisco’s car men. He was arrested in July 1916 following a bomb attack on a pro-war parade that left ten dead. Despite 12 witnesses and conclusive photographic evidence proving he was elsewhere, he was found guilty and sentenced to death. A campaign was launched to save his life with demonstrations taking place in over 40 cities on ‘Mooney Day’, 28 July 1918. An [un]successful attempt was made to call a general strike on 9 December 1918. The protest did save his life with the sentence being commuted to life imprisonment. The campaign to secure his release continued throughout the 1920s and 1930s. He was finally released in January 1939, returning to San Francisco at the head of a celebratory parade and going on to address a rally of 25,000 people. See R.H. Frost, The Mooney Case (Stanford, California 1968).
21. For a discussion of Lewis’s role see P.S. Foner, op. cit., pp. 146–148.
22. In Alabama nearly 80 percent of the UMW’s members were black. For the 1920 strike see R. Straw, The United Mine Workers of America and the 1920 Coal Strike in Alabama, Alabama Review 18 (April 1975), and G. Feldman, Labour Repression in the American South: Corporations, State and Race in Alabama’s Coal Fields 1917–1921, Historical Journal 37, 2 (June 1994).
23. F. Mooney, Struggle in the Coal Fields (Morganstown, West Virginia 1967), p. 60.
24. D. Corbin, op. cit., pp. 76–79; R.L. Lewis, op. cit., pp. 156–164. For a more sceptical view of relations between black and white miners in West Virginia, see J.W. Trotter, Coal, Class and Color (Urbana, Illinois 1990), pp. 105–115. For the UMW and black miners generally, see H. Gutman’s essay, The Negro and the United Mine Workers of America, which is collected in his Work, Culture and Society in Industrializing America (Oxford 1977). This essay has been the subject of a heated academic exchange: H. Hill, Myth-Making as Labor History: Herbert Gutman and the United Mine Workers of America, Politics, Culture and Society 2, 2 (Winter 1988), and S. Brier, In Defence of Gutman: The Union’s Case, Politics, Culture and Society 2, 3 (Spring 1989).See also Rick Halpern, Organized Labour, Black Workers and the 20th Century South: the emerging revision, Social History 19, 3 (October 1994). For an excellent overview of the question of black and white working class unity, see L. Sustar, The Roots of Multi-racial Labour Unity in the United States, International Socialism 63 (Summer 1994).
25. L. Savage, Thunder in the Mountains (Pittsburgh 1990), p. 14.
26. D. Corbin, op. cit., p. 204.
27. Ibid., p. 217.
28. H.N. Wheeler, Mountaineer Mine Wars: An Analysis of the West Virginia Mine Wars of 1912–13 and 1920–21, Business History Review 50 (Spring 1976), p. 80.
29. H.B. Lee, op. cit., pp. 99–100; L Savage, op. cit., pp. 140–141.
30. M. Maurer and C. Senning, Billy Mitchell, The Air Service and The Mingo War, West Virginia History 38 (1968), p. 343. Mitchell told a reporter that if the UMW army did not disperse, ‘We’d drop teargas all over the place ... then we’d open up with artillery preparation and everything’.
31. P.S. Foner, op. cit., p. 227.
32. M. Dubofsky and W. Van Tine, John L. Lewis (New York 1977), p. 82.
33. John L. Lewis is probably the most remarkable opportunist in international, let alone US, labour history. One recent study of the UMW assesses his career up to 1933: ‘His years in office to that point had been filled with the almost virtual destruction of the United Mine Workers ... It had lost its contracts, its wage scales, its membership. Its once great treasury, the pride of America’s unions, was thin and insecure. It had no strength to resist the operators, who could even count on the support of Lewis himself when they needed it. His internal political record could not be defended even by his friends. No man was permitted to defy him. Those who fought him could face almost sure expulsion from the union. Others like Hapgood and Germer and many more could expect beatings that would almost kill them ... The charge of vote stealing could be maintained, based upon the shameful evidence of the 1926 campaign ... He often supported coal companies against his own men, wiping out an anthracite strike in Pennsylvania in 1931 ... He was regularly called one of the most reactionary men in American labour, with no program, no vision, no concept of the future’, J. Finley, The Corrupt Kingdom (New York 1972), pp. 73–74. This reactionary union boss was to go on to become one of the leaders of the great working class revolt of the 1930s, beginning with a campaign to rebuild the UMW in 1933. He was the architect of the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO). No one could better exemplify the ability of the union bureaucrat to face left in order to remain at the head of the movement. Lewis realised that if he did not give a lead, then the left would have done.
34. P.S. Foner, Organised Labor and the Black Worker 1619–1973 (New York 1973), pp. 169–170.
35. For the great revolt see A. Preiss, Labor’s Giant Step (New York 1972), and I. Bernstein, Turbulent Years (Boston 1971).
 






JOHN NEWSINGER’S ARTICLE comes at a very appropriate moment; although it is thirty years since the Bolivian revolution, the actors in the historical present are essentially the same as they were then – the petty-bourgeois nationalists of the MNR, the military, and the workers’ movement led by the COB. Once again it has been the power of the working class that has brought the leader of a reformist coalition – Hernan Siles – to the presidency (he took over Paz Estenssoro’s mantle when the latter entered an alliance with the military five years ago). Once again there looms a terrible inevitability about the betrayals and confrontations to come, unless, that is, the experience of 1952 becomes not just a historical lesson but a guide to the immediate future.
In 1980, elections to a Constituent Assembly gave clear victory to a coalition (the UDP) led by Siles, and including the Movement of the Revolutionary Left (MIR) and the Bolivian Communist Party. In July, a military coup led by Garcia Meza seized power. Throughout Bolivia the working class rose in protest: hundreds died on the street barricades before the new military government imposed its control on the state. What was at stake was a profitable drugs trade with the US controlled by the military. The internal struggles within the military have more often than not been about control over that trade; the ruling class as a whole has always maintained unity, on the other hand, in the face of a combative working class movement.
Despite brutal and systematic repression, that movement has refused to lie down. Its bitter struggle has been the fruit of the conditions of life of the Bolivian workers. Today, half the population is less than 15 years old, 16 out of every 100 children die before their first birthday; average life expectancy is 52, and the average calorie intake 17% below the FAO’s minimum. 63% of the population is illiterate, and 70%o have no access to safe water.
Carcia Meza was replaced a year later by Torrellio, and in July 1982 he was displaced in his turn by General Guido Vildoso. Vildoso’s first acts were to give an official audience to the Gestapo torturer Klaus Altmann (by now a big noise in the drugs trade) and to appoint his two sisters-in-law to lucrative customs posts. Yet three months later Vildoso had agreed to return power to Siles in October. Why?
Two factors had combined. First, the deepening world crisis hit the vulnerable Bolivian economy particularly hard; the price of tin and oil (its chief exports) fell drastically between 1981 and mid-1982. On the verge of bankruptcy, the government turned to the IMF, which agreed to provide loans subject to the usual conditions – wage freeze, price rises, austerity, closer ties to the world economy. This was too much for a working class movement which had already experienced price rises of between 150% and 500% in the first six months of 1982. The miners of Huanuni, the workers of the state telecommunications company Entel, and the industrial workers of Cochabamba launched an indefinite strike. The demands were subsidies, wage rises, and new, democratic elections. In the event, however, the COB accepted the return of the Constituent Assembly elected in 1980, albeit reluctantly.
Siles, then, has been brought back to power to administer the austerity that the crisis demands. The military gave up power precisely because they were persuaded that Siles could make the working class movement accept the IMF’s policies; he had, after all, achieved it once before. And if Siles is allowed to demobilise the working class, history will tragically repeat itself. But there is an alternative to be found in the concrete history of a Bolivian working class which, all too briefly, exercised its own class power. It is that history that John Newsinger’s article rescues from the self-appointed leaders of the working class who, like Hernan Siles, will try to use it to lead the working class movement away from the struggle for workers’ power.



* * *
NOWHERE IN LATIN AMERICA has the class struggle developed to a greater extent or reached greater heights than in Bolivia. At a time when enthusiasm for the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua and solidarity with the guerrillas in El Salvador and Guatemala dominates the consciousness of much of the left, this point needs emphasising. In Bolivia, the working class provided the force that in 1952 overthrew the government, destroyed the army and swept away the ruling class. The working class carried to power a populist petty bourgeois revolutionary government that once installed was confronted with a situation of dual power and was reluctantly compelled to carry through extensive structural reforms. That the trotskyists within the working class movement were never able to transform this dual power into workers’ power was the great tragedy of the Bolivian Revolution. But, it has to be insisted that nowhere else in Latin America has a workers’ movement achieved so much carried the struggle for socialism so far forward and won by unremitting efforts so much valuable historical experience. Much of this experience has been neglected and forgotten, overshadowed Castro’s victory in Cuba and by the subsequent ‘Guevarization’ much of Latin American Trotskyism, but it is experience we cannot afford to neglect. [1]
 
The Tin Republic
Since the turn of the century, the Bolivian economy has been dependent on tin. If Guatemala, because of its mono-product export economy, could meaningfully be described as a banana republic, then Bolivia was without doubt the tin republic. While the overwhelming majority of the population remained peasants, tied to the land and living in incredible poverty, tin maintained the viability of the state and was the country’s bridge to the modern world. Without the tin mines, Bolivia’s existence as an independent state would have been very much in doubt (it is worth remembering that since its establishment in 1825 Bolivia has lost half of its national territory to its more powerful neighbours).
At the beginning of the 1890s annual tin production was l,00l tons, by 1899 it had risen to 3,500 tons, and by 1905 to over 15,000 tons. Between 1900 and 1920 Bolivian exports rose by 431%, on which tin consistently accounted for between 50% and 65%. In the 1920s, the percentage of exports accounted for by tin was to rise to a steady 75%. As tin mining expanded, so communications were developed, towns grew and small-scale light industry developed. The capital, La Paz, grew from a population of 70,000 in 1900 to 115,000 by 1920, and other cities experienced similar increases. Paved streets, sewers and piped drinking water all made their appearance for the first time. The well-to-do were able to model themselves on the upper classes of Europe and the American East. The rural caudillo was supplanted as the dominant figure in Bolivian society by the banker and the politician, the businessman and the lawyer. The mineowners, collectively known as ‘the rosea’, were the new rulers of Bolivia.
As the tin industry expanded, production became increasingly concentrated in the hands of three men: Mauricio Hochschild, Felix Aramayo, and Simon Patino. By the late 1920s, Patino alone controlled around 50% of Bolivia’s tin production, while together, the three men controlled a minimum of 75%. All three shifted their base of operations out of Bolivia in the course of the 1920s, registering their mining companies abroad and repatriating their profits for investment abroad, effectively integrating themselves into the business and financial worlds of America and Europe. After a while Bolivian tin became only one among a number of interests and their various companies could no longer be seriously considered as in any way ‘Bolivian’. Patino, in particular, became one of the richest men in the world, controlling a vast business empire in which his Bolivian interests played only a minor role; although in Bolivia, he remained the country’s largest capitalist, both its largest mineowner and its largest banker. All of this was accomplished on the backs of Bolivian mineworkers, men and women, working and living in inhuman conditions for the benefit of the super rich.
The years from 1900 to 1920 saw the tin industry provide the basis for a period of unprecedented political stability in Bolivia. This was a time of optimism of the urban upper and middle class. It appeared that tin was going to provide the means for reshaping the whole of Bolivian society, financing economic development on an ever increasing scale and carrying the country into the twentieth century. These hopes were misplaced. The withdrawal of the tin magnates from Bolivia represented an effective emasculation of the native capitalist class. Patino, Aramayo and Hochschild had no intention of using their considerable wealth to initiate any process of industrialization or to create a fully-fledged bourgeois democratic society in Bolivia; the returns on investment were greater abroad. For them, Bolivia became a source of revenue to help finance their international activities. In this they were merely obeying the logic of capitalist enterprise, investing where the returns were greatest. To expect them to do otherwise was to expect them not to behave like capitalists and this was Utopian.
At the same time as the profits of the tin industry were leaving the country, the need to raise money forced the Bolivian government into the hands of American bankers. In 1921, the notorious ‘Nicolaus loan’ had as one of its conditions the establishment of the Permanent fiscal Commission, controlled by representatives of the American banks, to supervise state finances and taxation. Whereas earlier in the century, the country had no foreign debt, by 1927 it had financial obligations amounting to $40 million, and had been virtually taken over by American banks. The paradox is that far from tin providing the means to develop the country and to consolidate its national independence, it was turned by the world market into the means hereby Bolivia was delivered up into the hands of international companies (albeit controlled by Bolivian expatriates) and American banks. The Bolivian people remained beggars sitting on a mountain of gold.
While the overwhelming majority of the Bolivian population remained peasants, tin mining and the limited amount of associated economic development, did create a small working class. At the core of this class were the tin miners, concentrated together in isolated mining towns and consequently developing a tremendous degree of solidarity. Their militancy was assured by the determined and ruthless opposition of the mining companies to anything that might interfere with the realization of their profits, particularly trade unions. Both their degree of concentration and their potential stranglehold over the country’s main source of foreign earnings gave the tin miners a social weight out of all proportion to their numbers and was to have considerable consequences for the future.
The hold of ‘the rosea’ over Bolivia seemed secure and absolute despite the political instability of the 1920s. The politicians were fighting amongst themselves for the spoils of office and in no way questioned the rights and prerogatives of the tin companies. They exercised a virtually unchallenged ideological hegemony over Bolivian society whereby the interests of the tin companies were perceived, by means of a complex process of mediation, as the interests of the country. What was good for Patino was good for all Bolivians and vice versa. The material basis for this illusion was shattered in 1929 by the onset of the great depression. Almost; overnight the position of the mineowners in Bolivian society was dramatically weakened as world demand for tin fell and prices plummeted. Whereas in 1929 Bolivia exported 47,087 tons of tin, by 1933 the figure had fallen to only 14,957 tons. This catastrophic fall in demand was compounded by an equally catastrophic fall in price from 917 dollars a ton in 1927 to only 385 dollars a ton in 1932. The economic collapse shook the whole of Bolivian society, but inevitably the full working out of its political effects extended over a number of years.
The government of Daniel Salamanca that came to power in February 1931 attempted to ride out the crisis by two familiar methods: savage attacks on the trade unions, and war. In April 1931 he used troops to break a postal workers’ strike and encouraged by this success proceeded to cut the wages of public employees. Attacks on the unions were accompanied by increasing conflict with Paraguay over the disputed Chaco region. Although subsequently Bolivian nationalist opinion was to condemn this war as having been fought on behalf of the Standard Oil Company to acquire control of oil-bearing land, Herbert Klein has convincingly shown this to be a myth. Standard Oil, if anything, opposed the war, and moreover, had virtually no influence over the Salamanca government. More than that, the Chaco region, which the war was waged over, was not oil bearing anyway; it was only Paraguayan victories that enabled them to menace Bolivia’s oil reserves towards the end of the war. The war was started by Salamanca as a deliberate and cynical attempt to strengthen his government by rallying patriotic feelings behind it, and to create the conditions that would enable him to finally crush the trade unions. [2] He was not the first bourgeois politician to do this, and he will not be the last. In November 1933, while heavy fighting was still raging in the Chaco, Salamanca outlawed the trade unions and allowed only nineteenth century mutual aid societies to exist. ‘Salamanca’, as Steven Volk points out, ‘aimed not to contain the movement, but to destroy it’. [3]
Military victory eluded him, however, and a succession of bloody defeats brought him down. In November 1934 the Army removed him from power and the following May Bolivia concluded a humiliating armistice. The Chaco War cost Bolivia some 80,000 dead, overwhelmingly peasants, and the loss of 215,000 square kilometres of territory. The scale of the defeat and the enormous loss of life precipitated a crisis of national identity that had been in the making since 1929. The political effects of the Great Depression were suddenly realised and the ideological hegemony of the mine-owners was shattered.
 
Military socialism and the MNR
The fall of Salamanca led to a resurgence of the trade unions. They quickly gave expression to the widespread discontent that gripped the country. In May 1936 a general strike threatened to plunge the country into civil war, but instead precipitated a takeover of the government by a radical faction of the Army led by Colonel David Toro. These men were veterans of the Chaco War and were determined to reconstruct the country after its humiliating defeat. As part of this reconstruction process they intended to integrate the trade unions into the state. Toro himself modelled his programme of ‘military socialism’ on that of European fascism and aspired to establish an authoritarian corporatist state. This would not only make the country stronger by giving the government greater control over its resources, but would also benefit the people whose degraded social condition was itself regarded as a weakness of the state.
Toro promptly established a Ministry of Labour and introduced a legal code that strictly regulated union affairs. In August 1936, a degree made work obligatory and ordered that everyone including the wealthy had to possess a valid work certificate or face conscription into a labour brigade. The following month membership of a trade union was made compulsory – for both workers and bosses! These measures, as the Bolivian Trotskyist leader Guillermo Lora points out, amounted to ‘the most resolute attempt to establish fascism that the country has ever seen. [4]
Toro’s efforts had the enthusiastic support of the petty bourgeoisie, and he sought to organise this support by establishing his own party, the Partido Socialista del Estado. In March 1937, he went on to nationalise the scapegoat of the Chaco War, Standard Oil.
Opposition to his authoritarianism was growing however, and he was losing working class support because of his efforts at regulating the trade unions. In July 1937 he was overthrown in a palace revolution and replaced by Colonel German Busch. To consolidate support, Busch relaxed Toro’s controls over the trade unions at the same time as introducing a comprehensive reformist labour code to, protect the rights of the working class. The most dramatic step taken by Busch involved him in a full-scale confrontation with the mineowners. In June 1939, he ordered that the foreign currency earnings of the mining companies were to be handed over to the Banco Central. This measure was extremely popular and might well have heralded more drastic measures and an attempt at fostering industrial development by a policy of import substitution. This was not to be: on 23 August 1939 Busch was shot. Officially, he committed suicide, but the widespread belief was that he had been assassinated. He was widely regarded as a martyr, as a friend of the people, murdered by the mine-owners and American imperialism.’ Certainly, one of the first acts of his successor, General Carlos Quantanilla, was to abandon the confrontation with the mining companies.
With the death of Busch, the mineowners seemed to be firmly back in control, buoyed up, moreover, by the outbreak of war in Europe that led to a rise in demand for tin. But while the Army radicals had been temporarily defeated, the petty bourgeoisie remained unreconciled, searching for a way out of the crisis that beset Bolivian society. They found inspiration in the ideas of Haya de la Torre, who before the advent of Castro, was the most influential advocate and theorist of national liberation in Latin America; and an organisational model in his Alianza Popular Revolucionaria Americana (APRA). Haya argued for ‘an alliance within a single party of all the oppressed and exploited classes in Latin America: the petty bourgeoisie and peasantry in addition to the proletariat’. The historical model upon which he based this new strategy, he tells us, was the ‘Chinese Kuomintang under General Chiang Kai shek’. [5] With this populist alliance, he argued, the traditional ruling classes could be broken, American imperialism curbed and national development encouraged along a path that was neither Capitalist nor Communist. He pointed to the Mexican Revolution as an example and urged the rest of Latin America to emulate the Mexicans. The result in Bolivia was the Movimiento Nacionalista Revolucionario (MNR), which first came together as a loose alliance in 1940, and by 1942 had emerged as a semi-clandestine petty bourgeois party.
The boom in Bolivian tin exports, especially after the Japanese conquest of Malaya, inevitably led to the miners attempting to restore their pay and conditions, both of which had seriously deteriorated in the course of the 1930s. The Penaranda government had agreed with the Americans to hold down tin prices as a contribution to the war against the Axis Powers, and determined to resist any demands that might compromise this policy. According to one estimate Bolivia subsidised the American war effort in this way to the tune of between $600-$900 million. [6] In December 1942, miners at Patino’s Catavi mines went on strike and the government sent in troops to crush them. On 21 December troops fired on an unarmed demonstration of 8,000 men, women and children and then for the next two days unleashed a reign of terror that left an estimated 400 dead.
The massacre discredited the government and divided the army. The MNR launched a campaign of support for the miners and bitterly attacked the government and the mine-owners. At the same time as rallying popular support, however, the MNR also entered into secret negotiations with a radical secret society of army officers, the RADEPA, who were pro-Axis in sympathy and supported the earlier experiment in ‘military socialism’. On 20 December 1943, the RADEPA staged a military coup and installed one of their number, Major Gualberto Villarroel in office. The MNR was invited to join the new government.
At the time of the Catavi massacre, the dominant political force within the working class was the Partido de la Izquierda Revolucionaria (PIR), a Stalinist controlled party, completely faithful to Moscow but that attempted to generate a broader appeal than an open Communist party would have. They found themselves seriously compromised by developments. They supported Bolivian sacrifices, including working class sacrifices, to help the war effort against the Axis and thereby assist the victory of the Socialist fatherland. Consequently they felt obliged to give the Penaranda government general support despite the Catavi massacre which they criticised as an excess. This did not save them from arrest in the repression that followed after the massacre. It did, however, open the way for the MNR to break into the working class and begin winning support from the PIR. The coming to power of Villarroel made things even more difficult for the PIR, because here was a popular regime that seemed sympathetic to working class interests and that advocated strong opposition to American imperialism, and yet loyalty to Russia compelled them to oppose it, and even ally with the ruling class. They denounced Villarroel’s regime as being a Nazi-puppet regime. One PIR leader actually called for US troops to occupy the country.
Was there any truth in the claim that Villarroel’s regime was Nazi? Certainly, there were, in both the MNR and the RADEPA, virulent anti-semitism, but these were minorities and had little influence. As for the government’s sympathy with the Axis powers, this was merely a reflex of its hostility to American imperialism: they sympathised with their enemy’s enemy. The defining feature of Villarroel’s regime was not any supposed fascism, but its petty bourgeois nationalism, and whereas in the 1950s this would have earned it the label ‘Communist’, in the 1940s it earned it the label ‘Nazi’.
Villarroel was from the very beginning under bitter attack from both inside and outside the country. The USA refused to recognise him until he dismissed his MNR ministers (which he did) while internally there were continual conspiracies, street clashes and provocations. Every effort was made to destabilise the government and precipitate its downfall. The British Secret Service was involved in this along with the Americans. To counter this assault, Villarroel looked to the working class and the peasantry for support.
Under his auspices there was a great strengthening of trade union organisation, particularly in the mines. At a congress in Huanuni in June 1944, a national miners’ federation, the Federacion Sindical de Trabaj adores Mineros de Bolivia (FSTMB) was founded by a number of local unions sympathetic to the MNR. Indeed, all the expenses of the congress were paid by the MNR. The more militant local unions, most notably from the Llallagua-Uncia mining complex, were deliberately excluded. In these more militant pits, once PIR strongholds, the PIR were losing ground to the Trotskyist Partido Obrero Revolucionario (POR) that was not compromised by an alliance with ‘the rosea’. For the PIR, this was a serious blow, heralding the later collapse of its influence within the working class; with the formation of the FSTMB, now the largest union federation in the country, the centre of gravity of the labour movement shifted away from them. The PIR still controlled the important Confederacion Sindical de Trabajadores de Bolivia (CSTB), a federation of manufacturing, transport and white collar unions, particularly strong in La Paz, but even here it was finding its influence increasingly restricted to white collar workers.
Encouraging trade union organisation and controlling it were two different things, as the government soon found out. Guillermo Lora makes the point admirably:
Because of its need for support, the Villarroel-MNR government had made a great contribution to organising the masses, though not with the intention of liberating them but rather to use them for its own ends. The unexpected consequence was that the government found its own position undermined for as soon as the workers were mobilised, they began to seek ideological and organisational autonomy and sought to follow an independent class line which threatened to transcend the limitations of the government’s policies. This phenomenon became particularly marked towards the end the Villarroel regime, when a confrontation between organised workers and the government seemed imminent. [7]
The FSTMB moved quickly to the left, and under the pressure of he rank and file, the leadership installed by the MNR freed itself from their tutelage. Juan Lechin Oquendo, the Secretary General of the Union, contrived to balance MNR influence against the growing influence of the Trotskyist POR, and thereby gave himself room for manoeuvre. Certainly, as Lora freely admits, the POR had great illusions in him, and while they thought they were making use of him, he, in fact, was making very effective use of them. By endorsing their politics, Lechin successfully enlisted their help in mobilising the rank and file of the union behind his leadership, thereby helping to insulate his bureaucratic control of the union from rank and file attack. Later when he no longer needed them, he was able to use the union bureaucracy to break their influence in the union. For the time being, however, Lechin adopted an increasingly antagonistic stance towards the government which found itself unable to satisfy working class demands. A confrontation was inevitable.
In December 1944, the MNR rejoined the government and the MNR leader, Victor Paz Estenssoro became Minister of Finance. Rather than trying to conciliate the working class, Paz adopted an orthodox conservative economic policy, sacrificing all hopes of social reform to the need to maintain a stable currency. He was determined to prove the MNR’s respectability to the United States. As working class support for the regime waned, it resorted more and more to repression against its opponents: beatings and torture, assassinations and secret executions became the order of the day. This reign of terror was a sign of weakness rather than strength.
At the FSTMB’s Third Congress in March 1946, the union voted to withdraw its support from Villarroel and adopted a programme drawn up by the POR. The miners made ready to launch an offensive against the regime, but they were forestalled. On 21 July 1946 the conservative opposition together with the PIR staged a popular uprising in La Paz. The army stood by while the people took control the city. Villarroel was seized and lynched by an angry crowd, and his body was left hanging from a lamp post outside the residential Palace. Instead of Villarroel falling to a working class offensive, he fell to an unholy alliance between the Bolivian ruling ass and the Stalinists. Working class activists took to the streets alongside the supporters of the conservatives, and together they carried ‘the rosea’ to power. The PIR was rewarded with a place in the new government.
Not only did the 21 July uprising not advance working class interests, events were soon to show that it was positively detrimental. First of all, it completely derailed the FSTMB’s plans and ford them onto the defensive. At the same time, it opened the way ruling class control of the country that was to last six years, the ‘Sexenio’. In the course of these years of struggle the PIR somewhat predictably found itself on the wrong side and its influence was completely disappear.
 
The POR and the miners
The Trotskyist Partido Obrero Revolucionario was founded by a number of leftwing Bolivian exiles at Cordoba in Argentina as early as December 1934, but only began to acquire any real influence within the working class in the 1940s. It held that Trotsky’s theory Permanent Revolution applied in Bolivia and that the Bolivian working class, small as it was, had to establish itself as the leadership of all the oppressed classes and by revolutionary means create a workers’ state. The bankruptcy of the Stalinist PIR helped clear the way for the POR and it found that under the Villarroel-MNR regime its politics acquired a growing audience. After having raised working class expectations, Villarroel’s failure to satisfy them led many workers to give a hearing to Trotskyist arguments that such regimes could never satisfy their needs and that the working class would have to take power itself. These arguments had most impact among the miners and the POR successfully established itself in a number of pits.
The increasing militancy of the miners, which was given politico direction by the POR, forced the leadership of the FSTMB to break with the Villarroel government and to prepare for a confrontation with it. At the March 1946 Congress, which, as we have seen, virtually sealed Villarroel’s fate, the POR successfully persuaded the delegates to repudiate the government and adopt an aggressive wages and conditions policy that made a clash inevitable. Lechin the FSTMB leader, rowed with the tide. It is important to be clear on the reasons for this. As Lora points out, Lechin was no Marxist but if it suited his purposes he was fully prepared to identify himself with the revolutionary left. Lora actually travelled with him to the March Congress and the POR was given every encouragement to attack both the government and the MNR (of which Lechin was ostensibly a member). This was not just opportunism on Lechin’s part, although he was certainly an opportunist! Ideally, he wanted government that was under trade union control; this would deliver substantial reforms for the working class and at the same time aggrandise his own position. To achieve this he was quite prepared to give the POR their head and even to confront the government including its MNR ministers.
The 21 July uprising changed the whole situation. Thanks to the PTR a conservative government was installed in power and the FSTMB was put on the defensive. An Extraordinary Congress was held at Pulcayo in November 1946 and adopted the famous Thesis of Pulcayo – ‘a high point in Bolivian working class history ... one of the most revolutionary documents ever endorsed by a Latin American working class organization’. [8] The Thesis was drawn up by Lora himself and proposed to the Congress by Trotskyist delegates from the Siglo XX-Cataui mining complex. It rehearsed the theory of Permanent Revolution, proclaiming that the working class was the revolutionary class and arguing that it must prepare itself to carry out the socialist revolution. It declared its uncompromising opposition to Imperialism and its wholehearted support for working class internationalism. It condemned class collaboration and advocated revolutionary intransigence. As well as this general declaration of revolutionary principles, the Thesis went on to reiterate the militant trade union demands agreed at the March Congress, called for the formation of a ‘Proletarian Bloc’ in Parliament, urged the miners to occupy the mines and to take steps to arm themselves. [9]
Without doubt the Thesis of Pulcayo was a remarkable document, but how important was it really? It has been widely held up as a triumph for a particular type of Trotskyist policies: the politics of the programme, whereby all that a revolutionary organisation needs is to put forward the correct programme and everything else will follow. The working class is seen as a computer, insert the programme and it will carry out the required operations. This conception of revolutionary policies is nonsense. Lora himself admits, rather shamefacedly, that it was approved by the Congress behind Lechin’s back and ‘largely because it was a surprise’. [10] In the circumstances, this was its central flaw, because it was on Lechin that the POR was relying to implement it. The Thesis posed no challenge to the union leadership, but rather demonstrated a belief that it could be pushed in a revolutionary direction and that this was the correct perspective for revolutionaries. From this point of view it had more of the character of a propagandist coup than of a serious political victory. The real question was not how successful the POR were at passing resolutions at miners’ congresses, but how successful they were at building a revolutionary party, a revolutionary leadership rooted within the working class.
At the end of January 1947 the government made clear its intentions towards the miners when troops fired on a demonstration in Potosi and PIR thugs spent the following day hunting down and shooting union activists. At the Fourth Congress of the FSTMB in June 1947 the delegates recognised that the tide had clearly turned against the union and that it was threatened with destruction. They opted a new policy document, Tactical Advice: How to Retreat Without Being Destroyed’. This urged preparation for struggle but also that every effort should be made to avoid provocation. The following month at the Catavi-Siglo XX complex, the Patino management, with government (including PIR) consent, sacked all its employees and then leisurely proceeded to select those it wanted to reinstate. This became known as the ‘white massacre’; to distinguish it from more bloody affairs.
More drastic action came in May 1949 when in response to a miners’ strike the government arrested a number of working class leaders, including both Lechin and Lora. At Catavi-Siglo XX the miners occupied the mines and took the management hostage (including a number of Americans). The government refused to release its own prisoners and sent in the army. After a heroic resistance the miners were overwhelmed; some 300 of them were killed. Three of the hostages, two of them Americans, were also killed, almost certainly by the troops.
While the government continued its offensive against the working class (even the PIR felt obliged to pull its ministers out), it faced a continual challenge from the MNR. After the fall of Villarroel, the MNR had gone underground and reorganised itself as a clandestine paramilitary organisation committed to the violent seizure of power. Initially, the MNR leaders looked to the army for support, but when this was no longer forthcoming they turned to the working class, and it established links with a number of trade unions, including the FSTMB. The undoubted courage and self-sacrifice of MNR activists won them considerable support among the workers. In August, soon after the Catavi massacre of May 1949, the MNR launched an uprising throughout the country. The rebels were crushed almost immediately in La Paz, but elsewhere they seized control of Cochabamba, Sucre, Potosi, and established a revolutionary government in Santa Cruz. Once again the miners of Catavi rose in revolt. For two months civil war raged, but by the end of September the army had successfully crushed the uprising. The following May another attempt was made in La Paz. The trade unions called a general strike and then together with the MNR tried to seize control of the city. POR members were actively involved in the fighting. The army was once again too strong and the rebels were driven back into the working class district of Villa Victoria, which was them bombed and shelled into submission with heavy loss of life.
The scale of resistance to the government made its overthrow only a matter of time. It had lost any vestiges of popular support and was completely dependent on the army. The POR confidently expected its downfall to herald the proletarian revolution in Bolivia as the theory of Permanent Revolution worked itself out in practice. Writing at the time of the 1952 Revolution, Guillermo Lora argued that:
The Chaco War brought to an end a historic stage: the stage of the undisputed reign of the feudal bourgeoisie, of liberal reforms, of the building of railroads, of a trade boom, of the lightning-like rise of mining developments, and also of the stage of unorganised working class revolts which were drowned in blood. A new stage was ushered in: the stage of the definitive decline and decomposition of the ruling class.
He went on to characterise Bolivia as a country ‘where the numerical weight of the petty bourgeoisie’ is such that it can be described as ‘petty bourgeois in its social composition’. Following the theory of Permanent Revolution he argued that this ‘petty bourgeoisie is incapable of developing an independent policy’:
Even if, under the pressure of the masses, it succeeds in elaborating a program of national liberation and agrarian reform, even if it assumes the leadership of the national revolutionary movement, that is as far as it is capable of going. At a given stage of the struggle it will join with the feudal-bourgeoisie and imperialism to crush the masses whose revolt endangers the system of private property.
So much had been proven by the experience of the Villarroel government which had conclusively demonstrated ‘that the petty bourgeoisie is not capable of fulfilling the bourgeois democratic tasks such as national liberation from imperialism, the destruction of big landed property and the realization of national unity’.
It was on to the shoulders of the working class that the role of leadership in the revolutionary struggle had descended. Although only a small minority of the population:
the role it will have to play as leader of the revolution flows not from its numbers but from the position it occupies in the economy of the country, from the backwardness of this economy and from the fact that the feudal-bourgeoisie has faltered as a class. One can say that the political weight of the Bolivian proletariat is in inverse ratio to its numbers and in direct ratio to the political impotence of the bourgeoisie and to the insignificance of national capital. It is foreign finance capital which takes the first place in the country and exercises an indisputable control over national life. But at the same time, imperialism has brought a proletariat into existence which will nave the gigantic task of putting an end to the oppression suffered by the country, of destroying large landed property and of leading Bolivian society to socialism. [11]
This perspective had a lot to recommend it. Even someone as unsympathetic to Trotskyism as Regis Debray, when confronted with the situation in Bolivia, described it as ‘a Russia in 1905, transplanted to Indo-America’ that ‘in many of its objective aspects, illustrate the theories of permanent revolution outlined by Trotsky’. [12] The working class was so central to the struggle against ‘the rosea’ that it appeared almost inevitable that it should take power itself. While the working class constituted less than 10% of the economically active population (3.2% in mining, 4.1% in manufacturing, and 1.5% in transport), nevertheless they had a stranglehold over the country’s economic life, and, because of the way they were brought together by the organisation of production, had a social weight out of all proportion to their numbers. The miners, in particular, sharing an incredibly hard life and concentrated together in tightly-knit communities, possessed immense reserves of solidarity and resistance. This, together with their control over the country’s most important export and source of foreign earnings, made them a force to be reckoned with. Only the MNR stood in the way, and such a petty bourgeois organisation was, according to the theory at least, incapable of holding on to the leadership in a revolutionary struggle.
 
1952: The Revolution
In an attempt to undermine the revolutionary forces that were mobilising against it, the Urriolagoitia government called presidential elections for May 1951. The MNR decided to participate and nominated Victor Paz Estenssoro for President and Hernan Siles Zuazo for Vice President. To virtually everyone’s surprise Paz overcame efforts at ballot-rigging and won, polling 54,000 votes to the conservative candidate’s 39,000. Such a result was not acceptable and the army stepped in, banned the MNR and installed a military junta. The MNR began preparations for a renewed revolutionary offensive.
Ironically, the junta was dealt a body-blow by the US government. During World War II, the Americans had bought considerable quantities of tin from Bolivia at below world prices and stockpiled it. The Korean War sent tin prices soaring to £1600 a ton, and the Americans intervened to bring prices down by selling off their stockpile. By June 1951 prices had fallen to £900 a ton. This caused uproar in Bolivia, because not only were the Americans forcing the price of tin down, but they were also making a considerable profit in the process. They had bought the stockpiled tin for between £250–400 a ton, an artificially low price that was Bolivia’s contribution to the war effort, and were now selling it off at prices of £900 a ton and above. The junta tried to insist on a world price of £1200 a ton and bring them to heel the Americans blocked Bolivian tin exports. The result was an economic slump that threw thousands out of work, and considerably weakened the unity of the junta. In February 1952 there were hunger marches in La Paz.
The MNR hoped to take advantage of the signs of disintegration that were appearing within the junta. They concluded a secret alliance with the commander of the paramilitary police, General Antonio Seleme, with the intention of staging a coup d’etat. The hope was that Seleme would be able to win over most of the army, while the MNR mobilised popular support. In the circumstances, if all went well, the junta would go without too much fuss, and Seleme would become Preisident with an MNR dominated government. What seems to have been envisaged was a rerun of the ‘military socialism’ of the 1930s and 1940s. Indeed, it has been argued that this ‘Villarroel-type formula ... a rapid coup involving little civil participation, followed by a military-civil coalition government’ was a conscious decision on the part of some MNR leaders, ‘due not just to tactical exigencies, but also out of a desire to diminish the role of labour in the coup and its influence in any following government’. [13] In the event, they were to be sadly disappointed.
On 9 April 1952, MNR commandos, together with units of the para-military police, took to the streets of La Paz. To their horror, the army remained loyal to the junta and moved in to crush them. At the end of the first day, the revolt seemed doomed and Seleme fled (forfeiting any claim on the Presidency in the process). The MNR leader, Hernan Siles, was made of sterner stuff, and appealed to the working class for support. The workers of La Paz rallied to the MNR cause, and, armed with captured weapons, made a fight of it.
The tide was decisively turned by the intervention of the miners. Armed miners from Milluni seized the railway station above La Paz, captured a munitions train and cut the line. At the same time, other miners surrounded the town of Oruro, preventing troop reinforcements leaving for La Paz. Cut off from reinforcements and with the centre of La Paz in rebel hands, the army’s position was hopeless. After a last stand by students of the military college, the army surrendered on 11 April.
Over 600 people had been killed in three days of fighting, but victory was complete. Power was effectively in the hands of a triumphant working class that with rifles and dynamite had smashed the military. What would they do with that power?
 
Dual Power
Immediately after the army surrender, Hernan Siles installed himself as interim President and appointed a cabinet with three working class leaders in it: Juan Lechin for the miners, German Butron for the factory workers and Angel Cromez for the transport workers. When Victor Paz arrived back from exile on 17 April, he took over as President.
The situation that confronted the MNR was quite remarkable. Instead of a coalition government with a section of the military, they found themselves in a coalition with the trade unions. Instead of a programme of limited land reform, increased trade union rights, and heavier taxation of mining profits, they found themselves confronted with demands for the nationalisation of the mines without compensation, workers’ control, and the dispossession of the landowners and the distribution of their land to the peasants. The army that they had been relying on to maintain them in power had been disarmed and its officers thrown into prison; the country was completely in the hands of armed workers’ militia. Showing considerable political skill the MNR leaders did not try to stand against the hurricane that had overwhelmed them, but bent with it. They gave away as little as they could, but nevertheless presided over revolutionary changes in Bolivian society that the Trotskyists, in keeping with the theory of Permanent Revolution, had assumed they would oppose to the bitter end.
The same day that Paz arrived back in Bolivia, the trade unions came together to establish the Central Obrera Boliviana (COB) which they intended should supervise the activities of the government. According to Lora this was ‘the highest achievement so far of the Bolivian labour movement’; the COB ‘was master of the country, and indeed for a certain period it was the only centre of power worthy of the name’. He emphasises that the COB was more than just a Bolivian version of the TUC (God forbid!): ‘the COB did not just embrace labour unions, nor did it limit its activities to promoting the formation of working class federations. It also included popular associations which, although they called themselves unions were not strictly speaking so’. [14] Tenants, housewives, students and peasants organisations all affiliated, although representation was weighted to ensure a working class majority. The COB had under its control its own armed forces, the workers’ militia. The worker ministers in the government were there as its representatives. The COB thus had much more in common with the Petrograd Soviet in March 1917 than with the British TUC. It was the institution through which the working class exercised ‘co-gobierno’ (co-government).
Initially, the POR had a strong position within the COB, controlling the leadership of a number of unions and riding high on the wave of working class militancy. Differences with the union bureaucracies soon led to conflict. Whereas the POR looked to the COB overthrowing the government and taking power itself, Lechin and the other union leaders wanted to institutionalise dual power as co-government. They had entrenched themselves in the government, increasing the number of worker ministers to five and even secured representation for the COB on the MNR Executive. They were quite happy to share power with the petty bourgeoisie and believed that the undoubted gains they made for the working class would satisfy it. In effect they were content to become the left of the MNR.
The decisive break between the union leaders and the POR came over the terms for the nationalisation of the mines. The MNR had the intention of nationalising the mines itself and in July 1952 went as far as it intended by declaring a state monopoly on the sale and export of minerals. The COB pressed for nationalisation without compensation and under workers’ control, and threatened to withdraw its ministers from the government. Massive demonstrations by armed miners reinforced the point.
Within the government, however, the worker ministers were persuaded that the United States would not tolerate nationalisation without compensation and that they had to be placated if the government was to survive. Accordingly on 31 October 1952, the major tin mining companies were nationalised, but with the promise of compensation for their owners. Lechin signed the decree before thousands of armed miners, firing their rifles and machine guns in the air in celebration. At last, ‘the rosea’ had been smashed. The POR bitterly attacked the sell-out over compensation, both in the COB and in its press. The party newspaper, Lucha Obrera, warned that the road ‘chosen by the government leads to the strengthening of the capitalist class, to the submission of the country to Yankee imperialism’. [15] Lechin decided that the time had come to break with the Trotskyists and launched a campaign to drive them out of the trade unions. He was successful. While the POR managed to maintain some influence in a number of unions and remained strong in the more militant mines, at national level and especially in the COB, the party was routed. In the process, the COB was filled with union men who were given government posts and salaries to ensure their loyalty. By the end of 1953, the COB had been transformed from the expression of working class militancy and democracy into a bureaucratically manipulated body completely in the hands of the union leaders. To a large extent the influence that the POR had exercised in the months immediately after the April insurrection was shown to have been dependent on Lechin’s goodwill. Once that goodwill was withdrawn their influence was reduced to its proper Proportions.
At the Tenth Congress of the POR in June 1953, it was decided that the opportunity for a working class seizure of power had passed, that the party should recognise this, come to terms with its weaknesses, and set about the task of winning a majority of the working class to its politics. This perspective was not acceptable to the Pabloite Latin American Bureau of the Fourth International which urged the removal of the ‘defeatist’ Lora leadership. The opportunity for socialist revolution had not passed, it was argued, and if the revolutionary party was weak then the correct perspective was for the POR to push the MNR left along the road to revolution. The ensuing internal conflict resulted in the disintegration of the POR and the virtual collapse of Bolivian Trotskyism as a political force for the next fifteen years.
Before we consider the reasons for the failure of the POR 1952–53, it is important to be clear about the scale of the 1952 Revolution. One recent account gives an excellent overview:
the Bolivian revolution of 1952 led to dramatic and permanent restructuring of Bolivian Society. Power was wrenched from the hands of a small exploitive elite which had held it for centuries; the army was destroyed aim worker and peasant unions became the dominant armed power in the lanm landlords were forcibly dispossessed, labour taxes abolished, and land turned over to the peasants who worked it; the crucial mining industry was nationalised, with control shared between government and the miners; the government took control of the export industry and most modern manufacturing, leaving over two-thirds of the nation’s capital in its hands; the middle classes; and even urban property, the traditional hedge against inflation, was effectively redistributed by laws giving renters security of tenure at fixed rents which soon became purely nominal. It was, in short, a radical revolution. [16]
The two most crucial areas of change were the nationalisation on the mines and the distribution of the land to the peasants. These two measures completely destroyed and swept away the old ruling class and created an altogether changed social context for Bolivian politics.
In the mines nationalisation was accompanied by a system of workers’ participation, ‘control obrero’. The FSTMB was given two places out of seven on the board of the state mining corporation, COMIBOL, while in each mine the miners elected a worker controller to work with management on their behalf and who had the power to veto any decisions detrimental to their interests. In the short term, the miners received substantial benefits and improvements in pay and conditions that proved sufficient to maintain their loyalty to Lechin and to undermine the influence of the POR.
While the peasantry played no part in the fighting of 9–11 April 1952, the overthrow of the junta and the destruction of the army soon produced an effect in the countryside. The COB, at the urging of the POR, sent delegations into the villages to rally support for the revolution and mobilise the peasants against the landowners. They distributed weapons to the peasant unions that sprang up and within a short time the countryside was in flames. Landowners and their families were killed or driven off, their haciendas burned and their lands taken by those who worked them. The MNR government tried to curb this movement of peasant revolt, but in vain. By the time the Agrarian Reform Decree was introduced in August 1953, the peasants had already broken the age-old power of the landowners.
The peasantry made up over 70% of the economically active population of Bolivia and had for centuries lived under the heel of the landlords. Bolivia’s land ownership was among the most unequal in the world and provided the basis for a system of labour relations bearing all the marks of feudalism. The revolution did not just change the pattern of landownership, but destroyed a whole society:
To appreciate the meaning of feudalism, we must look beyond social institutions to the workaday behaviour of individuals. Where peasants used to have to work without pay at least three days a week (and sometimes as much as five), they now have no such obligation. They are also relieved of the need to provide eggs, firewood, cheese and other goods for the landlord, and to work periodically at menial tasks in and around the manor house. They are allowed to go to school, to carry arms, to own property, to vote – in short, they have ‘become’ human beings, whereas they were previously treated as part of realty, to be bought, sold, rented or leased as appurtenances to an estate. [17]
The peasantry were the main beneficiaries of the revolution. The crucial question for the future was to whom would they give their allegiance, who would win their support?
Now we must turn to consider the question of why, in the course of the Revolution, the POR failed to become the leadership of the working class and consequently failed in its objective of leading the working class to power and establishing a workers’ state. How far were the mistakes and weaknesses of the POR itself responsible?
Certainly there were organisational and political weaknesses and Lora himself has identified many of them. While the party grew in strength and influence during the Sexenio (1946–52), this, he said,
put in relief our organisational weaknesses. Internally, there continued to be applied the norms learned in the reading club, or in the best cases, in a propaganda circle ... A chasm yawned between the goals of the party and its primitive work methods. This was a typical case of growing pains. Exceptionally favourable circumstances had placed us at the head of the masses ... We were converted into a powerful party, but in spite of all this organisationally we had many of the characteristics of a circle of friends.
The POR did not make the necessary and vital transition from the activities of the Marxist study circle to mass agitation. The party’s increasing ‘penetration of the masses was not accompanied by the formation of cells in factories or in the streets, and their labour was confined to the propagation of revolutionary principles ... the extreme weakness of the party was expressed in its rudimentary organization’. [18]
Was this failure on the part of the POR a subjective failure whereby the revolutionary party let down the working class? Or was it a failure produced by objective conditions? [19] While the ‘programmatic’ and purely propagandist tendencies of ‘Orthodox Trotskyism’ were strongly working in favour of the first alternative, objective conditions were important too. Working class consciousness in Bolivia, for all its militancy and combativeness, did not in the course of the Revolution, rise above trade union consciousness. The most advanced workers who led the class in struggle were revolutionary syndicalists. They looked to the trade unions to achieve their ends and did not recognise the need for a revolutionary party in the Leninist sense at all. As they were recruited into the POR, they brought these politics with them and this vitiated against turning the party into a combat organisation. There was no need for it: the trade unions would do the fighting while the party provided the programme. Certainly the Thesis of Pulcayo is an example of this process at work. When confronted with accusations of anarcho-syndicalism with regard to the Thesis, Lora replied to the effect that this was the only possible way to proceed if the party was to have a role. There is no real reason for doubting this. Lora completely rejected syndicalism in theory, but working class consciousness was such that the party inevitably adapted itself to syndicalism in practice.
The most damaging consequence of this was political rather than organisational: the party’s reliance upon Juan Lechin. For a considerable time, Lechin made overtures to the POR: according to Lora, he ‘did not hide his sympathies for the POR and he even attended training courses given by POR militants’. The party welcomed him with open arms, first of all because ‘they saw him as someone who was prepared to become a revolutionary leader’ and secondly because ‘they thought that he would help to carry Trotskyist ideas to the unions’. Even after he entered the MNR government and became a member of the MNR Executive, they continued for some time to have the perspective that the course of development of the struggle would inevitably force him to break with the MNR and drive him in a revolutionary direction. Lechin, Lora writes, ‘was seen as incarnating the radicalism of the masses’. It was only later that he ‘utilised typical bureaucratic measures ... setting up a great apparatus which distorted the will of rank and file trade unionists’. [20] The party’s faith in Lechin left it unprepared for his political evolution and it paid the price when he turned on it. There are considerable grounds for criticising the POR here. They neglected the building of the revolutionary party and instead trusted Lechin to do it for them. Their main political role was supporting him.
This brings us to what seems to be the decisive factor that goes most of the way towards explaining why the working class was not able to take power. The POR’s perspectives derived, as we have seen, from Trotsky’s theory of Permanent Revolution. From this they concluded that the Bolivian petty bourgeoisie would, in a revolutionary situation, align itself with ‘the rosea’. While the MNR might occupy the leadership in the struggle for a while, it was incapable, because of its class composition, of carrying it through to its bourgeois-democratic conclusions. Once this was demonstrated in practice, then the POR would be able to win the leadership of the working class, brush the MNR aside and carry the struggle through to socialism.
Unfortunately, the petty bourgeoisie did not abide by Trotsky’s theory. However reluctantly, and only under immense working class pressure, the MNR did preside over a bourgeois-democratic revolution that swept away the old ruling class, liberated and enfranchised the peasantry, and won considerable benefits for the working class. If anything, the trade union consciousness of the working class was strengthened by nationalisation and the ‘control obrero’. Ironically, while the POR confidently expected the failure of the MNR government to satisfy popular demands to force the COB to split with it, the very success of the MNR government was, in fact, to split the POR. First of all in 1954, a faction that included a good number of the party’s leading grade unionists, actually defected to the MNR left, and then, as we have seen, the party proceeded to split over its attitude towards the MNR.
If the MNR government had set its face against nationalisation of the mines and land reforms, then there is every likelihood that in the ensuing struggle the working class would have seized power itself. They were the dominant force in Bolivia and their victory in an armed conflict with the MNR would have been certain. Instead of the working class remaining content to take control of its own areas of immediate concern, the mines and the factories, it might have gone on and completed the smashing of the state, replacing dual power with workers’ power. This is the essence of the distinction between trade union consciousness and revolutionary consciousness. The miners were satisfied with taking control of the mines and trusted their unions to defend this gain. They had too much confidence in their unions. They did not accept the need to extend their control over the whole of Bolivian society and consequently did not see the need for a revolutionary party.
Both the strengths and weaknesses of the miners’ consciousness are brought out in a marvellous book by June Nash, We Eat The Mines And The Mines Eat Us. [21] Here she explains the great reserves of strength and militancy that the mining communities have, giving great attention to their distinctive folk culture, rooted in the pre-colonial past. This she argues, has given them the ability to withstands massive repression and still continue resisting. At the same time, however, this culture must be recognised as having weaknesses, because while it did provide the basis for taking control of the mines, it did not provide a basis for generalisation, for taking control of the whole of society. When the MNR government agreed to nationalisation and control obrero, they reinforced this consciousness and POR efforts to go beyond it failed.
Certainly fear of the working class taking power was the crucial factor that the MNR leadership felt made it necessary for them to acquiesce in the revolutionary changes that followed April 1952. Similarly, the US government was persuaded that the only alternatives to the MNR were the Trotskyists and Communists.
In this sense, the POR failure can best be seen as a consequence of what Tony Cliff has called Deflected Permanent Revolution. The Bolivian petty bourgeoisie was able to play a role unforeseen by Trotsky. It possessed an autonomy that he had not thought possible. On the one hand the weakness of the capitalist class, especially after 1929, and on the other the trade union consciousness of the working class, enabled the petty bourgeoisie to play an independent role that confounded the POR’s expectations. The party broke up in the process of trying to come to terms with this. [22]
 
Defeat
Dual power is never a stable condition. Inevitably it resolves itself in the triumph of one side of the duality over the other. In 1952–53, the Bolivian working class had power in its hands; the country was controlled by armed workers’ militia. Rather than taking that power for itself, the leadership of the working class, the COB, decided to share it with the MNR, and in the process allowed themselves to be incorporated into the state. The gains for the working class were enormous, but as events were to show, they were not in the long run compatible with the continued existence of a capitalist state in Bolivia. Initially, the MNR leadership had to give ground and make concessions, but the intention was always at the earliest opportunity to break the working class and restore it to its proper place in society. The harsh fact was that the extent of working class power in Bolivia obstructed the process of capital accumulation, and while this could be tolerated for a while, it could not be tolerated indefinitely.
The attack on working class power began in 1956 after Hernan Siles Zuazo was elected President. He introduced a stabilization Plan drawn up by an American, George Jackson Eder that was designed to solve the country’s economic problems at the expense of the working class. As Eder candidly admitted afterwards, his Plan ‘meant the repudiation, at least tacitly, of virtually everything that the Revolutionary Government had done over the previous four years’. [23] This would only be possible if the unions were defeated.
While the unions remained on the defensive, trying to hold on to the gains they had made, the MNR went on the attack. Siles had three prongs to his strategy: to divide the unions, favouring some and singling out others, notably the miners; to rally the peasant to the government and mobilize the peasant militia against the labour movement; and most crucially to restore the Bolivian army. The strategy met with some success. The unions were successfully divided so that when the COB called a general strike against the Plan on 1 July 1957 it failed to get the support of a number of unions representing factory, transport and oil workers. Indeed, soon after, in November, the COB actually voted to accept the Plan. Later when miners struck at Oruro in March 1959 Siles brought lorries full of armed peasants into the city to overawe them. But these measures only worked for a while. The impact of Eder’s Plan was such that resistance to it began to spread. Even those unions that had initially supported the Plan were forced to oppose its consequences. In the factory workers’ federation a rank and file revolt threw out a leadership that was too slow to adapt to this. Serious fighting broke out in the countryside between peasant unions that supported Siles and those opposed to him. In these circumstances, the MNR government became increasingly dependent on the third prong of its strategy, the army.
Alongside of this attempt to break the power of the unions, the MNR government had another, potentially, even more damaging strategy. This involved a shift in the economic basis of the country as dramatic as had occurred with the rise of the tin mines, ‘a shift from the altiplano and tin to the east and agriculture and hopefully oil’. This would turn the miners into ‘an economic anachronism’ and break their hold on to the economy once and for all. [24] Steven Volk has provided the best account of this shift:
Although most of Bolivian history has been concentrated on the relatively narrow altiplano, the eastern lowlands constitute 70 per cent of the national territory. And while mining generally occurs in the highlands, the eastern regions have abundant reserves of oil, natural gas, and wood, and present optimal conditions for the cultivation of rice, sugar, cotton and the raising of cattle.
He argues that the MNR government, together with the United States, deliberately began the development of this region, not just to undermine the miners but also to foster a new bourgeois class. He continues
The early steps of creating an economic infra-structure in the region were finished by 1961. These included various projects designed to link the eastern region to the rest of the nation: completion of the Cochabamba–Santa Cruz highway with a $50 million loan from Eximbank (1953–54): construction of feeder roads and bridges on this highway with $33.7m million in US loans (1954–59); the Santa Cruz–Yacuiba, Argentina railroad financed by Argentina (begun in 1955); and, the Santa Cruz–Corumba, Brazil, railroad, financed by Brazil (begun in 1957). Other US loans helped construct sugar mills, import mechanized agricultural equipment, explore for oil, support colonization programs, and subsidize sugar, rice and cotton producers.
By 1960, over sixty US assistance projects were operating in Santa Cruz. [25]
By the beginning of the 1970s Santa Cruz had become the dynamo of the Bolivian economy.
While this development of the eastern lowlands was getting under way, the MNR still faced the immediate problem of dealing with the working class. In 1960 Victor Paz was once again elected President with Lechin as his Vice President. The Stabilization Plan continued in effect, but for a while Lechin was able to use his influence to moderate opposition. Lechin hoped to be the MNR Presidential candidate in 1964 and was prepared to sacrifice virtually anything for this. In 1963 Paz introduced a plan to reorganize the tin mines, the Triangular Plan, sponsored by among others both the US and West German governments. This proposed a programme of rationalisation, closing pits, sacking miners and restoring labour discipline: ‘control obrero’ was abolished. The time had come for the settling of accounts between the MNR and the miners. Meanwhile, Lechin had realized that Paz intended to stand for the Presidency again in 1964 and that he was moving to a decisive break with the left. In January 1964, the MNR left split away to form the Parlido Revolucionario de la Izquierda Nacionalista (PRIN). Co-government was at an end.
There was massive resistance in the mines and this provided the rallying point for growing opposition to the MNR. By October 1964 the struggle had reached such proportions that the government looked in danger of being overthrown by a new working class uprising. On 3 November 1964 the army intervened in order to head off the developing crisis, and installed General Rene Barrientos in power. The coup was welcomed by Lechin’s PRIN, by the Bolivian CP (formed in 1950 as a breakaway from the PIR), and even by some Trotskyists who saw it as a victory for the working class. Indeed, Barrientos did claim that his intention was to restore the gains of 1952. Yet in May–June 1965 the trade unions were banned, massive wage cuts imposed and troops occupied the mines with hundreds of miners killed. Barrientos was to attempt a ‘Brazilian’ solution to Bolivia’s crisis. [26]
The defeat of the Bolivian working class flowed directly from the lure to seize power in 1952. Instead of smashing the state when they had the opportunity, the union leaders attached themselves to it, relying on union muscle to extract concessions. Clearly it was only a matter of time before the MNR leadership would begin trying to claw back the concessions it had made. When they did the miners resisted heroically: between 1952 and 1967 there were no less than 139 miners’ strikes, 16 of them national strikes involving the whole of the FSTMB membership. But they were defensive struggles and all the time the MNR government was strengthening its position. Rather than moving to overthrow it before it became too strong, the union leaders continued their collaboration, trying to win concessions and favours. Once the army was re-established with American help, it was only a matter of time before a final move was made to smash the unions and wrest back the gains of 1952. When June Nash was discussing the union leadership’s collaboration with MNR governments in this period with a group of rank and file miners in 1979, one of them said to her: ‘This kind of petty bourgeois politics broke the skull of the working class’. [27]

Notes
1. In his Revolutionary Marxism Today, London 1979, Ernest Mandel does not so much as mention the 1952 Bolivian Revolution, while devoting considerable attention to Cuba. Similarly, Pierre Frank in his The Fourth International, London 1979, does not mention either the Bolivian Revolution or Guillermo Lora, one of the most important Trotskyist theoreticians and activists in the world today.
2. S. Klein, Parties and Political Change in Bolivia, Cambridge 1969, p. 153.
3. S. Volk, Class, Union, Party: The Development of a Revolutionary Union Movement in Bolivia, 1905–52, pt. 1, Science and Society 39, Spring 1975, p. 40.
4. G. Lora, A History of the Bolivian Labour Movement, Cambridge 1977, p. 180.
5. C. Hodges, The Latin American Revolution, New York 1974, p. 29.
6. S. Volk, Tin and Imperialism, NACLAS Latin America and Empire Report 8, 2, February 1974, p. 17.
7. Lora, op. cit., pp. 241–242.
8. H.J. Spalding, Organized Labor in Latin America, New York 1977, p. 215.
9. The Thesis is printed in NACLAS Latin America and Empire Report 8, 2, February 1974, pp. 19–23.
10. Lora, op. cit., p. 246.
11. G. Lora, The Great Decade of Struggle, Fourth International, May–June 1952, pp. 89–90; July–August 1952, p. 128.
12. Regis Debray, Che’s Guerilla War, London 1975, p. 344.
13. J.M. Malloy, Bolivia: The Uncompleted Revolution, Pittsburgh 1970, p. 157.
14. Lora, History ..., p. 283.
15. J. Alexander, Trotskyism in Latin America, Stanford 1973, p. 137.
16. J. Kelley and H.S. Klein, Revolution and the Rebirth of Inequality, Berkeley 1981, p. 123.
17. Heath, Revolution and Stability in Bolivia, Current History, December 1965, p. 335
18. Alexander, op. cit., p. 125.
19. The ‘crisis of leadership’ formulation has always seemed to tend towards a version of vulgar materialism. Society is divided into two parts and then one part is used to explain the development of the other. The question of revolutionary leadership cannot be separated from the development of the working class in this way. As Marx put it, who is to educate the educator.
20. Lora, op. cit., pp. 242, 243, 300.
21. June Nash, We Eat The Mines and The Mines Eat Us, New York 1979.
22. Tony Cliff, Permanent Revolution, International Socialism (first series) 61.
23. G.J. Eder, The Bolivian Economy 1952-1965, New York 1966, p. 87.
24. J.M. Malloy, Bolivia’s MNR, New York 1971, p. 45.
25. S.S. Volk, Bolivia: The War Goes On, NACLAS Latin America and Empire Report 8, 2 February 1974, pp. 4–6.
26. For discussion of this see J.M. Malloy, Authoritarianism and Corporatism: The Case of Bolivia, and from James M. Malloy Authoritarianism and Corporatism in Latin America (Pittsburgh 1977); and for a recent account of the fate of these efforts see Latin America Bureau, Bolivia: Coup D’Etat, London 1980.
27. June Nash, Workers Participation in the Nationalized Mines of Bolivia 1952–1972, from David Brownman et al., Peasants, Primitives and Proletarians, The Hague 1981, p. 317.






Tom Sito
Drawing the Line: The Untold Story of the Animation Unions from Bosko to Bart Simpson
University of Kentucky Press, 2006, £16.50
On 27 May 1941 one of Walt Disney’s top animators, Art Babbitt,
the creator of Goofy, was escorted from the studio premises by
company guards, sacked for his union activities. The next day nearly
400 animators, members of the Screen Cartoonists’ Guild, walked out
on strike. The dispute was extremely bitter. On one occasion Art
Babbitt and Walt Disney had to be pulled off each other after a
picket line confrontation. Pickets carried placards showing Pluto
with the slogan ‘I’d rather be a dog than a scab’. Every
Wednesday the animators at the nearby Warners studio, who had won
union recognition after a six-day lockout earlier that year, marched
to the Disney picket line to show their solidarity. Led by Chuck
Jones, the creator of Roadrunner (beep! beep!), they marched
dressed as French revolutionaries, carrying a banner that read
‘Liberté, fraternité, closed-shoppité’.
Eventually Disney was forced to surrender, and the strikers
returned to work triumphant on 21 September. Pay was more than
doubled. Although Disney was reconciled to recognising the union, he
was never to forgive the strike leaders. Even after Disney was long
dead, when Art Babbitt was invited to lecture at the California
Institute of the Arts in 1974, the Disney Corporation threatened to
withdraw all its funding if the invitation was not withdrawn.
While the Disney strike effectively completed the unionisation of
American animation, it was not the first serious dispute in the
industry. In May 1937 animators at the Fleischer Studio in New York
(they produced the Betty Boop and Popeye cartoons)
had walked out on strike. This was also a bitter conflict. On a
number of occasions the strikers occupied the foyer of the Paramount
cinema in Times Square singing ‘I’m Popeye the union man’. The
picket line was regularly reinforced by New York dockers. Eventually,
in September, the company surrendered, conceding union recognition, a
20 percent pay rise, a shorter working week, sick pay and paid
holidays. Both the Fleischer and the Disney strikes were part of the
great labour revolt that swept American industry in the late 1930s
into the 1940s. The unions were a power in the land.
In his marvellous book, Drawing the Line, Tom Sito tells
the story of the struggle to unionise American animation. Both union
man and animator, Sito recounts his own first uneasy encounter with
trade unionism in the 1970s. When starting work as an animator, he
had swallowed the line that if you had talent you did not need a
union. As he puts it, ‘It wasn’t until after years of being
cheated, laid off, and being assured that I was part of a “family”,
then cheated and laid off some more, that I came to understand what
my union was trying to do for me.’ Now he has written a history of
the animation unions and, in the process, has uncovered a ‘hidden
history, a people’s history of animation’. In fact the book is
more than that. It also provides a witty, passionate, radical
insider’s view of the American film industry that is indispensable
reading for anyone interested in the cinema.
After chronicling the heroic struggles of the 1930s and 1940s (the
anti-capitalist sentiment of the time is demonstrated, according to
Sito, by the success of the song Don’t Tell My Mother I Work on
Wall Street, She Thinks I Play the Piano in a Whorehouse), he
explores the grimmer years of McCarthyism and the Hollywood
blacklist. Even the man who wrote the song Somewhere Over the
Rainbow for The Wizard of Oz, Yip Harburg, was
blacklisted, an episode, as Sito realises, that is rich in symbolism.
With solidarity banned by the Taft-Hartley Act and the unions on the
defensive, the 28-week 1947 Terrytoons lockout was to end in a
crushing defeat.
Sito examines the impact of television on the industry and the
problem that ‘runaway’ production posed by the end of the 1970s.
Studios were exporting work and the unions attempted to stop the
flight of animation jobs. In the Runaway Strike of 1979, they caught
the studios unprepared and won concessions. In 1982 the studios
struck back and inflicted a crushing defeat. Union membership fell
from over 2,000 to 866. The export of work continued. At the time of
the Tiananmen Square massacre in 1989, Disney was having work on The
Little Mermaid completed in Communist China. Cheap labour
trumped anti-Communism every time.
Sito laments, in particular, the failure of the animation unions
to win residuals (payments for repeat showings, for example on TV).
The Screen Actors Guild had won residuals for its members (after
strike action led and sold out by Ronald Reagan) in 1960, but the
animation unions had never taken the issue seriously enough. The
result is, as Sito points out, that all those whose voices are used
on Beauty and the Beast, including backing singers, receive
substantial payments from the huge profits the film continues to
generate. But the men and women who actually drew the cartoon only
received their salaries and bonuses.
Sito identifies the animators’ perception of themselves as
artists as one of the big obstacles to union consciousness. Just as
when he first started work, young animators believe that if you have
talent you don’t need a union. This is why on The Simpsons,
while every other aspect of production was unionised, the 400
animators did not get a union agreement until 2004, after the cartoon
had been in production for 15 years. Young animators rejected the
union out of loyalty to ‘their hip studio director with his earring
and Save the Whale T-shirt’ and did not see the ‘old robber
barons pulling the strings’, the robber baron in this particular
instance being Rupert Murdoch.
The ‘computer generated imagery’ (CGI) revolution poses new
opportunities and dangers for the animation unions. Sito himself has
been involved in responding to these. Is CGI live action special
effects or animation? Sito has no doubts himself. As he puts it, ‘The
animation labour unions have to grow and diversify or die.’
 




Alastair Campbell
The Blair Years: Extracts from Alastair Campbell Diaries
Hutchinson, 2007, £25
Soon after he had accompanied Tony Blair on his famous journey across the world to Hayman Island to pledge allegiance to Rupert Murdoch’s business interests, Alastair Campbell had a meeting with his former mentor, Neil Kinnock. It was towards the end of July 1995 and Campbell had “heard whispers” that Kinnock “was a bit disaffected with TB”. The former Labour leader began with heavy sarcasm (“a joke or three about the Oratory”) before giving way to an explosion of rage. It is worth quoting Kinnock’s diatribe (as reported by Campbell, of course) at length:
“‘Oh Margaret Thatcher, not too bad you know, not such a bad person, quite radical, and of course you had to admire her determination and her leadership – that’s what the fucking leader says.’ ‘Now, now’, I said, trying to calm things ... ‘Don’t “now, now” me. I’ll fucking tell him – too radical my arse. That woman fucking killed people ... He’s sold out before he’s even got there.’ ‘Sold out what?’ ‘Everything ... tax, health, education, unions, full employment, race, immigration, everything, he’s totally sold out. And for what? What are we FOR? It won’t matter if we win, the bankers and the stockbrokers have got us already by the fucking balls, laughing their heads off’.”
What Kinnock found particularly objectionable was Blair’s visit to Murdoch, flying “halfway round the world to grease him up”. “We gave him absolutely nothing,” Campbell insisted. “You will,” Kinnock replied.
Of course, Kinnock soon calmed down and even conceded that “his ‘sell-out’ analysis would have carried more conviction if he hadn’t sold out once or twice himself”. Indeed, Campbell told him that New Labour was “your creation”.
What is interesting is that Kinnock’s critique was absolutely spot on – with one important exception. He could not possibly have imagined that Blair, ably assisted by Campbell, and with Kinnock’s own acquiescence, would go on to kill considerably more people than Thatcher.
Who is Alastair Campbell? His first claim to fame came on 9 May 1980 when the Sun carried a story celebrating his exploits as a sex worker. The young Campbell was featured as a British gigolo, having sex with middle aged women in return for money and presents. Campbell has, of course, subsequently claimed that he had been “sexed up”, but at least for this observer of his career, he will always be a “sex worker gone bad”. He went on to write pornography for Forum magazine before abandoning all standards to become a tabloid journalist.
Although Campbell has been described as the most influential journalist there has ever been in British politics, this is really misleading – conflating journalism with propaganda. He was never concerned with informing his readers, with “speaking truth to power”. Instead Campbell’s defining characteristic was the need to be of service to powerful men. He started with Robert Maxwell, the then proprietor of the Daily Mirror, who was to go on to become the biggest thief in British history. His loyalty to the appalling Maxwell was absolute and uncompromising.
From Maxwell he went on to become part of Neil Kinnock’s circle, helping orchestrate his assault on the Labour left and on Militant. And finally he became Tony Blair’s press secretary in September 1994. Campbell was to be one of the most important architects of the New Labour project, sometimes described as the real deputy prime minister.
How to account for his influence? First there is the collapse of the Labour Party, its effective transformation into a docile vehicle for whatever the leadership want. This process was accomplished at every level of the party, up to and including the cabinet. Under Blair his “court” became decisive and Campbell was the ultimate courtier, prepared to do his master’s bidding, no matter how unsavoury it might be. The diaries might actually be of some use to future historians in establishing the culture of Blair’s court, its “laddism” and casual sexism, for example.
The other factor explaining Campbell’s importance is the need that New Labour had, and still has, to disguise its policies from the Labour Party’s supporters. A government uncompromisingly committed to neoliberalism, to furthering the interests of capital, had been elected as a backlash against these very same policies. New Labour was wholeheartedly committed to a pro-business agenda, carrying forward the same policies that had brought the Tories down. This had to be hidden, disguised, “spun” as something else. It involved an unprecedented degree of political dishonesty that was to be masterminded, in the main, by Campbell. This was to culminate with the Iraq war where the attempt was made to disguise a commitment to invade as a search for peace, and a non-existent Iraqi threat as an imminent danger.
What of the diary extracts themselves? Given Campbell’s track record, one cannot believe anything he writes. This, one feels, is a man who would lie to himself as easily as to other people. And indeed the book is absolutely self-serving, put together to make money and salvage reputations. One suspects it is intended to prepare the way for his election as a Labour MP sometime in the near future.
Campbell unwittingly portrays himself as someone who is profoundly insecure and consequently terribly susceptible to flattery. He dutifully records Neil Kinnock telling him he could be “the next Michael Parkinson”, Alan Clark, the reactionary and racist Tory MP (a close friend), telling him he could be the next leader of the Labour Party, Nicholas Soames, another Tory MP, telling him he was a “sex god”, Tony Blair telling him what “a big person” he was and even George Bush promising to “kiss his arse”.
Most embarrassingly, there is the supposed attraction that he and Princess Diana had for each other. He writes of how her eyes “went beyond radiance ... I’m lost in her beauty”, of her “magical quality ... we discovered we had a shared loathing of cats.” One dreads to think what his pornography was like. And most obscenely, he records Tony Blair suggesting that he should become his personal representative in occupied Iraq, “be his person totally gripping it ... I said I was not keen, but he clearly was.”
There are some supposed revelations in the book. For example, Martin Bell’s independent candidature against Neil Hamilton at Tatton in 1997 turns out to have been a New Labour stunt. It was all Campbell’s brainchild and he actually describes it as “the Hamilton scam”. Interestingly, the media has not picked up on Campbell’s portrayal of Bell as a New Labour stooge. More important, however, is what has been excised from his account. For example, one would conclude that Alex Ferguson, the Manchester United manager, had more influence on the government than Rupert Murdoch. British support for Clinton’s indefensible attack on Sudan in August 1998, destroying the al-Shifa pharmaceutical factory, goes completely unremarked. Most astonishingly, he has nothing to say about his key role in New Labour’s “dirty tricks”, in the media manipulation that was his actual job. And the bitter conflict between Tony Blair and Gordon Brown has been altogether removed from the record.
The book does usefully highlight the contrast in New Labour’s attitude towards the trade unions on the one hand and the union buster Rupert Murdoch on the other. On 1 May 1995 the veteran union leader Rodney Bickerstaffe warned Campbell that Blair would need the unions once in power: “I reported back to TB who said they can just fuck off.” Indeed, Campbell notes the difficulty Blair had disguising his “contempt” for the unions. Murdoch, however, was treated with respect, indeed deference. And, of course, Murdoch’s influence on New Labour policy was to far exceed that of the TUC. Under Tony Blair, Britain was to become a paradise for big business and the super-rich.
Of most interest, inevitably, is Campbell’s sanitised account of the Iraq war. As early as 23 July 2002 he has Blair and his advisers acknowledging that “the US had pretty much made up their minds” about invading Iraq. Blair “was pretty clear that we had to be with the Americans”. When the foreign secretary, Jack Straw, “raised the prospect of not going in with the US, TB said that would be the biggest shift in foreign policy in 50 years”. Britain would stand by the Americans no matter what. There was no problem with regime change because, according to Blair, that was the “route to dealing with” weapons of mass destruction.
What followed was an increasingly desperate attempt to rally support for the war. Everything was subordinated to it. Guantanamo, for example, was not seen as a problem itself, but as a presentational problem for New Labour. (“Guantanamo was running big and bad.”) Even the American warning that two British detainees might face execution was seen from the point of view of the problems it would cause the government rather than the problems it would cause the victims.
But despite all the difficulties there were heady moments. As Jack Straw put it, Tony Blair was “effectively vice-president of the free world”. There were, it seems, no delusions that these men were not capable of embracing. Campbell’s role, of course, was to “sex up” the intelligence on Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction in order to provide justification for an illegal war of aggression. The highlight of his career saw him help manufacture a war that has cost over half a million people their lives and that will certainly cost the lives of many more people before it is over. Through all this the only person he really feels sorry for is himself.
What of the great 15 February 2003 anti-war demonstration? It inevitably gets short shrift. He complains of the “wall to wall, uncritical coverage of the march and the usual over the top claims about its size”, although he does admit it “was very big”. That evening, after he had done his 18-mile run and was on his way home, he “bumped into no end of people coming back from the march, placards under arms, faces full of self-righteousness” and “occasional loathing when they spotted me”. What is remarkable, of course, is how little resonance the biggest protest movement in British history had in New Labour. This, in itself, is a tribute to the success that Blair and Co. have had in transforming the Labour Party, severing its links with the labour movement and consolidating its ties with big business.
Has Campbell any regrets about the Iraq war and its catastrophic consequences? Absolutely not. His only concern is very New Labour: maximising the blood money this discreditable volume will earn him. By some accounts it is working out at something like £2 for every Iraqi he has helped to kill.
 




David Blunkett
The Blunkett Tapes
Bloomsbury, 2006, £25
With the publication of his supposed ‘diaries’, David Blunkett
has achieved an impressive hat-trick: the former heads of the
Metropolitan Police, the Prison Service and the Armed Forces have all
publicly called him a liar. This is a remarkable achievement for any
former home secretary, let alone one as right wing as Blunkett.
Indeed nothing like it has ever happened before. While at one level
this obviously reflects on Blunkett’s honesty, or rather lack of
it, more important is what it tells us about the culture of New
Labour and the state of the Blairite project. First though, what
about Blunkett?
Of particular interest in this regard is the tale that Martin
Narey, the former Director-General of the Prison Service, had to
tell. He was incensed by Blunkett’s self-aggrandising account of
his performance during the Lincoln prison riot of October 2002. In
his ‘diaries’ Blunkett relates how he had to instruct Narey to
stop ‘dithering’ and if necessary to call in the army to retake
the prison. He was worried that the rioting might spread throughout
the prison system, that ‘we were within a whisker of having on our
hands a total and utter catastrophe’. Blunkett emphasises that on
this occasion he made a real difference, that his intervention staved
off disaster. He acted decisively to strengthen ‘the arm of those
who were prepared to act’ and made it clear that he was ‘prepared
to override those who were dithering’. He modestly concludes that
his performance on this occasion proved that he was one of the ‘best’
of Tony Blair’s ministers and that he had prevented a ‘firestorm’
engulfing the prisons. [1]
Narey tells a somewhat different story. He observes that
Blunkett’s diary entry ‘was clearly not written at the time
because he refers to me as being in overall charge of corrections
(prisons and probation), a position not invented at the time of the
riot and one I was not to take up until 2003’. He, on the other
hand, was so disturbed by Blunkett’s behaviour that he did keep
contemporaneous notes. According to these, a hysterical Blunkett
phoned Narey to demand that the prison be retaken, no matter what the
consequences:
‘He directed me, without delay, to order staff back
into the prison. I told him that we did not, at that time, have
enough in the prison to contemplate such a move, but that many more
staff were on their way from other prisons. I insisted, however, that
although I was determined to take the prison back as quickly as
possible, I could not, and would not, risk staff or prisoners’
lives in attempting to do so. He shrieked at me that he didn’t care
about lives, and told me to call in the army and “machine-gun”
the prisoners. He then ordered me to take the prison back
immediately. I refused. One of the prison governors who overheard the
exchanges remarked incredulously, “Did he really say he didn’t
care about lives?”’ [2]
This episode reveals a great deal about New Labour and the state
of the Labour Party. Blunkett was actually urging a prison massacre,
something that shocked his officials, in order, it seems clear, to
protect his political career. He feared that the rioting would spread
to other prisons and that his carefully constructed image as a
hardline reactionary would be destroyed. If this happened, his
popularity with the right wing press would be at an end and his
usefulness to Tony Blair would be over.
It is easy to forget the extent to which it is historically
unprecedented for a Labour Home Secretary to find himself so far to
the right of his prison officials, but then this government has
produced many such surprises. It is a new development for a man of
Blunkett’s character and reactionary opinions to be a senior figure
in the Labour Party, for such a man, before his (first) resignation
in December 2004, to be seriously considered as Blair’s possible
successor, and indeed for him to remain a Labour MP at all. Once upon
a time someone like Blunkett would have inevitably defected to the
Conservatives. Clearly the Labour Party is not what it used to be. It
would once have been inconceivable that a member of a Catholic right
wing secret society (Ruth Kelly) could have become Secretary of State
for Education or that the husband of a health minister (Tessa Jowell)
could be regarded as an unfriendly witness by the Italian police in a
case involving the illegal sale of contaminated blood products. [3]
Today anything is possible with New Labour. One can only look
forward, at the time of writing, to Blair becoming the first prime
minister ever to be interviewed by the police over the sale of
peerages! All this is really unprecedented, but we have got used to
it. It is testimony to how far the Blairites have pulled the Labour
Party to the right, the extent to which they have corrupted it and
left it rotten to the core.
How has this sorry state of affairs come about? How is it that
David Blunkett, once a young radical Labour councillor in Sheffield,
later the leader of the so-called ‘Socialist Republic of South
Yorkshire’, has ended up a discredited reactionary, a man regarded
as a serious threat to civil liberties, one of the most right wing
members of the New Labour government?
Blunkett, as is well-known, had a very hard childhood. After the
death of his father in a horrendous industrial accident [4] the
family was poverty-stricken and, of course, Blunkett was blind. He
had enormous difficulties to overcome, but nevertheless succeeded,
against considerable odds, in securing a university education and
eventually becoming a Labour councillor, positioning himself on the
left of the party. As Blunkett wrote in his autobiography, On A
Clear Day:
‘I had already learned sufficient history to appreciate
that through the ages there has been a constant struggle not only
between right and wrong, but also between those with power and wealth
and those with neither.’ [5]
He marched against the Springboks tour and was on the massive
demonstration against the Industrial Relations Act in 1972. He made
his name, however, as a champion of subsidised public transport. By
1980 he was the leader of Sheffield Council. According to his
biographer, Stephen Pollard, Blunkett always took care to appear more
left wing than he really was. He was, at this time, ‘riding the
left horse’ as a career strategy. He was ‘a master at playing the
left gallery’. Pollard quotes one of Blunkett’s friends on this
left pose:
‘Take the red flag flying over Sheffield; it was all
gesture politics. It was all to make the left think that he was one
of them. But he did not really believe in it. What he really wanted
was office for himself and for the Labour Party.’ [6]
He was far from alone in this adoption of a left pose at this
point in time. The 1980s saw the rise of Bennism inside the Labour
Party, and to secure a parliamentary seat, Blunkett had to establish
his Bennite credentials. Given that his leftism was always
exaggerated, it is worth making the point that at this time even the
right of the Labour Party would have recoiled in horror from the
politics of Blairism, from what would have been seen then as a kind
of ultra-Thatcherism.
What began Blunkett’s shift to the right was apparently
Thatcher’s defeat of the municipal left over rate capping and the
defeat of the miners’ strike in 1985. This began his trajectory
from Tony Benn to Tony Blair via Neil Kinnock. What is interesting,
of course, is that the miners’ strike was one of those dramatic
demonstrations of the ‘constant struggle between those with wealth
and power and those with neither’. The conclusions Blunkett drew
from this particular episode in the struggle led to him eventually
changing sides.
Which brings us, at last, to The Blunkett Tapes – surely
one of the biggest publishing disasters of the decade. The
publishers, Bloomsbury, paid £400,000 for this interminable 850-page
exercise in self-justification and self-pity, for a book that is
really without any redeeming features and that contributes nothing
whatsoever to our political or historical understanding of the times
we live in. Despite a massive publicity blitz on radio, television
and in the press, The Blunkett Tapes sold only 769 copies in
its first week on the shelves, something that will seriously affect
the size of the advances paid to other Labour ministers for their memoirs.
What does Blunkett actually have to say? He is very much concerned
to establish his own cleverness and decisiveness, to condemn ‘human
rights fanatics’, ‘woolly-minded liberals’ and even ‘the
Socialist Workers Party and its hangers-on’ and, of course, to sing
the praises of Tony Blair (‘absolutely superb ... a real world
leader’). Interestingly, he takes every opportunity he can to put
the knife into Roy Hattersley, the former deputy leader of the Labour
Party, who has watched Blunkett effortlessly pass from his left to
his right with ill-disguised distaste. On occasions Blunkett’s
dislike for asylum seekers comes out. His infamous use of the word
‘swamped’ with regard to asylum seekers seems not so much a
cynical playing of the racist card as something he felt quite
genuinely. His resentment at asylum seekers turning up at his
constituency surgeries is almost visceral, and on one occasion they
were actually accompanied by ‘a white woman, a real do-gooder’.
This is all pretty unsavoury.
One problem with Blunkett’s diaries concerns their reliability.
Martin Narey, as we have already seen, effectively exposed his
account of the Lincoln prison riot as fictional, and one suspects
that the same is true for much of the rest of the diaries. His
entries regarding the war in Iraq, for example, do not inspire the
slightest confidence. It seems absolutely clear that the diary has
been rewritten in light of the furore over the failure to find
weapons of mass destruction.
While Blair and Co. never seriously believed that they were going
to find such weapons, they were confident that in the euphoria of
victory such details would be easily forgotten. Blunkett’s diaries
show every sign of being written in the knowledge that this was not
to be, that the failure to find WMD would come to haunt them, and
that some other pretext for the invasion would be necessary. He
writes that it was his belief that the question of WMD was always
secondary because UN Resolution 1441 provided adequate justification
for attacking Iraq. Britain and the United States were merely
enforcing a UN resolution.
These are just not credible as contemporaneous diary entries.
Similarly, his entry explaining away Clare Short’s embarrassing
revelations that the government had been listening in on the UN
Secretary-General Kofi Annan’s phone calls: she must have found the
transcripts on a website. This was clearly made up after the event.
Even with regard to his recent boast that during the war he had urged
the bombing of Al Jazeera, one cannot possibly take his word
for it without other confirmation. He might just be trying to
demonstrate his reactionary credentials to the likes of Rupert Murdoch!
What do ring true, however, are his concerns about the impact of
the anti-war movement. ‘How do you count a march like the one in
London?’ Blunkett asked himself of the great 15 February 2003
anti-war demonstration. ‘This is not going to be an easy time’,
he observed, with some understatement. ‘We have got an uphill
struggle on our hands.’ And when the invasion finally began, he
complained that ‘we are getting demos all over the place’. A year
later he was still writing about ‘the backlash on Iraq’. [7]
It is necessary to put Blunkett’s trajectory from ‘soft’
left to ‘hard’ right in context. Labour MPs, even former
ministers, have often completed such a transformation. It is an
established feature of Labour Party history. Indeed one only has to
think of Ramsay MacDonald, the leader of the party for many years and
twice prime minister, defecting to the Conservatives in 1931. An even
more extreme example is provided by Oswald Mosley, a former Labour
junior minister, establishing the British Union of Fascists in 1932.
What is new today is that under Blair the Labour Party as a whole
has defected to the right, not just its leader or individual MPs.
This reflects the shift in the balance of class forces in Britain
that began under Thatcher and has continued under Blair. Big business
and the rich are so powerful today that Labour ministers actually see
themselves as being there to serve their interests, and indeed aspire
to join their ranks. When the Labour Party was first established,
whatever criticisms one might have of its reformism, it was committed
to fight against the injustices and inequalities in British society.
New Labour, however, has enthusiastically embraced them.
A key figure in the transformation of the Labour Party has been
Rupert Murdoch, not just in helping bring it about, but also in
indicating exactly how far the process has gone. It would have been
absolutely unthinkable before Blair for any senior Labour politician
to openly court a union buster and right wing media boss of the
calibre of Murdoch. Even Kinnock drew the line there. Today it is
regarded in Labour ranks as unexceptional, as routine, as an
inevitable part of the contemporary political process. Indeed Lance
Price, a senior Labour spin doctor, has actually described Murdoch as
a de facto member of the cabinet, as one of its most important
members along with Gordon Brown and John Prescott. [8] Attempts under
the Freedom of Information Act to find out how often Blair and
Murdoch have communicated predictably failed, the reason being, of
course, that they are so regular as to constitute a scandal. And
there is every expectation that when Blair finally retires from
politics he will be rewarded with an extremely lucrative post at the
top of Murdoch’s News International. Some cynics would argue that
he has, in fact, been working for Murdoch for years. What the Murdoch
connection does, however, is personalise New Labour’s intimate
connection with the British capitalist class. It is indicative of the
relationships that Blair and Brown have successfully established with
big business and the rich.
Blunkett himself has benefited from Murdoch’s generosity. He
found the man ‘perfectly decent to deal with – very reasonable’.
One has to remind oneself that this is the same man who in 1986
recruited scab labour, sacked his entire workforce and fought a
year-long lockout to break the print unions, one of the bitterest
industrial battles of the period. Murdoch inflicted tremendous
hardship on thousands of workers and their families, and dealt the
whole labour movement a serious blow. This is of no concern at all to
the New Labour leadership. When Blunkett found himself in serious
trouble, with his political career collapsing around him, he wrote in
his diary, ‘Thank God the Sun is totally with me. At least
one newspaper is trying to tell the truth.’ This verges on the
obscene. And when he finally had to resign from the government for a
second time in November 2005, he immediately went to Wapping for ‘a
pleasant drink’ with Murdoch, who offered him a regular column in
the Sun. [9] He was to be paid £150,000 a year for this. The
man who had first appeared on TV in 1967 to complain about nudity and
who in 1983 walked out of a play in protest against nudity on the
stage apparently has no problem with Page 3.

Notes
1. D. Blunkett, The Blunkett Tapes (London 2006), pp. 404–406.
2. Times, 17 October 2006.
3. For a transcript of the BBC Panorama programme on David
Mills see the BBC website.
4. In his autobiography Blunkett wrote of how when he was 12 his
father had met ‘a dreadful agonising end’ after falling into ‘a
giant vat of boiling water’. He had stayed on working for the Gas
Board after retirement age at their invitation. They used his age to
try and avoid paying compensation. See On A Clear Day (London
2002), p. 43.
5. As above, p. 56.
6. S. Pollard, David Blunkett (London 2005), pp. 104,
105, 127. Blunkett and his suitably right wing biographer
subsequently fell out when Blunkett tried to blame him for his
contemptuous remarks about fellow cabinet members and others. Pollard
is now among those who dismiss Blunkett as an inveterate liar.
7. The Blunkett Tapes, as above, pp. 278, 293, 295,
308, 449, 450, 454, 461, 711.
8. L. Price, Rupert Murdoch is Effectively a Member of Blair’s
Cabinet, Guardian, 1 July 2006.
9. The Blunkett Tapes, as above, pp. 360, 725, 853–854.
 




“The distribution of income in Britain has now become so unequal
that it is beginning to resemble a Third World country”, wrote
Gordon Brown in his 1989 indictment of Thatcherism, Where There Is
Greed. He complained that since 1979 “an extraordinary transfer
of resources, from poor to rich, has taken place”. Indeed, so great
had the level of inequality become that it was “difficult to argue
that there remains even a common interest between the top 1 percent
to whom Mrs Thatcher has given so much, and the rest of the nation”.
And, of course, inequality was even more glaring with regard to the
distribution of wealth. According to Brown, the richest 10 percent of
the population owned more than 50 percent of the wealth, while the
bottom 50 percent of the population owned only 7 percent. Even more
outrageous, under Thatcher “the wealth of the top 1 percent, who
now own 17 percent, had more than doubled”. [1]
Remember, this was written in 1989 and the situation was to get
considerably worse in the run-up to Labour’s 1997 election victory.
Now that he has been chancellor of the exchequer for ten years in
a New Labour government with a large majority, what has Brown done to
remedy the injustices and inequalities of the Thatcher years? Not
only has he done nothing to reverse “the extraordinary transfer of
resources from the poor to the rich” that so outraged him in 1989;
under New Labour the situation has continued to get worse. When New
Labour came to power in 1997 the proportion of the country’s wealth
in the hands of the richest 1 percent had reached 20 percent. By
2004, with Brown as chancellor, it had increased to 24 percent. [2]
According to one commentator, the 600,000 individuals who make up the
richest 1 percent were, on average, £737,000 richer than they had
been under the Conservatives. [3] More
recently, according to the Institute for Fiscal Studies, 2005–6 saw
both relative and absolute poverty increase. The institute reported
that income inequality today is “higher than Labour inherited by a
statistically significant amount”. [4]
Brown is still trumpeted as the Labour Party’s most successful
chancellor ever.
In Where There Is Greed Brown not only condemned increasing
inequality under Thatcher, but also savaged the Conservative policy
of privatisation. He was particularly critical of the dramatic
increases in pay that the top executives of the privatised utilities
awarded themselves. He also censured the erosion of civil liberties
under the Conservatives, complaining that “information on
individuals is now compiled and held on an unprecedented scale” and
that “the right of assembly and the right to protest have been
curtailed in ways that were not contemplated under any other post-war
Conservative administration”. New Labour have, of course, far
surpassed the Tories in their assault on civil liberties – with
Brown’s full support. But back in 1989 he even complained of the
government allowing “the Murdoch empire” to take over the Times.
What was Brown’s answer to all this? “Socialism has always
been about more than equality,” Brown insisted, very deliberately
distancing himself from the Labour right. Indeed, he warned that
hard-won political and social rights were always in danger while they
“existed side by side with huge concentrations of private
unaccountable power”. The way forward was to forge “a strong
economic democracy”. This was his vision of socialism. [5]
How did Gordon Brown, the champion of “a strong economic
democracy”, become the champion of privatisation, of the market, of
the interests of the super-rich, of globalisation, of the whole
neoliberal agenda? The Brown who in 1989 warned of the danger posed
by “huge concentrations of private unaccountable power” went on
to embrace them, court them and govern in their interests. And this
was openly celebrated: in March 2006, for example, Brown proudly
announced the establishment of an International Business Advisory
Council to help ensure that British economic policy remained in the
best interests of global capital. Its members included Lee Scott,
president and chief executive officer (CEO) of WalMart; Lord Browne,
chief executive of BP; Jean Pierre Garnier, CEO of GlaxoSmithKline;
Bill Gates, chairman of Microsoft; Robert Rubin, chairman of
Citigroup; Ratan Tata, chairman of the Tata Group; Sir John Rose, CEO
of Rolls Royce; Sir Terry Leahy, CEO of Tesco; and Meg Whitman, CEO
of eBay. [6] Needless to say, these
people are not friends of the labour movement, either in Britain or
abroad; they are its enemies, extreme examples of those whose huge
wealth Brown had once considered made it difficult to believe that
they still had any “common interest” with the rest of humanity.
Brown’s courtship of Rupert Murdoch, conducted in competition
with Tony Blair, has been even more grotesque. This competition
between the prime minister and chancellor led Murdoch to complain in
a recent interview that whenever he visited Britain he always had to
“have tea” with both men “or they are very suspicious that you
are lining up with the other one”. For Murdoch, the test for Brown
as prime minister will be “how much would he let the private sector
get involved in health and education”. [7]
This courtship of the reactionary, union-busting, tax-dodging
Murdoch, something unprecedented in Labour Party history, tells us
everything we need to know about the politics of New Labour.
This article will examine how Brown got to where he is today. It
will chronicle and attempt to explain his remarkable trajectory from
student radical to left Labour MP to becoming one of the principal
architects of New Labour and, at last, to the enthusiastic embrace of
neoliberalism.
 
Student radical
Brown was born in 1951, the son of a Presbyterian minister. He was
brought up in a middle class household with a strong social
conscience. In 1967 he arrived, aged 16 and with this social
conscience still intact, as a student at Edinburgh University. Here
Brown, along with thousands of others, found himself part of a
student revolt. Although he was certainly influenced by the radical
ideas of the time, Brown never embraced the politics of direct action
and in 1969 he joined the Labour Party. This did not involve any
commitment to Harold Wilson’s Labour government, but rather a
belief that the Labour Party in Scotland could be transformed into a
vehicle for radical change. Brown first came to prominence as a
student politician in 1970 when the university principal, Michael
Swann, categorically denied that the university had investments in
any companies involved in apartheid South Africa. This was a lie of
Blairite proportions. Brown received leaked documentary proof of
this, and a special issue of the student newspaper was produced to
expose the scandal. He went on to get a first class degree and began
a PhD on the history of the Scottish Labour Party.
Brown continued to be involved in student politics and in 1972
campaigned on a “student power” platform for election as rector
of the university. The rectorship was an office elected by students,
usually contested by various notables and celebrities, and, once
elected, the rector only ever played a nominal role. To the horror of
the university authorities, Brown won an overwhelming victory, and
immediately demanded that the university should support the campaign
for increased grants. During his time as rector, he argued for
working class representation on the university court, proposing that
two vacancies be filled by the president of Edinburgh Trades Council
and by the secretary of a tenants’ association. In retrospect,
Brown was to regret this protracted involvement in student politics,
but to his credit he was actively involved in the Chile Solidarity
Campaign, set up in response to the CIA-sponsored military coup that
overthrew the government of Salvadore Allende on 11 September 1973
(“the other 9/11”), and supported the miners during the 1974
strike that brought down the Heath government. [8]
It was in this period of military coups, American defeat in
Vietnam and governments brought down by industrial action that Brown
edited The Red Paper on Scotland, a collection of articles
published in 1975. It was a new leftish celebration of radical
politics, which included contributions from Tom Nairn, John McGrath,
John Foster, Robin Cook and others. Brown’s own contribution
condemned “the gross inequalities which disfigure Scottish life”,
and argued that the times cried out for “a new commitment to
socialist ideals”. He urged “a coherent strategy” of reforms
designed “to cancel the logic of capitalism” and to lead “us
out of one social order into another”. This would involve “a
phased extension of public control under workers’ self-management
and the prioritising of social needs by the communities themselves”.
He called for “a planned economy” and for “workers’ power”,
identifying himself with “Scotland’s socialist pioneers, Hardie,
Smillie, Maxton, Maclean, Gallacher, Wheatley and others” – a
pantheon that included both revolutionary and reformist socialists.
What was needed was “a positive commitment to creating a socialist
society”. [9]
Brown’s student activism denied him a teaching post at Edinburgh
University. Instead he got a post at Glasgow College of Technology in
1976, and in 1980 gave up academic life to work as a producer at
Scottish Television. Brown was elected onto the executive of the
Scottish Labour Party in 1976 and eventually, in 1983, was elected
Labour MP for Dunfermline East in the face of Thatcher’s
post-Falklands general election victory.
 
Labour MP
Brown became a Labour MP as the Thatcher government’s assault on
the labour movement was moving towards a climax with the Great
Miners’ Strike of 1984–5. He confronted this turning point in the
class struggle as a left wing Labour MP, someone who was never to
embrace Bennism, but who nevertheless continued to advocate a
reformism that he believed would raise up the working class, confound
the capitalist enemy and accomplish a peaceful transition to
socialism. In 1983, together with Robin Cook, he published a powerful
collection of articles on poverty and deprivation in Scotland
entitled Scotland: The Real Divide. In his introduction Brown
argued that the “first prerequisite for eradicating poverty is the
redistribution of income and wealth from rich to poor”. In what
reads like an indictment of his later policies as chancellor, Brown insisted:
Taxation should rise progressively with income.
Programmes that merely redistribute poverty from families to single
persons, from the old to the young, from the sick to the healthy, are
not a solution. What is needed is a programme of reform that ends the
current situation where the top 10 percent of the population own 80
percent of the wealth and 30 percent of the income, even after tax.
As Tawney remarked, “What some people call a problem of poverty,
others call the problem of riches.”
Such views would later become anathema. At the time, however, he
was adamant that “the goal would not simply be the minimalist one
of equalising opportunities, a strategy akin to what Tawney described
as ‘the impertinent courtesy of an invitation to unwelcome guests
in the certainty that circumstances would prevent them from accepting
it’.” So much for the cornerstone of New Labour’s claim to be
“progressive” today. Moreover, a crucial point of the package of
reforms that Brown was advocating was that taxation of the rich
should be increased – increased, that is, from the then top rate of
60 percent. [10]
The 1984–5 miners’ strike was the most bitter and hard fought
class struggle in Britain since before the Second World War. It was a
decisive moment when the opportunity to defeat Thatcherism was lost
and the labour movement went down to a historic defeat. [11]
In Scotland, Brown gave the miners his full support throughout the
battle, appearing on picket lines, donating a significant proportion
of his salary and challenging the Thatcher government’s decision to
confiscate the benefits of striking miners’ families. His
commitment to the miners’ cause earned him honorary membership of
the Scottish Miners’ Union. In the aftermath of the strike he
published his biography of the Scottish leader of the Independent
Labour Party (ILP), James Maxton, a labour of love that it had taken
him 20 years to write. Maxton was one of the great spokesmen for
reformist socialism in the period between the two world wars. He
supported workers’ struggles, savagely attacked the capitalist
class and was a constant critic of the compromises and betrayals of
the Labour Party leadership that were to culminate with Ramsay
Macdonald’s defection to the Conservatives in 1931. The collapse of
the Labour government saw Maxton lead the ILP out of the Labour Party
in 1932. He condemned the Labour Party as irredeemably compromised
and no longer a vehicle for socialist change. Any sympathy with
Maxton would be inconceivable for the Gordon Brown of today, but the
Brown of the mid-1980s was different. He produced a sympathetic and
scholarly account that celebrated a tradition of militant reformism,
an account that was still fuelled by anger at the defeat of the miners.
Some commentators have seen the book as marking a turning point
for Brown: he celebrates Maxton’s principled intransigence, but in
the end rejects it because it can only lead to political impotence.
This is to read Brown’s subsequent trajectory into the book in a
way that is not substantiated by the actual text. Certainly Brown
acknowledges contemporary criticisms of Maxton’s “purism”, but
he goes on to reject them. He insists, “Maxton’s journey through
the politics of the twenties and thirties must be viewed in context.”
Just at the moment when the Great Depression “cried out for a
radical political response, the British Labour Party seemed
immobilised, frozen by the enormity of the challenge”. The great
weight of his criticism is of the Labour Party, not of Maxton. There
is, I would argue, no doubt that at this time Brown’s loyalties
still lay with some sort of militant reformism. The book ends with a
strong endorsement of Maxton’s socialist vision. [12]
We have already looked at Brown’s 1989 book, Where There Is
Greed, a book in which he continues to condemn Thatcher and all
her works and argues for a left Keynesian reformism. What was to
transform him into a champion of neoliberalism?
 
Architect of New Labour?
One of the problems with bourgeois political science as it is
practised in British universities is that it focuses on the shadows
cast by the class struggle rather than on the class struggle itself.
From this point of view New Labour is regarded primarily as an
electoral phenomenon, as a necessary step if the Labour Party was to
secure the votes of the Thatcherite middle class and have any chance
of taking power. The problem with this particular view of politics is
that it ignores, indeed helps conceal, the way that power is actually
exercised in capitalist societies, and in particular it renders the
ruling class invisible. The reality is that New Labour was the
product of class struggle or, more to the point, of defeat in the
class struggle. The emergence of New Labour was predicated on the
defeat of the miners’ strike and of the print unions (by Rupert
Murdoch) at Wapping. These defeats registered a historic shift in the
balance of class forces in Britain, and New Labour was a product of
that shift. Whereas previous Labour governments had served as
mediators between the trade unions and the capitalist ruling class,
in the aftermath of defeat this was no longer a viable role. [13]
After Thatcher’s victories the ruling class no longer needed a
party to mediate with the trade unions. If the Labour Party was to
get into government again it needed to make itself acceptable to the
ruling class – it needed to embrace Thatcherism and transform
itself into the party of business, the party of globalisation. This
was to become Brown’s objective in the 1990s.
Defeat in the 1992 general election is often seen as decisive in
transforming Brown from a reformist socialist into a neoliberal. In
reality, it only consolidated developments that were already under
way. The task of making Labour acceptable to big business began under
Neil Kinnock, continued under John Smith and was merely carried
forward to completion by Brown and Blair. Whereas, for Blair, the
embrace of neoliberalism involved no great personal struggle because
he had no previous beliefs to dispose of, for Brown it involved a
deliberate decision to change sides. The effort, one suspects,
damaged his personality. Nevertheless, for Brown, the class struggle
was over and the capitalist class had won, both domestically and
globally. Once he had come to terms with this, he embraced the
neoliberal agenda with all the fervour of the recently converted.
While there is no evidence to show that Brown
was ever an admirer of the Soviet Union, at the very least, the
victory of the United States in the Cold War would have reinforced
this conclusion. And it was to the United States that he turned for
the model of the New Jerusalem that beckoned humanity. It began with
an enthusiasm for Bill Clinton, but has since generalised into a
belief that the United States is the global future. [14]
What seems clear, looking back, is that it was Brown and not Blair
who was the principal architect of New Labour. Blair was more the
salesman. Brown was by far the most substantial of those pushing the
neoliberal agenda within the Labour leadership. George Galloway has
provided an interesting assessment of the calibre of the two men:
Brown was a political titan compared to Blair; as deep as
Blair was shallow, as serious as Blair was slick. Brown versus Blair
was like a contest between Bertrand Russell and Bob Monkhouse (whose
motto, incidentally, could easily be Blair’s: “Once you learn how
to fake the sincerity, the rest is easy”). [15]
This makes Brown’s culpability all the greater.
Nevertheless, when Labour leader John Smith died from a heart
attack in May 1994, Brown found himself outmanoeuvred for the party
leadership by Blair. [16] He regarded
himself as having been betrayed by people he had trusted, something
he has never forgotten or forgiven. His position was still remarkably
strong, however. He extracted from Blair an agreement (the Granita
agreement) that gave him control of economic and social policy in a
future Labour government, together with the promise that Blair would
hand the prime ministership over to him in the not too distant
future. This unprecedented agreement was testimony to the extent to
which Brown was the driving force behind New Labour.
As shadow chancellor, Brown played the decisive role in remaking
the Labour Party as New Labour, “the party of business”. In
speech after speech to business leaders, he insisted that Labour had
accepted the results of Thatcherism, embraced market forces, adapted
itself to the supposed realities of globalisation, and cherished the
entrepreneur above all others. He even tried to invent a business
background for himself. In November 1996 Brown told the Confederation
of British Industry conference that “business is in my blood”.
His mother had been a company director and “I was brought up in an
atmosphere where I knew exactly what was happening as far as business
was concerned”. He was, indeed he had always been, one of them. The
only problem is that it was not true. As his mother subsequently
admitted, she would never have called herself “a business woman”:
she had only ever done some “light administrative duties” for “a
small family firm” and had given up the job when she married, three
years before young Gordon was even born. [17]
While there have been Labour politicians who have tried to invent
working class backgrounds for themselves before, Brown is the first
to try and invent a capitalist background.
 
“Britain is made for globalisation”
Since becoming chancellor of the exchequer Brown has regularly
boasted to business audiences, both at home and abroad, of how New
Labour has made Britain “the most business friendly environment in
Europe”, although on this particular occasion he did go on to
acknowledge that there was still a lot to learn “from the
entrepreneurial and flexible labour markets of the American economy”.
Some of these speeches have been collected in his recently published
Speeches 1997–2006. They provide a wealth of evidence of the
way in which he has transformed himself from a reformist socialist
into a full-blown neoliberal. In a speech to the Social Market
Foundation in February 2002, Brown admitted that making Britain a
paradise for business and the rich had involved “a break from a
hundred years of Labour history”. Indeed, he went on to warn that
“we need to affirm a yet more radical break with Labour’s past”.
Whereas, in the past, the left had seen markets as “leading to
inequality, insecurity and injustice”, now he could “assert with
confidence that promoting the market economy helps us to achieve our
goals of a stronger economy and a fairer society”. He actually went
on in the same speech to accuse the Conservatives of not being
pro-market enough. It had been necessary to make “fundamental
changes” to Labour Party policy, but he was now confident that
Britain would “be a beacon for the world, where enterprise and
fairness march forward together”.
Brown was even prepared to pay tribute to the contribution made by
Margaret Thatcher, no longer “the betrayer of Britain’s future”,
but the country’s saviour. In a speech made in July 2004, he was
fulsome in his praise: “She recognised the need for Britain to
reinvent itself and rediscover a new and vital self-confidence”.
She, he went on, “understood that we could gain strength from the
glories of our past which could point the way to a glorious future”.
While Thatcher had made mistakes, nevertheless there had been many
“advances, achievements and important changes”. In this same
speech, he recited some of “the real achievements” of Britain’s
glorious past, which included the country’s “imperial mission”
and the fact that Britain was once “centre to the world’s largest
empire – the global economy of the day”.
What was needed, according to Brown, was not just the
transformation of the Labour Party into “the party of business”,
but the transformation of British culture. In July 2001 he urged that
“a truly entrepreneurial culture” should be created in Britain.
He went on:
We want every young person to hear about business and
enterprise in schools; every college student to be made aware of the
opportunities in business and to start a business; every teacher to
be able to communicate the virtues and potential of business and enterprise.
Socialism, for Brown (and he still used the word to trade union
and Labour Party audiences), had become “the creation of a deeper
and wider entrepreneurial culture where enterprise is truly open to
all”. One can imagine the outcry if any previous Labour government
had ever suggested that schools should inculcate socialist values or
trade union solidarity!
Brown returned to this theme later the following year (December
2002) in a speech to the Growing Business Awards. New Labour, he
boasted, had “done a lot to make businessmen and women role models
for young people” and to “make successful business leaders role
models in every community”. They were creating “a wider and
deeper enterprise culture”. In effect, British culture had to be “Americanised”.
On 2 December 2005, addressing business leaders at the Advancing
Enterprise Conference in London, Brown welcomed the event as “a
concrete expression of our partnership”. They had “a shared
agenda” and New Labour could be relied on to “take it forward”.
He was, he told his audience, particularly looking forward to the
session on “our educational priorities” that was being led by
that great educationalist Terry Leahy, the chief executive officer of
Tesco. Brown promised them that “if we work together then I believe
we shall prove that Britain is made for globalisation and
globalisation is made for Britain”. [18]
 
The politics of spin
One point worth considering is how it is that Brown has still
managed to appear to some people (admittedly a declining number) as
being to the left of Blair. To a considerable extent this has been
the result of “spin”, reinforcing wishful thinking, although it
also derives from a very deliberate effort, in which Brown has played
an important part, to locate New Labour within the Labour Party
tradition, arguing that it is a development of “Croslandism”. Let
us consider the question of “spin” first.
In 1998, in what one commentator described as a “frenzy of
privatisation” that “bordered on the messianic”, Brown proposed
the privatisation of the Post Office. [19]
This was opposed by the then secretary of state for trade and
industry, Peter Mandelson, who instead proposed that it be retained
in the public sector, but be given commercial “freedom”. In this
particular battle Mandelson carried the day. Charlie Whelan, Brown’s
press officer, gave two alternative briefings, “one to
right-leaning papers claiming that Mandelson had funked a desirable
privatisation of the Post Office, and another to left-leaning papers
and the trade unions, that Brown had ‘saved’ the Post Office from
privatisation”. [20]
Much the same story can be told with regard to the minimum wage.
This is inevitably championed as one of the great achievements of New
Labour by its supporters. Brown, however, only agreed to it because
experience in the United States, where there has been a minimum wage
since 1938, showed that it was not a serious inconvenience to
business. Indeed in the United States the minimum wage has proven to
be perfectly compatible with the sustained attack on working class
living standards and workplace conditions that has been under way
since the 1980s. All that had to be ensured was that the minimum wage
was set low enough. In Britain, as Simon Jenkins observed, it was set
so low “as to be almost invisible”. [21]
The man responsible for this was Gordon Brown.
When it was proposed that the minimum wage should be set at £3.70
an hour, Brown insisted that the most business could afford was
£3.50. In the face of his intransigence, TUC general secretary John
Monks, certainly no militant, intervened. Monks, according to Tom
Bower, was “puzzled that Brown, posing as the champion of the
working class and diligently attending the birthday parties of the
movement’s leaders, could suggest that the economy was unable to
afford the increase”. Monks warned Brown that if he did not drop
his opposition he would make it public and thereby “put an end to
Brown’s bid to become the Labour Party’s next leader”. Brown
retreated, but once again Charlie Whelan spun the story to his
advantage. Stephen Byers, who had replaced Mandelson as secretary of
state for trade and industry, had publicly advocated a rate of £3.60
an hour. Brown threw his weight behind this. Whelan now briefed
journalists that Brown had always favoured £3.70, but had been
forced “to compromise with Byers ... and accept a £3.60 minimum
wage”. Brown did still insist, however, that the full rate should
be payable, not from age 21 as the Low Pay Unit (LPU) urged, but from
age 22. When George Bain of the LPU told him that only 8,000 young
people were affected, Brown remained adamant, telling Bain, “I
won’t allow 21 year olds to be classed as adults”. [22]
 
“Croslandism” and New Labour
While “spin” is the main factor in accounting for whatever
remnants of a left reputation Brown still has, he has also been
centrally involved in the effort to identify New Labour as a species
of “Croslandism”. This fascination with the intellectual
standard-bearer of the right wing of the Labour Party in the 1950s
and 1960s is rather sudden. In the “anthology of Socialism”,
Values, Visions and Voices, that Brown co-edited with Tony
Wright in 1995, there are only four contributions from Crosland’s
writings out of nearly 200 selected extracts. Even that intellectual
giant Neil Kinnock has five contributions! [23]
By early 1997, however, Brown had decided to lay claim to “Crosland’s
rich and lasting legacy to Labour”. He was aware of the need to at
least maintain the pretence that New Labour still had some connection
with “Old Labour”, even if it was with the Labour right. He
fastened on “Croslandism” as the way to achieve this. In a speech
that was later published in an edited volume, Crosland and New
Labour, Brown emphasised the way that Crosland had placed
“equality” at the centre of the Socialist project. This was what
New Labour was all about, Brown argued: “everyone should have the
chance to bridge the gap between what they are and what they have it
in themselves to become”. Brown tried to update Crosland’s
understanding of equality with a more modern New Labour definition:
“employment opportunity for all”, “continuing and lifelong
educational opportunity”, “genuine access to culture” and “a
redistribution of power that offers people real control over the
decisions that affect their lives”.
The great advantage of this updating of the definition of equality
is that it is perfectly compatible with “inequality”. And,
moreover, one of the ways that power is to be redistributed is
through the market! What Brown is about is substituting “equality
of opportunity” for equality of wealth and income – that everyone
should have an equal opportunity to become rich. This, of course, has
a particular attraction for today’s Parliamentary Labour Party. To
be fair though, Brown does concede that “even in a global
marketplace”, it might still prove necessary to “address wealth
and income inequalities”. “I believe”, he wrote, “that these
inequalities can be justified only if they are in the interests of
the least fortunate.” This truly original contribution to socialist
thought looks remarkably like the good old “trickle-down” effect
championed by the Thatcherites. At the very least, it leaves him with
considerable leeway. Indeed, judging from his performance as
chancellor, he has yet to find any of the increasing levels of
inequality in New Labour Britain that are not in the interests of
“the least fortunate”. [24]
More recently, in 2006, Brown contributed an introduction to a new
edition of Anthony Crosland’s The Future of Socialism. First
published in 1956, this book was the intellectual mainstay of
Labour’s right wing, the bible of Gaitskellite revisionism. Now, 50
years later, Brown celebrated its publication as “a decisive moment
in post-war Labour history” and praised its “freshness” and
“relevance”. What Crosland showed was that Socialism “was about
the dignity of human beings and the equal right of each individual to
realise their potential in a supportive community”. Socialism was
“opportunity for all”. All of Brown’s earlier campaigning for
“the redistribution of income and wealth from rich to poor” was
effectively repudiated. [25]
This supposed commitment to equality has become central to New
Labour’s claim to be a party of “the centre-left”. They are
absolutely passionate about it, so much so that, when it was proposed
to include an explicit unambiguous commitment to equality in the
Labour Party’s new Clause IV in 1995, Peter Mandelson had it
removed. [26] Nevertheless “equality”
continues to be a tricky concept, encouraging all sorts of unhelpful
ideas and attitudes. It has to be continually redefined so as to pose
no threat to the rich and the super-rich. The most promising
redefinition so far has been that provided by the Equalities Review,
set up by Blair in 2005. A panel consisting of Trevor Phillips; Sir
Robert Kerslake, the chief executive of Sheffield Council; and Dame
Judith Mayhew Jonas, a top lawyer who was made a dame for her
services to the City, deliberated at great expense. They came up with
something so spurious as to take the breath away:
An equal society protects and promotes equal, real
freedom and substantive opportunity to live in the ways people value
and would choose so that everyone can flourish. An equal society
recognises people’s different needs, situations and goals and
removes the barriers that limit what people can do and can be. [27]
This is New Labour at its most intellectually rigorous.
 
“Old Labour”
What would Anthony Crosland himself have made of all this?
Crosland, after a brief flirtation with Stalinism at university,
positioned himself on the right of the Labour Party in the early
years of the Second World War. As early as 1941, while serving in the
army, he had stated his intention to be “the modern Bernstein”
who would defeat Marxist influence within the labour movement. [28]
The Future of Socialism was his attempt at realising this
ambition. What is crucial for our purposes is that Crosland’s
arguments were premised on a belief that capitalism had been
defeated, tamed, fundamentally changed, and that all that remained
for the left was the implementation of a programme of democratic
reforms, including “democratic equality”. New Labour is founded
on the very opposite premise, on the belief that capitalism has
triumphed and that the left has been defeated once and for all. There
is nothing in Crosland’s writings to suggest that he would have
responded to this defeat in the way that Brown and New Labour have.
From this point of view Roy Hattersley, a vocal opponent of New
Labour, can be best seen as Crosland’s heir. One obvious
consequence of the difference in context is worth pointing out: New
Labour is far to the right of anything that Crosland and the Labour
right would ever have contemplated in the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s.
Indeed, New Labour is to the right of the Conservatives in this period.
Interestingly, Crosland had a much more robust attitude to
equality, or “democratic equality” as he called it, than anything
evidenced by New Labour. While Brown has tried to redefine equality
as a watered down equality of opportunity, Crosland explicitly ruled
that out. Indeed, he described equality of opportunity as “the
doctrine of Tory radicalism”. What Crosland, a Labour right winger,
called for were “measures ... to equalise the distribution of
rewards and privileges so as to diminish the degree of class
stratification, the injustice of large inequalities and the
collective discontent”. [29] This
certainly did not amount to socialism, but nevertheless, it has
nothing in common with New Labour.
In 1962 Crosland published another book, The Conservative
Enemy. Here he was even more forthright than in the earlier
volume. According to Crosland, inequality in Britain was “still
greater than should be tolerated in a democracy” (it was less than
today) and he complained of the rich receiving rewards “far higher
than any civilised person should want or need” (they received
considerably less than today). He urged that a future Labour
government “must grapple with the maldistribution of property”.
He was particularly critical of the concentration of newspaper
ownership which was a threat to “a healthy democracy” and was
contemptuous of “the more depraved and poisonous of the capitalist
press”. This was, of course, long before the advent of Rupert
Murdoch. In short, Crosland would not have recognised New Labour as
Labour at all. [30]
Crosland talked more radically than he was ever prepared to act.
Most famously, while secretary of state for education he had
remarked: “If it’s the last thing I do, I’m going to destroy
every fucking grammar school in England.” [31]
In practice, he rejected the compulsory introduction of comprehensive
schemes in favour of “persuasion”, which is why there are still
grammar schools today. Similarly, while he argued that the state
should take over the public schools and democratise them, he never
actually did anything about it when in office. He certainly never
suggested that the public schools should be invited to take over
state schools as New Labour does today. Nevertheless, during the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) crisis that crippled James
Callaghan’s Labour government in 1976, Crosland was one of those
arguing for rejection of the IMF’s demand for cuts in government
spending. What is the point of the government surviving, he
complained, “if Labour measures can’t be implemented”.
Callaghan’s government, he went on, “is the most right wing
Labour government we’ve had for years”. [32]
He had not, as they say, seen anything yet.
 
New Labour in power
Brown’s wholehearted commitment to markets, globalisation and
today’s rampant capitalism was made absolutely clear to the whole
world by the decision to make the Bank of England independent. He was
showing the capitalist class, both at home and abroad, that he was
their man and that New Labour was their government. As one
sympathetic historian observed, “At a stroke much of the political
economy of the Labour Party since 1945 was abandoned.” [33]
It is worth remembering that at least one of the reasons Clement
Attlee’s government had nationalised the bank had been because of
its role in the 1931 financial crisis, which had brought down Ramsay
MacDonald’s government and seen him defect to the Conservatives.
The bank had represented the interests of international finance,
rather than the interests of the Labour government. This was never to
be allowed to happen again, although the reality was that the bank
always retained considerable independence. What Brown’s action
signalled was that New Labour would never find itself in conflict
with international finance. Brown had out-Thatchered the
Thatcherites. His “great political coup” successfully positioned
New Labour to the right of the Conservatives. [34]
Brown was committed to what can usefully be described as
“globalisation in one country”. [35]
What followed was Brown’s rush to privatise as he came out as
“Thatcherism’s most coveted St Paul”. As Simon Jenkins observes:
Brown tore up all he had said in opposition and hurled
himself into a frenzy of privatisation, scouring the cupboard for
things to sell. He faced down union opposition by seeking to dispose
of air traffic control, the Royal Mint, the Commonwealth Development
Corporation, and Tote on-course betting. The privatisation of the
Post Office ... was halted in 1998 only because its departmental
sponsor was Brown’s sworn enemy, Mandelson ... Privatisation spread
even to Whitehall. The Inland Revenue sold its entire estate to a
property developer, John Ritblat, who transferred it, quite legally,
to an off-shore tax haven ... The Treasury even sold and then leased
back its own headquarters in Parliament Square.
Brown’s frenzy of privatisation has yet to run its course. His
supposed opposition to privatisation in education and the NHS is
largely a matter of spin and of the factionalism within the New
Labour government. Brown has carried big business into areas of the
public sector that the Thatcherites never dreamed of.
Jenkins goes on to write of Brown’s privatisation of “public
borrowing” through Private Finance Initiatives (PFI) and
Public-Private Partnerships. As he points out:
By July 2003 Brown was boasting of the completion of 450
PFI projects, including 34 hospitals, 239 schools, 34 fire and police
stations, 12 prisons and 12 waste projects. The NHS had by 2005
borrowed some £6 billion for PFI schemes, with a further £11
billion in the pipeline. By the mid-2000s virtually all health
investment was being financed by the private sector. [36]
What Brown had done was to find a way to make government spending
attractive to and profitable for big business. The inevitable end
result will be a public sector, if that is still the right term, that
will be effectively in the hands of capital. The first charge on
revenue will inevitably be payment of the debts incurred by PFI. In
the NHS this makes the introduction of charges a certainty, and one
can predict with considerable confidence an attempt by a Brown
government to introduce such a scheme, limited to begin with, but
preparing the way for later expansion. [37]
One other thing that Jenkins points out is New Labour’s
effective privatisation of civil service functions. Instead of
turning to the civil service for advice, New Labour turns to private
consultants. This is not a small matter. Whereas in 1995 £300
million was spent on consultants by the Conservative government, by
2003 the cost was £1.7 billion and by 2004 £2.5 billion. Indeed,
from 1997 to 2006 New Labour’s spending on consultants has been
estimated at £70 billion. [38]
Why has the Labour Party allowed all this? Well, first of all,
many party members, including lifelong members, have voted with their
feet and resigned in disgust and despair. Those who remain inhabit a
party that is radically different from the Labour Party in 1990, let
alone 1964 or 1945. As Stephen Ingle has pointed out, the new intake
of Labour MPs in 1997 “contained as many millionaires as it did
manual workers”. Indeed, he goes on to put New Labour into some
sort of historical perspective: “The New Labour government is less
representative of organised Labour than was the Liberal Party of
Campbell Bannerman and Asquith.” [39]
The Labour left has never been weaker, and it has been completely
unable to seriously hinder, let alone stop, the drive to the right.
What of relations between Brown and Blair? Throughout Blair’s
period of office one of the most important features of his government
has been the power exercised by the chancellor of the exchequer. To a
considerable extent, Blair was effectively excluded from social and
economic policy making, with Brown famously refusing to even discuss
the budget with him. This unprecedented situation reflected the
strength of Brown’s position within New Labour, but, for all that,
Brown has never felt strong enough to bring Blair down and at the
same time ensure his own succession. Over the introduction of student
“top-up fees”, for example, Brown covertly encouraged backbench
opposition, but in the end backed down. On Blair’s part, there
seems little doubt that if the Iraq War had been the triumph he
expected it to be, then the overthrow of Saddam Hussein would have
been swiftly followed by the overthrow of Gordon Brown. Far from
strengthening Blair so as to enable him to remove Brown from the
Treasury, the war mortally damaged him. It is the Iraq War that in
the end has made it possible for Brown to take over from Blair.
It is important to recognise, however, that this bitter struggle
within the government has not been over any fundamental policy
differences, between a left and a right within New Labour. Brown and
Blair’s mutual hatred has been personal rather than political. The
differences between them are more differences of style than of
substance. Brown, for example, does not share Blair’s relaxed
attitude towards political corruption, something he evidenced as far
back as the Ecclestone affair. [40]
But those who believe, against all the evidence, that Brown was
not fully behind the invasion of Afghanistan and Iraq are deluding
themselves. One recent New Labourite discussion of a Brown
government’s likely foreign policy argues that we should “expect
small but symbolic statements” distancing themselves “from
aspects of Bush’s foreign policy – Guantanamo, the practice of
extraordinary rendition and US hostility towards the UN”. Maybe. It
goes on to argue that as far as a US attack on Iran is concerned, “it
is almost inconceivable that a Brown government would support such
action”. [41] This is so much wishful
thinking. It shows the extent to which people still have illusions in
Brown. Indeed, it is inconceivable that a Brown government will not
support the attack on Iran when it comes. New Labour and the
Conservative opposition are both married to the United States, for
better and increasingly for worse, and will support US actions,
either overtly or, if it is too politically damaging, covertly. There
is no comfort whatsoever to be taken from developments inside the
Labour Party at the present time. Hope lies outside.

Notes
1. Brown, 1989, pp. 119, 121.
2. Self and Zealey, 2007, pp. 70–71.
3. Carvel, 2004.
4. Institute for Fiscal Studies, 2007.
5. Brown, 1989, pp. 10, 176–178.
6. HM Treasury, 2006.
7. Cassidy, 2006. Murdoch’s
ambassador to Britain, Irwin Stelzer, has gone on record to recommend
that Brown appoint Ed Balls as chancellor, and that Balls’s wife,
Yvette Cooper, should also be given a cabinet post. The support of
someone like Stelzer would once have destroyed the prospects of a
Labour politician, but today it does not even raise eyebrows (see
Stelzer, 2007).
8. For Brown’s career as a student
radical see his semi-official biography: Routledge, Paul, 1998, pp. 41–63.
9. Brown, 1975, pp. 7, 9, 18,19.
The book was actually printed by the Institute for Workers’ Control
and among the influences that Brown acknowledges were Institute
publications, the Socialist Register, Antonio Gramsci and
Edward Thompson. He even footnotes the publications of the
International Marxist Group and of the International Socialists (the
forerunner of the Socialist Workers Party). The front cover of the
book is illustrated with a photograph of Upper Clyde Shipbuilders
workers voting to occupy the shipyards, and the back with a
photograph of Leith dockers on strike in 1913.
10. Brown, 1983, pp. 20, 22.
11. Callinicos and Simons, 1985.
12. Brown, 1986, p. 298.
Brown’s Maxton compares favourably, for example, with
William Knox’s academic study, James Maxton (Knox, 1987). In
his biography of Brown, Tom Bower argues that “in his head” Brown
“understood how Maxton had undermined his ambitions for a better
society by refusing to compromise to obtain power” (Bower, 2004,
p. 51). On the contrary, in his book, Brown recognises that
compromise led to MacDonald joining the Conservatives to help save
capitalism at the expense of the working class.
13. The best study of the Labour
Party remains The Labour Party: A Marxist History (Cliff and
Gluckstein, 1988). A new edition would be extremely useful.
14. As one recent sympathetic
account has argued, Brown’s “allegiance and enthusiasm for the
American way is as great as Blair’s” (Hassan, 2004, p. 211).
15. Galloway, 2003, p. 141.
16. Brown coedited a volume of
tributes to John Smith (Brown and Naughtie, 1994). Brown’s own
contribution includes extensive quotations from Smith’s speeches,
attacking John Major’s Tory government for sleaze, every word of
which could apply to New Labour today. He even quotes Smith’s
condemnation of “the too-close relationship that has developed
between this government and the private sector” (p. 96). He
understandably does not mention the fact that he was criticising
Smith for not moving far enough to the right when he died.
17. Peston, 2005, pp. 23–24.
18. For this and the other quoted
speeches, see Stevenson, 2006, pp. 26, 34, 35, 37, 59, 63, 64,
124, 125, 127, 133, 146–147, 342, 370.
19. Jenkins, 2006, pp. 258–259.
20. Macintyre, 2000, pp. 474–475.
21. Jenkins, 2006, p. 257.
22. Bower, 2004, pp 276, 294–295.
23. Brown and Wright, 1995. Values,
Visions and Voices is an appalling book, where any hint of class
struggle has been altogether exorcised. In its pages Sheila Rowbotham
rubs shoulders with Ramsay Macdonald, George Orwell with Neil
Kinnock, and William Morris with Hugh Gaitskell. There is, of course,
nothing from Karl Marx or Frederick Engels, both of whom had quite a
lot to say about Britain. Indeed the Marxist tradition is effectively
suppressed. Still, despite every effort to make the collection as
inoffensive as possible, some moments of embarrassment still creep
in. There is an extract from an interview with Dennis Potter where he
lambasts the Sun newspaper: “Just pick up a copy of the Sun.
Is this Britain? Is this what we’ve done to ourselves? How can the
people who work on that paper go home and face their families without
a sense of shame” (pp. 149–150). This was, of course, before
Blair and Brown had had to abase themselves before Rupert Murdoch,
had both written for the Sun and had made it New Labour’s
favourite newspaper. Indeed, on 1 May 2007, May Day no less, Brown
actually had an article in the Sun on Blair’s decade of
achievement. Here he identified Blair’s most memorable success
as being “how we stood shoulder to shoulder with America” after
9/11. This was not written to reassure Sun readers of his
continuing support for the United States, but to reassure Rupert
Murdoch. Dennis Potter, of course, named the cancer that was to
eventually kill him “Rupert Murdoch”.
24. Brown, 1999, pp. 36, 41, 43, 44.
25. Crosland, Anthony, 2006,
pp. vii, viii. Tony Blair had no interest whatsoever in any of
this laying claim to a Labour heritage, indeed in 2004 he contributed
a chapter to a collection entitled Neo-Conservatism (Stelzer,
2004). Other contributors included Margaret Thatcher, Condoleezza
Rice and various luminaries of the US Republican right.
26. Macintyre, 2000, pp. 316–317.
27. Equalities Review, 2007, p. 7.
28. Jeffreys, 1999, p. 16.
29. Crosland, Anthony, 2006, pp. 173, 191.
30. Crosland, Anthony, 1962, pp. 7,
28, 37, 211, 212.
31. Crosland, Susan, 1982, p. 148.
32. Meredith, 2006, p. 245.
33. Brivati, 1999, p. 245.
34. Keegan, 2004. Keegan emphasises
the American influence on the decision, quoting Brown thanking Alan
Greenspan, then chair of the US federal reserve, for the discussions
on “how central bank independence would work for Britain” (p. 156).
35. The term is not original, but
comes from Hirst and Thompson, 2000.
36. Jenkins, 2006, pp. 259-260,
272. His chapter on Brown is simply entitled Gordon Brown, Thatcherite.
37. New Labour’s foremost academic
apologist, Anthony Giddens, calls precisely for “user-charging”
in his advice to a Brown government: Giddens, 2007, pp. 83–84.
He comforts fellow Blairites with the assurance that while “Brown’s
political philosophy is often said to be to the left of that of Tony
Blair – meaning that he leans more towards the Old Left ... his
speeches and writings over the past few years reveal nothing of the
kind” (p. 35).
38. Jenkins, 2006, p. 266.
39. Ingle, 2000, p. 157.
40. Blair rode into office on a
white charger, without anyone realising it had been given to him in
return for a favour. The character of the man was demonstrated
immediately by the Ecclestone scandal. In return for a £1 million
donation to party funds and the promise of more, the government
exempted Formula One motor racing from the ban on tobacco
advertising. Darts and snooker were not exempted. This was one of the
most blatant acts of political corruption in modern times, carried
out by a man and a government elected on an anti-sleaze ticket. Blair
defended himself by famously arguing that he was “a pretty straight
sort of guy”. Brown, to his horror, was caught out on Radio 4’s
Today programme, having to lie to cover up for Blair. See
Rawnsley, 2001, pp. 97–98.
41. Mepham, 2006.


References
Bower, Tom, 2004, Gordon Brown (HarperPerennial).
Brivati, Brian, 1999, Gordon Brown, in Kevin Jefferys
(ed.), Labour Forces: from Ernest Bevin to Gordon Brown (IB Taurus).
Brown, Gordon, (ed.) 1975, The Red Paper on Scotland (Edinburgh).
Brown, Gordon, 1983, Introduction to Gordon Brown and Robin
Cook (eds.), Scotland: The Real Divide (Mainstream).
Brown, Gordon, 1986, Maxton: A Biography (Mainstream).
Brown, Gordon, 1989, Where There Is Greed: Margaret Thatcher
and the Betrayal of Britain’s Future (Mainstream).
Brown, Gordon, 1999, Equality – Then and Now, in Dick
Leonard (ed.), Crosland and New Labour (Macmillan).
Brown, Gordon, and James Naughtie (eds.), 1994, John
Smith: Life and Soul of the Party (Mainstream).
Brown, Gordon, and Tony Wright (eds.), 1995, Values,
Visions and Voices (Mainstream).
Callinicos, Alex, and Mike Simons, 1985, The Great Strike (Bookmarks).
Carvel, John, 2004, Super-rich Have Doubled Their Money Under Labour, The Guardian, 8 December 2004.
Cassidy, John, 2006, Murdoch’s Game, The New Yorker, 16 October 2006.
Cliff, Tony, and Donny Gluckstein, 1988, The Labour Party: A
Marxist History (Bookmarks).
Crosland, Anthony, 1962, The Conservative Enemy (Cape).
Crosland, Anthony, 2006, The Future of Socialism (Constable
and Robinson).
Crosland, Susan, 1982, Tony Crosland (Jonathan Cape).
Equalities Review, 2007, Fairness and Freedom: The Final Report of the Equalities Review.
Galloway, George, 2003, I’m Not The Only One (Penguin).
Giddens, Anthony, 2007, Over To You, Mr Brown: How Labour Can
Win Again (Polity).
Hassan, Gerry, 2004, Labour’s Journey from Socialism to
Social Democracy: A Case Study of Gordon Brown’s Political Thought,
in Gerry Hassan (ed.), The Scottish Labour Party
(Edinburgh University Press).
Hirst, Paul, and Geoff Thompson, 2000, Globalization in One
Country: The Peculiarities of the British, in Economy and
Society, volume 29, number 3 (August 2000).
HM Treasury, 2006, press release, 21 March 2006. [Note by ETOL: No longer available online]
Ingle, Stephen, 2000, The British Party System (Continuum).
Institute for Fiscal Studies, 2007, press release, 28 April 2007. [Note by ETOL: No longer available online]
Jeffreys, Kevin, 1999, Anthony Crosland (Politicos).
Jenkins, Simon, 2006, Thatcher and Sons: A Revolution in Three
Acts (Allen Lane).
Keegan, William, 2004, The Prudence of Mr Gordon Brown (Wiley).
Knox, Willian, 1987, James Maxton (Manchester University Press).
Macintyre, Donald, 2000, Mandelson and the Making of New Labour (HarperCollins).
Mepham, David, 2006, Gordon’s world, in Prospect
Magazine, 124 (July 2006).
Meredith, Stephen, 2006, Mr Crosland’s Nightmare: New Labour
and Equality in Historical Perspective, in the British Journal
of Politics and International Relations, volume 8, number 2 (May 2006).
Peston, Robert, 2005, Brown’s Britain (Short Books).
Rawnsley, Andrew, 2001, Servants of the People: The Inside
Story of New Labour (Penguin).
Routledge, Paul, 1998, Gordon Brown (Simon & Schuster).
Self, Abigail, and Linda Zealey (eds.), 2007, Social Trends 37 (Office for National Statistics).
Stelzer, Irwin (ed), 2004, Neo-Conservatism (Altantic).
Stelzer, Irwin, 2007, When Brown Moves to No. 10 He Will Need His Closest Ally Next Door, The Guardian, 27 February 2007.
Stevenson, Wilf (ed.), 2006, Gordon Brown: Speeches
1997–2006 (Bloomsbury).
 



Red Mars
Kim Stanley Robinson
Harper Collins £8.99
Science fiction novels generally fall into one of two categories:
‘hard’ and ‘soft’. The first category is generally concerned
to explore what is scientifically possible. It is technology
oriented, features macho characters and attracts right wing writers.
The second category is more concerned with exploring personal
relationships and social orders. Science is of interest only insofar
as it can serve as metaphor. This category attracts the more liberal,
feminist and left wing writers.
Now with Red Mars we have a widely acclaimed science
fiction novel that attempts both to remain true to the direction of
scientific knowledge and to explore the nature of the social and
political order.
Even more noteworthy, its author, the American writer Kim Stanley
Robinson, has claimed that part of his intention in writing Red
Mars had been to rescue ‘the socialist baby from being thrown
out with the Stalinist bathwater’ in the aftermath of the collapse
of the Soviet Union. How successful is he?
Red Mars is volume one of a projected trilogy. It tells of
the first settlement on Mars, of the first stages of the terraforming
process that is to make the planet habitable, of the increasingly
ruthless exploitation of the planet’s resources by the great Earth
Multinationals and of the eventual revolution of 2062 that this
provokes. The revolution ends in defeat with the surviving
revolutionaries driven underground.
In a whole number of ways, the novel is superb. Robinson’s Mars
is marvellously realised: the sheer scale and grandeur of the new
planet captures the imagination. His exploration of the politics of
the settlement, of the various factions that form among the
colonists, is also a success. There are those who only reluctantly
come to embrace the cause of independence, who take up a position
clearly modelled on that of the American colonies in the 1770s. They
want an independent Mars, but one going down the same road as the
Earth. More radical factions, however, want not just independence but
a new social order, one where profit does not rule.
The radicals consist of two main factions: the reds led by Arkady
Bogdanov and the greens led by Hiroko Ai. They both share a
libertarian socialist perspective.
Less successful is Robinson’s handling of personal relations. He
never really manages to rise above the level of a rather melodramatic
soap opera.
Nevertheless Red Mars is essential reading for anyone who
enjoys science fiction. It is another demonstration that socialist
ideas were not extinguished with the collapse of Stalinism and that
the struggle goes on.
 



The Revolution of 1905 in Odessa
Robert Weinberg
Indiana University Press Â£25.00
In 1905 Odessa was Russia’s largest port and fourth largest city
–a commercial, trading and manufacturing centre with a population
of some 500,000 people. Over a quarter of the city’s inhabitants
were Jews, the great majority of them working class, many casual
labourers living in great poverty. About half of the city’s dockers
were Jews.
Socialist activity had begun in Odessa in the mid-1880s but the
various socialist organisations – Bolshevik, Menshevik and the
Jewish Bund – all had difficulty rooting themselves in the working
class. The labour movement in the city was dominated by the 25,000
engineering workers. Unrest and discontent were widespread but none
of the socialist organisations was strong enough to give a decisive lead.
The Bloody Sunday massacre in St Petersburg on 9 January 1905
precipitated strikes and street clashes throughout much of Russia but
not in Odessa. Here there was no spontaneous eruption, but instead a
gradual build up of anger and militancy.
Growing numbers of workers became involved in strikes on economic
issues, but it was to be the authorities’ refusal to allow a
general assembly of the city’s workers, what would in effect have
been a soviet, that became the issue around which the working class united.
By May, the city was in the grip of a strike wave that saw many
workers walking out without even making any demands. The authorities
at last resorted to repression. On 8 June worker representatives were
invited to discuss the situation with the authorities and were
promptly imprisoned. The next few days saw more arrests. Then on 13
June troops opened fire on a mass picket outside the Henn engineering
factory, one of the best organised and most militant in the city.
Dozens of workers were killed or wounded.
This shooting provoked an explosion of anger. Thousands of workers
took to the streets and large crowds, sometimes 2,000 strong, fought
with the police and occupied the municipal gas and electricity
stations. By the next day barricades had been erected throughout
working class districts and the police had been driven off the
streets. This outbreak took the socialists, including the Bolsheviks,
by surprise.
On 15 June the battleship Potemkin arrived in the port.
Mutineers had taken over the vessel. Huge crowds of workers assembled
on the docks to welcome them. The scene was set for a successful
revolutionary attempt. The sailors could have provided armed backing
for a workers’ takeover of the city. But it was not to be. There
was no political leadership to bring workers and sailors together.
Instead it was the army that acted. As evening approached, troops
cordoned off the docks and then opened fire on the crowds. Much of
the dock area was set on fire and in the confusion perhaps as many as
1,000 people were either burned or shot to death. This horrific
massacre broke the movement for the time being. The city was occupied
by 20,000 troops and the Potemkin sailed for asylum in Romania.
But while the workers’ movement had been defeated, it had not
been destroyed. In early October Russia was once against gripped by a
strike wave that reached Odessa. The city was paralysed by a general strike.
The authorities tried a new tactic. Right wing agitators, many of
them policemen, set about stirring up anti-Semitism, exploiting the
tensions caused by the competition for work between Russian and
Jewish casual labourers.
On 18 October large crowds, often led by police and soldiers,
carried out a savage pogrom that was to last for five days.
Even this disaster did not destroy the Odessa workers’ movement.
Indeed, the pogrom stirred the socialists to greater efforts so as to
prevent its recurrence. At the end of November a soviet was
established and an uneasy situation of dual power prevailed in the
city. The soviet campaigned against any fresh attempt at unleashing a pogrom.
In early December the Tsarist regime began its final crackdown on
the revolutionary movement. On 7 December a general strike was called
in Moscow and quickly spread throughout the empire. The Odessa soviet
called a general strike, effectively closing the city down. Following
the armed suppression of the Moscow workers, on 18 December the
Odessa soviet called the strike off. The movement was in retreat.
Early in January 1906 the soviet was banned and its leaders were arrested.
Weinberg has provided an outstanding account of events in Odessa,
an account that gets right down to street and factory gate level. He
has written a tremendous history of class struggle in a multi-ethnic
city where the authorities made full use of both force and racism in
their attempts to defeat the workers’ movement.
The only weakness is in his discussion of the role of the various
socialist parties. He celebrates working class spontaneity but does
not recognise the role that socialist politics could have played in
avoiding the June defeat and the October pogrom. Nevertheless a
superb book.
 



The Racial State: Germany 1933–1945
Michael Burleigh and Wolfgang Wipperman
Cambridge £12.95
There are a growing number of books on the Holocaust, all of which give the lie to the ‘Holocaust denial’ garbage peddled by today’s new Nazis. What makes this one distinctive and particularly welcome is the way that it places Nazi anti-semitism and its murderous outcome within the overall context of their racial fantasies.
The first victims of systematic mass murder were the mentally ill. In the summer of 1939 Hitler ordered the killing of patients in mental hospitals throughout Germany, a programme of murder that involved the gassing of its victims. By September 1941, some 90,000 people had been killed. Public protest led to the formal abandonment of the programme but in practice it continued throughout the war and even in the weeks immediately after on a decentralised local basis.
The sick, the old, even severely wounded and shell-shocked servicemen were killed on the order of doctors implementing the programme. Many of the men involved in gassing the mentally ill and others were later sent to make use of their expertise in the death camps.
Less well known than the murder of the mentally ill was the Nazis’ compulsory sterilisation programme that was introduced in January 1934. This was intended to improve Germany’s racial stock by preventing those considered racially unfit from having children. Panels of doctors (half of Germany’s doctors were Nazi Party members) took the decision to sterilise both men and women on the basis of feeble-mindedness, anti-social behaviour, habitual drunkenness, promiscuity, social inadequacy, even laziness.
In practice middle class prejudice with a gloss of scientific racism was given free rein to ‘improve’ the genetic stock of the German nation by sterilising large numbers of working class men and women. By the outbreak of the war, a staggering 320,000 people had been compulsorily sterilised, that is half of 1 percent of the German population.
This figure was regarded as just the beginning. Nazi experts placed the number of sterilisations necessary as anywhere between 5 and 30 percent of the German people.
The Nazis were engaged in a murderous attempt to create a ‘racial community’ that would somehow transcend class division and class conflict. Burleigh and Wipperman argue the Nazis were well on the way to achieving their objective. This is not true. The attempt was always doomed. The Nazis were attempting to find a racial solution to problems that had nothing whatsoever to do with race, and everything to do with ruling an advanced capitalist society in deep crisis.
Nazi rule in the 1930s rested not mainly on racial policies, but on the economic recovery of German capitalism. Any success they may have had in creating an appearance of ‘racial community’ rested on their ability to deliver economic growth. Meanwhile, class conflict continued beneath the surface.
Much of the authors’ own material clearly contradicts their argument, showing that even the supposed Nazi racial community was a class phenomenon. It was not just a coincidence, for example, that nearly a fifth of senior SS officers were members of the German aristocracy. Despite this criticism, the book is invaluable both for its contribution to our knowledge of the Nazis and their crimes and as a weapon against today’s Nazis.
 



Although George Orwell is perhaps best known as the author of Animal Farm, a fairytale account of revolution betrayed, and Nineteen Eighty-Four, a satire of modern totalitarianism, he is also the author of one of the most important celebrations of revolution in English literature, Homage to Catalonia. In this account of his experiences with the POUM (United Marxist Workers Party) militia in Spain, he makes clear his commitment to both working class struggle and to socialism, and at the same time his steadfast opposition to Stalinism and its apologists. Such were the conclusions he drew from the Spanish Civil War and they were to inform his political attitudes for the rest of his life. In a later essay, Why I Write, he was to recall the way his Spanish experiences had ‘turned the scale and thereafter I knew where I stood. Every line of serious work that I have written since 1936 has been written, directly or indirectly, against totalitarianism and for democratic socialism.’ [1] It was in Spain that he first came to fully believe in the possibility of socialist revolution and it was in Spain that he witnessed at first hand the destruction of that possibility at the hands of the Communists.
 
Orwell
Orwell was born Eric Arthur Blair at Motihari in India in 1903, the son of an Indian civil servant, an agent in the Opium Department. His paternal grandfather had served in the Indian army and his maternal grandfather had been a teak merchant in Burma. In every respect his was a family rooted in the British Raj. He attended a preparatory school in Sussex and then aged 13 was sent to Eton.
Despite his literary interests he did not go on to university, but in 1922 joined the Indian Imperial Police and was stationed in Burma. Given his background this was hardly a surprising decision. As Raymond Williams observes, so far his life had been ‘in all its visible details a training for membership in the administrative middle class of imperialist Britain’. [2] Then in the autumn of 1927, while on leave in England, he decided to resign from the police and become a writer.
According to his own account, Orwell decided after ‘one sniff of English air’ that he ‘was not going back to be part of that evil despotism’. He wanted more than just to escape from his job, however, and provides a clear analysis of his motivation at the time:
For five years I had been part of an oppressive system, and it had left me with a bad conscience. Innumerable remembered faces faces of prisoners in the dock, of men waiting in the condemned cells, of subordinates I had bullied and aged peasants I had snubbed, of servants and coolies I had hit with my fist in moments of rage (nearly everyone does these things in the East, at any rate occasionally: Orientals can be very provoking) – haunted me intolerably. I was conscious of an immense weight of guilt that I had got to expiate. I suppose that sounds exaggerated; but if you do for five years a job that you thoroughly disapprove of, you will probably feel the same. I had reduced everything to the simple theory that the oppressed are always right and the oppressors are always wrong: a mistaken theory, but the natural result of being one of the oppressors yourself. I felt I had got to escape not merely from imperialism but from every form of man’s dominion over man. I wanted to submerge myself, to get right down among the oppressed, to be one of them and on their side against their tyrants. [3]
This wish to get down among the oppressed and to be on their side against the tyrants culminated with his journey to Catalonia.
 
The Spanish Revolution
The attempted military coup of 17–18 July 1936 in Spain provoked the very thing it had ostensibly been intended to forestall: revolution. While the Republican government stood by paralysed and helpless, in many towns and cities the working class rose up against the army and after fierce fighting put the insurgency down. What had been envisaged as a straightforward seizure of power, almost as a technical exercise, ended with the army defeated in two thirds of Spain’s national territory and the country plunged into revolution and civil war. A popular uprising had dealt the generals an unprecedented blow that makes the failure of the July coup one of the most heartening events in modern working class history. Only the assistance forthcoming from fascist Italy and Nazi Germany prevented Franco’s cause from speedily collapsing in total disarray. Meanwhile in many Republican areas a social revolution had been unleashed.
The Republican state was effectively crippled, with its armed forces in revolt and power in many towns and cities in the hands of the armed working class. The only obstacle to a socialist revolution in the Republican areas of the country was the caution of the main socialist organisations, in particular the left wing of the Socialist Party, led by Largo Caballero. Caballero determined to sustain the Republic rather than complete its overthrow and replace it with a workers’ state. Nevertheless, in many areas effective control remained in the hands of the working class and Caballero tacitly endorsed this exercise in dual power, promising to complete the transition to socialism once the war with the generals was won. [4]
The development of the social revolution varied widely from area to area: at one extreme the Basque country, a Republican stronghold, was nevertheless virtually untouched by the revolution, whereas, at the other extreme in Catalonia and in particular in Barcelona, the working class were in virtually complete control. Franz Borkenau, a former Comintern official, but by now an independent socialist, who was incidentally to have a considerable influence on Orwell’s thinking, provides one of the best accounts of revolutionary Barcelona in his invaluable book, The Spanish Cockpit:
The first impression: armed workers, rifles on their shoulders, but wearing their civilian clothes. Perhaps 30 percent of the males on the Ramblas were carrying rifles, though there were no police, and no regular military in uniforms ... The fact that all these armed men walked about, marched and drove in their ordinary clothes made the thing only more impressive as a display of the power of the factory workers. The anarchists, recognisable by badges and insignia in red and black, were obviously in overwhelming numbers. And no ‘bourgeoisie’ whatever!
He continues:
The amount of expropriation in the few days since 19 July is almost incredible. The largest hotels, with one or two exceptions, have all been requisitioned by working class organisations (not burnt, as had been reported in many newspapers). So were most of the larger stores. Many of the banks are closed, the others bear inscriptions declaring them under the control of the Generalitat. Practically all the factory-owners we were told, had either fled or been killed, and their factories taken over by the workers. Everywhere large posters at the front of impressive buildings proclaim the fact of expropriation... All the churches had been burnt. [5]
The revolution in Spain had gone far beyond events in Russia in February 1917. In Trotsky’s words, in ‘its political and cultural level, the Spanish proletariat stood on the first day of the revolution, not below, but above the Russian proletariat at the beginning of 1917.’ [6] Whether this revolution should be continued or reversed was to be the great political debate within the Republican camp, a debate finally settled with police, torture chambers and execution squads.
At the risk of considerable oversimplification, it is possible to distinguish three positions within this debate. At least initially, the dominant position was that the revolutionary process had to be temporarily suspended and the bourgeois state maintained in order to maximise unity in the war against the fascists and to avoid the international isolation of the Republic. Once the military were crushed, however, the revolution would continue. To ensure this there was an acceptance of elements of dual power, of the need for the working class to maintain powerful independent bastions of power and control both in the militia and in production. This was the position of Largo Caballero and the Socialist Left and increasingly of the anarchist FAI and of their trade union confederation, the CNT, that broke with all of their previous traditions to participate in the government. [7]
Against this, there were those who argued that the only way to win the war was by actually completing the revolution, by overthrowing the bourgeois state altogether and completing the process of expropriation. Only in this way could revolutionary enthusiasm be maintained and unrest and rebellion be stirred up behind the fascist lines and, perhaps most crucially, in Morocco. This was the position of the small independent revolutionary party, the POUM, although it was to be savagely criticised by Trotsky for inconsistency and equivocation. There were also many anarchists holding similar views. [8]
Lastly, there were those who believed that the revolutionary process had to be put into reverse and that the revolutionary gains of July 1936 had to be liquidated. Far from either establishing, or preparing the way for the establishment of, a workers’ state, the bourgeois state had to be re-established and all working class encroachments upon its prerogatives had to be eliminated. Predictably, this was the policy of the Republican middle class, but, somewhat less predictably, it was also the position of the Spanish Communist Party and of the military-political apparatus that the Russians eventually established in the country. Although the Communists made anti-fascism their watchword and vigorously advocated a more disciplined, centralised war effort, they were also determined to destroy the revolution and to eliminate the various bastions of workers’ power that had been established. Revolutionary Barcelona was to be an important target. The Spanish Revolution was to be ruthlessly sacrificed in the interests of Russian foreign policy, of securing an alliance with Britain and France. [9]
Orwell himself, as we shall see, was to initially regard the POUM’s position with some scepticism and had considerable sympathy with the Communists’ avowed aim of building a more disciplined army in order to defeat Franco. What he was to find totally unacceptable was their ruthless determination to eliminate the revolutionary gains that the working class had won in Barcelona, and the methods of slander, wholesale arrests of their rivals on the left, and murder that they used to accomplish this. He only narrowly escaped death at their hands himself.
 
Homage To Catalonia
Orwell begins his account of his Spanish experiences by describing an incident that in many ways captured the meaning that the revolution had for him personally. The curse of class difference that had confronted him like a wall of stone in England, that prevented a middle class socialist like himself from becoming one with the working class, was overthrown in revolutionary Barcelona. At the Lenin Barracks a semi-literate Italian militiaman ‘stepped across the room and gripped my hand very hard ... It was as though his spirit and mine had momentarily succeeded in bridging the gulf of language and tradition and meeting in utter intimacy ... One was always making contacts of that kind in Spain’. The idea of equality that was always to be at the core of his notion of socialism had actually triumphed in Barcelona and he could at last meet the working class on equal terms. That Italian militiaman ‘typifies for me the special atmosphere of that time. He is bound up with all my memories of that period of the war’. [10] So important was this that he was to make this unknown comrade the enduring symbol of revolutionary working class solidarity in a later essay, Looking Back on the Spanish War, published in 1942.
Orwell left England for Spain a few days before Christmas 1936, having just sent off the completed manuscript of The Road to Wigan Pier to his agent. He arrived in Barcelona at a time when the revolution was already coming under increasing pressure. To someone who had been there since July ‘it probably seemed ... that the revolutionary period was ending; but when one came straight from England the aspect of Barcelona was something startling and overwhelming.’ His description of the city as he first saw it is justly famous:
It was the first time that I had ever been in a town where the working class was in the saddle. Practically every building of any size had been seized by the workers and was draped with red flags or with the red and black flag of the Anarchists; every wall was scrawled with the hammer and sickle and with the initials of the revolutionary parties; almost every church had been gutted and its images burnt. Churches here and there were being systematically demolished by gangs of workmen. Every shop and cafe had an inscription saying that it had been collectivised; even the bootblacks had been collectivised and their boxes painted red and black. Waiters and shop-walkers looked you in the face and treated you as an equal ... There were no private motor-cars, they had all been commandeered, and all the trams and taxis and much of the other transport were painted red and black ... Down the Ramblas, the wide central artery of the town where crowds of people streamed constantly to and fro, the loudspeakers were bellowing revolutionary songs all day and far into the night. And it was the aspect of the crowds that was the queerest thing of all. In outward appearance it was a town in which the wealthy classes had practically ceased to exist ... Practically everyone wore rough working-class clothes, or blue overalls, or some variant of the militia uniform. All this was queer and moving. There was much in it that I did not understand, in some ways I did not even like it, but I recognised it immediately as a state of affairs worth fighting for. Also I believed that things were as they appeared, that this was really a workers’ state and that the entire bourgeoisie had either fled, been killed, or voluntarily come over to the workers’ side; I did not realise that great numbers of well-to-do bourgeois were simply lying low and disguising themselves as proletarians for the time being. [11]
Orwell volunteered to fight and enrolled in the POUM militia along with a contingent from the Independent Labour Party. As he later admitted, he was to be involved in little fighting on the Aragon front which remained quiet while the two sides concentrated all their efforts around Madrid: ‘No aeroplane ever dropped a bomb anywhere near me, I do not think a shell exploded within 50 yards of me, and I was only in hand-to-hand fighting once (once is once too often I may say).’ Instead, his account emphasised ‘the mingled boredom and discomfort of stationary warfare’ and he wrote of his life being ‘as uneventful as a city clerk’s, and almost as regular’. The most important things in this sort of desultory trench warfare were firewood, food, tobacco, candles, and only lastly, the enemy. Firewood especially dominated his life, such was the cold, and men risked their lives to collect what they could of it: ‘there is probably no entry in my diary that does not mention firewood.’ [12] As a literary exercise his account is a classic of war literature, but for Orwell his writing had more than literary intentions and was directed towards explicit political ends. He was concerned first of all to defend the militia against their Communist and fellow travelling detractors and secondly to celebrate the democratic and egalitarian spirit that they embodied and which meant so much to him.
According to Orwell, the egalitarian nature of the militia system was often blamed for faults that were in fact caused by lack of training and of weapons. If a newly raised draft of militia looked like an undisciplined mob it was because raw troops are always an undisciplined mob, not because the officers were called ‘comrade’. In fact revolutionary discipline based on class loyalty was surprisingly effective. Orwell was for a short while an acting lieutenant in command of about 30 men, English and Spanish, and although they had been at the front for months he never once had any difficulty getting an order obeyed or in getting men to volunteer for dangerous jobs. Revolutionary discipline was a matter of political consciousness and while this might take time to inculcate so did turning a man into an automaton on the barrack square. Whatever the deficiencies of the militia, if they had not held the line in the most difficult circumstances then Franco would have won. The training and equipping of the Republic’s Popular Army was only possible because the militia were in place.
More than that, however, Orwell championed the militia system as a social experiment,as ‘a sort of temporary working model of the classless society’. There was complete equality between officers and men. Everyone got the same pay, ate the same food and wore the same clothes. Although orders had to be given and obeyed, it was understood that ‘when you gave an order you gave it as comrade to comrade and not as superior to inferior.’ He argues quite passionately that:
There is a sense in which it would be true to say that one was experiencing a foretaste of Socialism, by which I mean that the prevailing mental atmosphere was that of Socialism. Many of the normal motives of civilised life – snobbishness, money-grubbing, fear of the boss, etc. – had simply ceased to exist. The ordinary class-division of society had disappeared to an extent that is almost unthinkable in the money-tainted air of England ... to the vast majority of people Socialism means a classless society, or it means nothing at all. And it was here that those few months in the militia were valuable to me. For the Spanish militias, while they lasted, were a sort of microcosm of a classless society ... The effect was to make my desire to see Socialism established much more actual than it had been before. [13]
Not only was this ‘experiment’ to be ended by the incorporation of the militia into the Popular Army, but the militia system was also to be systematically maligned and denigrated and the sufferings and sacrifices of its officers and men were to be disparaged and treated as of no account. Orwell’s account of his experiences on the Aragon front was intended at least in part to counter this.
At this point it is worth considering one of the most substantial of the recent critiques of Orwell: Daphne Patai’s The Orwell Mystique. Orwell has been the subject of attack from Communist sources since the late 1930s and at different times various socialist commentators have also provided critical evaluations of his work. Patai, however, breaks new ground with what amounts to a full scale assault on the whole body of Orwell’s work from a feminist perspective. She argues that throughout his writings he cultivates ‘a traditional notion of masculinity, complemented by a generalised misogyny’ and displays an ‘insistent adherence to a gender polarisation that assumes male centrality and superiority’. Her painstaking elaboration of the ‘masculine discourse’ that runs through Orwell’s work will certainly have to be taken account of in any future discussions of Orwell.
Two criticisms can be made of her argument however. First of all she considers Orwell in too great isolation so that he appears to stand almost alone as the champion of traditional notions of masculinity in the 1930s. This reduces her critique almost to the level of a moral objection to him personally, whereas, of course, it needs to be expanded into a critique of the whole masculine culture to which Orwell belonged and which he never seems to have questioned. His attitudes and prejudices on this question were widely held. Once this is realised it is possible to see that Orwell’s importance does not lie so much in this aspect of his work, which he shared with many if not most writers, but in those elements of his thinking that marked him out in the late 1930s – his anti-imperialism, his revolutionary socialism and, of course, his anti-Stalinism.
This becomes clearer if we consider the second criticism which arises from her discussion of Homage to Catalonia. Here she argues that Orwell’s conversion to socialism was brought about by its association with the ‘archetypal masculine moment: war’. Instead of being soft and pacific, values which Orwell rejected as threats to his masculine identity, socialism was shown to be hard, tough and courageous in Spain, so that he could adopt it without risk. Certainly she establishes Orwell’s attitude towards war as being informed by notions of a masculine challenge and also his idealisation of the brotherhood of the trenches, but this does not explain his conversion to socialism. Indeed, if his traditional notion of masculinity and assumption of male superiority had been the deciding factors in determining his political allegiance then one would really expect him to have been a staunch conservative and imperialist, or even a fascist. That Orwell was aware of the attractions fascism might hold for someone with his class background he made clear in The Road to Wigan Pier. Instead he became a socialist because of his opposition to oppression and exploitation, to inequality and privilege, to authoritarianism and dictatorship, but his socialism never led him to question the notions of masculinity and of male superiority that had been bred into him. What makes this weakness so surprising is precisely the way in which it contradicts his championing of the cause of the oppressed and his conversion to socialism. Once again, however, he was not alone in this. [14]
 
May 1937
Up to May Orwell, by his own account, had little understanding of the differences that existed between the various political groupings in Spain and certainly considered that winning the war overrode any political considerations. On the whole, he found the Communist Party’s argument that the completion of the revolution would have to be postponed until after military victory had been achieved a convincing one and argued as much with his comrades in the militia. The Communists, as far as he could see, ‘were getting on with the war while we and the Anarchists were standing still’. Consequently ‘the revolutionary purism of the POUM, though I saw its logic, seemed to me rather futile ... the one thing that mattered was to win the war.’ Despite his association with the POUM, he could see no problem in the idea of transferring into the Communist controlled International Brigades that were fighting on the crucial Madrid front. That was where the fighting was fiercest and that was where he increasingly felt he could make a more effective contribution to the struggle. Consequently, when, after three and a half months at the front, he was granted leave, he returned to Barcelona with every intention of joining the International Brigades. [15]
His political education began the day he arrived back in the city: ‘the revolutionary atmosphere had vanished ... the tide had rolled back. Once again it was an ordinary city, a little punched and chipped by war, but with no outward sign of working class predominance.’ The smart restaurants and hotels were full of the rich eating expensive meals while in the working class districts the queues for bread, olive oil and other foodstuffs were hundreds of yards long. Whereas before there had been a striking absence of beggars, now the city swarmed with them. ‘This open contrast of wealth and poverty would have been impossible a few months earlier.’ The atmosphere in the city was ‘scarcely less alien and hostile to us and our kind than if this had been Paris or London.’
Over a period of months the revolution in Barcelona had been first undermined and then dismantled, mainly through the efforts of the Catalan Communists, the PSUC. It had been done, in Orwell’s words ‘by a series of small moves – a policy of pin pricks, as somebody called it – and on the whole very cleverly’. There had taken place the ‘deliberate destruction of the equalitarian spirit of the first few months of the revolution’. It happened so swiftly ‘that people making successive visits to Spain at intervals of a few months have declared that they scarcely seemed to be visiting the same country’. What had been to all appearances a workers’ state had changed ‘before one’s eyes into an ordinary bourgeois republic with the normal division between rich and poor’. As Orwell recalled, he had grasped that the Communists had ‘set their faces against allowing the revolution to go forward,’ but only now was he to realise ‘that they might be capable of swinging it back’. This is a crucial point for understanding the development of his political ideas. Orwell accepted much of the argument in favour of postponing the completion of the revolutionary process, but what he found in practice was that the Communists were actually engaged in reversing it in dismantling the bastions of working class power and in handing back to the bourgeoisie the revolutionary gains that the working class had already won. He was completely opposed to this. It was not the Communists’ refusal to complete the revolution during the war that alienated him, it was the effective counter-revolution that they carried out behind the Republican lines. [16]
The accuracy of Orwell’s account written so soon after the events themselves cannot be seriously disputed. Burnett Bulloten’s important study of Communist policy and practice, The Spanish Revolution, makes it quite clear that they were engaged in the systematic elimination of all independent centres of working class power and in re-establishing the power and authority of the bourgeois state. At the same time they were busy entrenching themselves inside the reconstituted state machine, especially in the Popular Army and the police, so as to ensure their continued ascendancy. This operation was closely controlled by the Comintern’s agents in Spain, most notably Palmiro Togliatti and in Catalonia the Hungarian, Erno Gero. These men were the ‘real’ leadership of the Spanish Communist Party and they made sure that it faithfully adapted itself to the requirements of Russian foreign policy, regardless of the interests of the Spanish working class and the Spanish Revolution. [17]
When Orwell arrived back in Barcelona the situation was approaching crisis point. Communist pressure was provoking increasing conflict and it was only a matter of time before it erupted into open fighting. Tension was so great that all May Day parades and demonstrations were cancelled in order to avoid the inevitable clashes between Anarchists and Communists. Then at 3pm on Monday 3 May came the provocation that finally did the trick. Heavily armed police occupied the CNT controlled telephone exchange. There was a spontaneous response from working class Barcelona as a general strike quickly gripped the city, hundreds of barricades were erected and armed CNT members took to the streets. The spirit of July had been resurrected.
That evening the POUM executive met in secret with the regional committees of the CNT and of the FAI to consider how to respond to the uprising. The POUM leader Julian Gorkin later described how he and his comrades had argued that now was the last opportunity they would have to settle accounts with the Communists and their bourgeois allies:
Neither of us has urged the masses of Barcelona to take this action. This is a spontaneous response to a Stalinist provocation. This is the decisive moment for the Revolution. Either we place ourselves at the head of the movement in order to destroy the internal enemy or else the movement will collapse and the enemy will destroy us. We must make our choice; revolution or counter-revolution.
Gorkin’s assessment of the alternatives was to be fully vindicated in the following weeks but the Anarchist leadership refused to acknowledge their predicament. They were still committed to supporting the Catalan government, the Generalitat, where their representatives still sat as ministers alongside the PSUC and the representatives of the Catalan bourgeoisie. These problems, they argued, could all be settled by discussion and negotiation. They absolutely refused to have anything to do with the uprising and instead called for a ceasefire, the dismantling of the barricades and a return to work. [18]
This forced the POUM leadership onto the defensive. Their support and influence were only small compared to that of the Anarchists who still dominated the working class movement in Catalonia. If the Anarchists refused to give a lead to the uprising and, indeed, called for its actual surrender then the situation seemed altogether hopeless. Without leadership the uprising was doomed to defeat and the POUM believed that they were too weak to provide that leadership. The party seems to have lapsed into passivity, to have gone on the defensive in the hope of preserving what it could in the coming catastrophe. [19]
Orwell had no difficulty in deciding where he stood in the conflict. ‘The issue was clear enough. On one side the CNT, on the other side the police ... when I see an actual flesh-and-blood worker in conflict with his natural enemy, the policeman, I do not have to ask myself which side I am on.’ His involvement amounted to helping guard POUM buildings in case of attack. There was no offensive action. [20]
Without leadership and under a constant barrage of demands from the CNT to restore normality, the morale of the insurgents was inevitably undermined. By Thursday 6 May the barricades began to come down and people began returning to work. The crisis had been resolved, they were promised, their grievances would be remedied and now unity against the fascists had to be restored. Over 900 people had been killed and some 4,000 had been wounded in the fighting. What would be the outcome? [21]
The first contingents of assault guards began to arrive in the city on 7 May and within a few days were 12,000 strong. They took effective control of the city and began eliminating the remnants of working class power. The revolutionary committees were dispersed, the revolutionary police, controlled by the CNT, were disarmed and many activists were arrested and some were killed out of hand. Bourgeois order prevailed. The Anarchist ministers had participated in their own defeat and, once their organisations had been destroyed, their services were dispensed with – at the end of June the Catalan government was reorganised without them. The main weight of Communists’ vengeance was to fall on the POUM however.
The Communists launched a barrage of slander against the POUM, denouncing them as fascists and claiming that they had instigated the May uprising as part of a fascist plot. This campaign of lies and distortion had a dramatic effect on Orwell. Once the fighting was over, he was approached by a Communist friend who asked if he still intended transferring to the International Brigades. Orwell expressed surprise that they should still want him because according to the Communist press he was a fascist. He made it clear that he could no longer consider joining a Communist controlled unit because, as the last weeks had shown, ‘it might mean sooner or later being used against the Spanish working class’ and in any such conflict he intended to use his rifle ‘on the side of the working class and not against them’. [22] He returned to the front to serve with the POUM militia.
On 20 May, only just after his return, Orwell was shot in the throat by a fascist sniper. After convalescing from the wound he set about getting his papers in order so that he could be invalided home to Britain. Events once again overtook him. On 16 June the POUM was banned, its headquarters were occupied, its leadership was arrested and the police began a general round up of its members. Among those arrested were a number of foreign volunteers serving in the POUM militia, including Bob Smillie, the grandson of the Scottish miners’ leader, and Georges Kopp, a close friend Orwell had made at the front. Orwell, together with his wife, Eileen, went on the run and eventually, on 23 June, succeeded in crossing the border into France.
That Orwell was himself in danger of arrest has been established beyond any doubt by the discovery in 1989 in the National Historical Archives in Madrid of a security police report to the Tribunal for Espionage and High Treason. This described Eric Blair and his wife Eileen Blair, as ‘known Trotskyists’ and as ‘linking agents of the ILP and the POUM’. [23] There can be little doubt that if he had been arrested he would have died in prison. His health was poor (indeed in March the following year he fell ill with a tubercular lesion in one lung and spent six months recovering in a sanatorium) and he was still recovering from a serious wound. Conditions in the Spanish prisons were appalling and the many Socialist political prisoners were given no special treatment. Bob Smillie died in prison from what Orwell and many others believed to be deliberate medical neglect, while Georges Kopp, when after 18 months of incarceration he was finally released, had lost seven stone in weight. Such treatment would have killed Orwell. Many others were actually murdered by the Communist secret police who were a law unto themselves; among them Kurt Landau, an Austrian Left Socialist and Erwin Wolf, a Czech Trotskyist. The POUM general secretary Andres Nin was kidnapped by Communist agents, held in a secret prison and tortured in an attempt to secure a confession that he and his comrades were fascist agents. This would certainly have signed the death warrants of the rest of the POUM leadership who were still awaiting trial. He died under torture, according to one recent account, having been flayed alive. [24] Despite Communist demands for the death penalty, the POUM leadership were eventually sentenced to 15 years in prison for insurrection in October 1938.
 
Spilling the beans
Back in England, Orwell was outraged by the extent to which developments in Spain were being lied about and distorted on the left, and by the difficulty in getting any alternative viewpoint heard. The suppression of working class power and the repression of the revolutionary left were completely ignored amidst the general celebration of the Popular Front, and the POUM was routinely libelled as either a fascist organisation or an organisation manipulated by fascists. He saw the hand of the Communist Party and its many fellow travellers at work in this and set about contesting their version of events with a fury that was to make him many enemies on the left.
His important article, Spilling the Spanish Beans, written almost immediately after his return from Barcelona, was rejected by the New Statesman, that was unwilling to rock to the Popular Front boat, but accepted by the New English Weekly. By way of a consolation it seems, the Statesman sent him Franz Borkenau’s The Spanish Cockpit to review, only to reject his review when it finally arrived. Orwell had no doubts as to why and later made clear that he could no longer write for the journal as he had ‘to stand by my friends’. [25]
He completed Homage to Catalonia in January 1938, only to have it rejected unseen by his publisher, Victor Gollancz. This is all the more surprising when one considers that his previous book, The Road to Wigan Pier, had been a great success. His association with the POUM and his hostility to the Communists made him unacceptable to many on the left. This was a serious blow because there can be little doubt that if Gollancz had published the book, it would have made considerably more impact than it did. Gollancz effectively controlled the Left Book Club, which at its height had over 50,000 members, and had immense prestige as the publisher of the left. He was, however, wholly committed to the Popular Front and at this time gave his uncritical support to the British Communist Party and to the Soviet Union. [26]
While he rejected Homage to Catalonia, it is worth briefly considering some of the books that Gollancz did see fit to publish. One of the more restrained was Frank Jellinek’s The Civil War in Spain. He at least acknowledged that the POUM was not a Trotskyist organisation, but ‘it was objectively helping Trotskyism – and, by extension, fascism’. As for the May events themselves: ‘Documents found in two leading hotels proved conclusively that Franco’s agents had been actively at work to foment the rising’ and that there had been ‘a plan for a large-scale rebel landing on the Catalan coast in April, aided surreptitiously by German and Italian ships’. The outbreak had fortunately been ‘badly mistimed’. [27] Less restrained was J.R. Campbell’s Soviet Policy and its Critics. This enthusiastic endorsement of the Russian purges included various asides on Spain: the POUM ‘have spied for Franco and stabbed the People’s Army in the back’, while the fascist agent, Nin, was unfortunately ‘rescued by fascists disguised in military uniforms, who took this measure in the hope of preventing the Spanish authorities securing new and fuller proofs of their crimes’. [28] Most remarkable, however, is Reuben Osborn’s The Psychology of Reaction. This attempted psychological analysis of the fascist personality includes an inevitable chapter on Trotskyism: ‘a knowledge of the psychology of fascist leaders is, at the same time, a knowledge of the psychology of the Trotskyists.’ Osborn goes on to warn, somewhat ominously, that ‘there are concealed within all revolutionary movements individuals who are still unavowed Trotskyists, who mask with their Socialist ideology the psychology of the fascist.’ [29] These and other similar volumes were all published by Gollancz and distributed by the Left Book Club. They were part of a barrage of abuse and slander that effectively denied Orwell and other critics of so much as a hearing from much of the left.
Rejected by Gollancz, Homage to Catalonia was published by Frederic Warburg. His was an embattled firm that was slowly having the life squeezed out of it by the Communists for publishing books by the dissident left, by socialists hostile to Communism. He published C.L.R. James’s World Revolution, Reg Groves’s We Shall Rise Again, Boris Souvarine’s Stalin, and André Gide’s Back From the USSR as well as Homage to Catalonia. [30] When it did finally appear in April 1938 Orwell’s book made virtually no impact whatsoever and by the outbreak of war with Germany had sold only 900 copies.
Interestingly, the Communist vendetta against the book and its author still continues today. In 1984 Lawrence and Wishart, the then Communist Party’s publishing house, brought out a collection of essays, Inside the Myth, bringing together a variety of standpoints hostile to Orwell in an obvious attempt to do as much damage to his reputation as possible. Two of the essays deal with Spain, one by Bill Alexander, who fought in Spain himself and for a while commanded the British battalion of the International Brigades, and the other by Robert Stradling, a historian. Together they make the most ferocious of recent attempts to discredit Homage to Catalonia and consequently deserve some comment.
Stradling is concerned to call into question Orwell’s reliability as a witness to events in Spain. He puts forward as the crux of his argument the remarkable discovery that Orwell had such a minimal grasp of Spanish as to call into question his ability to follow what was going on around him. Consequently his book is ‘of questionable value’ as history. ‘Not only did its author fail to carry out basic research’, but we are told, ‘he was not qualified to perform it in the first place.’ He was ‘an emphatically non-academic writer’ and ‘a self-confessed propagandist’ and his charges against the Communists were ‘no less (if no more) absurd than those forwarded by the Cominternists against the POUM’. Stradling likens him to the Daily Worker’s notoriously dishonest correspondent in Spain, Frank Pitcairn (Claud Cockburn). Moreover in the period leading up to the outbreak of the Second World War, Orwell’s confused efforts to understand the political situation reveal him to be either ‘schizoid or perhaps a simple charlatan’. [31]
This is a quite disgraceful exercise. Stradling’s method is to construct a mosaic of Orwell, putting together a variety of separate pieces taken out of context and rearranged so as to look nothing like him. On the question of Orwell’s lack of Spanish, Stradling’s key ‘fact’, there is unfortunately evidence to the contrary that he seems to have overlooked when preparing his case. Some years before the Spanish War broke out (26 April 1932), Orwell wrote to his agent asking if he could get him any French ... or Spanish books to translate into English. Orwell might well lie to his readers, but surely not to his agent. [32] As for the attempt to suggest that Orwell’s criticisms of the Communists were no different from the Communists’ criticisms of the POUM, the suggestion is a travesty. No amount of assumed academic detachment can get away from the fact that what Orwell said about the Communists was true, whereas what the Communists said about the POUM was lies, and moreover part of an unprecedented international campaign of slander against ‘Trotskyism’ and in support of the Moscow Show Trials. In Spain the Communists’ lies were used to justify the repression of the revolutionary left and the torture and murder of men like Nin. It is positively grotesque to suggest that Orwell’s ‘propaganda’ exposing their lies and their ‘propaganda’ telling those lies were somehow equivalents. As for Orwell’s difficulties with regard to the Second World War, they were an honest attempt to adapt his socialist politics to the situation and surely compare favourably with the problems that the Hitler-Stalin Pact caused for British Communists. Stradling is probably on surer ground with the criticism that Orwell did not carry out ‘basic research’ – he was too busy in the trenches, getting shot in the throat and evading the police.
Bill Alexander adopts a somewhat different approach when dealing with Orwell’s criticisms of the Communists. He ignores them and instead launches into a sustained attack on Orwell for, among other things, his class background, his lack of any deep feelings about politics and, incredibly, because his attitude in Spain was ‘almost one of neutrality’! Of course, it is an improvement that he is now only considered neutral, whereas at the time he was considered a Trotskyist fascist dupe, but not that much of an improvement. Orwell, according to Alexander, saw the war as a game and was only there to collect material for his ‘bestseller’ which the establishment made eager use of ‘to obscure and denigrate the real issues in the struggle against fascism’. [33] Both these contributions are clearly more interesting for what they are, rather than for anything they have to say.
At the same time as doing his utmost to challenge the Communist inspired version of events in Spain, Orwell also developed a critique of the Popular Front that was for the time being at least the mainstay of Communist strategy. Influenced increasingly by debates inside the Independent Labour Party, which he actually joined in June 1938, he put forward a coherent critique of Popular Front politics, not from an academic or reformist but from a revolutionary standpoint. In Spilling the Spanish Beans, Orwell pointed out that the central contradiction at the heart of the Popular Front would always make itself felt in the end. While the working class and the bourgeoisie were both fighting against fascism, they were also at the same time fighting for very different things: the bourgeoisie fought for capitalism and the working class for socialism. This had been shown in Spain where the workers ‘took the opportunity of seizing land and factories and setting up the rough beginnings of a workers’ government by means of local committees, workers’ militia, police forces and so forth’. He went on to make it clear that he now accepted the POUM position that the revolution had to be completed if the war were to be won: they made the mistake ‘of leaving the Republican Government in nominal control’. Subsequently the working class had been defeated and the revolutionary left crushed by ... the Communists ‘It is unfortunate’, he wrote, ‘that so few people in England have yet caught up with the fact that Communism is now a counter-revolutionary force; that Communists everywhere are in alliance with bourgeois reformism and using the whole of their powerful machinery to crush or discredit any party that shows sign of revolutionary tendencies’. [34]
Elsewhere, in a review of Fenner Brockway’s Workers Front, he endorsed his argument that the Popular Front ‘is simply an alliance of enemies and must always, in the long run, have the effect of fixing the capitalist class more firmly in the saddle’. The Popular Front was just a polite name for ‘class collaboration’, for ‘an unholy alliance between the robbers and the robbed’. Although it was still only a proposal in Britain, it had already ‘produced the nauseous spectacle of bishops, Communists, cocoa magnates, publishers, duchesses and Labour MPs marching arm in arm to the tune of Rule Britannia.’ [35]
Orwell’s opposition to the Popular Front embraced opposition to what he regarded as the coming war with Germany. He saw the Popular Front as a means whereby the working class could be rallied in support of a war that was not really against fascism but was actually for British imperialism. Such a war, he believed, would inevitably be accompanied by the same repression of the revolutionary left in Britain as he had seen in Spain. He was determined to oppose it and for a while was even urging preparations for going underground. This intransigent revolutionary stance was often accompanied by feelings of hopelessness, that all was lost, and on occasions he seemed to advocate an almost quietest response to the impending catastrophe. [36] Once war with Germany broke out, however, he quickly abandoned his opposition and in a remarkable about turn took up a position of what can be best described as ‘revolutionary patriotism’. He argued that the war could only be won if Britain became socialist, adapting what was essentially the POUM position during the Spanish War to British circumstances. Eventually his politics moderated into what Bernard Crick has somewhat misleadingly characterised as ‘Tribune Socialism’ [37], the belief that a Labour government was the most that could be achieved in Britain, at least for the foreseeable future, but as late as the autumn of 1942 in his Looking Back on the Spanish War he could still link the experience of the two wars. He remembered ‘the Italian militiaman, who shook my hand in the guardroom, the day I joined the militia’. This man’s face:
which I saw only for a minute or two, remains with me as a sort of visual reminder of what the war was really about. He symbolises for me the flower of the European working class, harried by the police of all countries, the people who fill the mass graves of the Spanish battlefields and are now, to the tune of several millions, rotting in forced-labour camps ... The question is very simple. Shall people like that Italian soldier be allowed to live the decent, fully human life which is now technically achievable, or shan’t they? Shall the common man be pushed back into the mud, or shall he not? I myself believe, perhaps on insufficient grounds, that the common man will win his fight sooner or later, but I want it to be sooner and not later – some time within the next hundred years, say and not some time within the next ten thousand. That was the real issue of the Spanish war, and of the present war, and perhaps of other wars yet to come. [38]

Notes
All references to Orwell’s Collected Essays, Journalism and Letters (CEJL) are to the Penguin 1971 four volume edition.
1. CEJL 1, p. 28.
2. R. Williams, Orwell (London 1984), pp. 7–8.
3. G. Orwell, The Road to Wigan Pier (London 1986), pp. 129–130. For an important account of Orwell’s political development see P. Sedgwick, George Orwell, International Socialist, International Socialism 37, first series (June–July 1969).
4. See P. Broué and E. Temime, The Revolution and the Civil War in Spain (London 1972), pp. 102–118.
5. F. Borkenau, The Spanish Cockpit (London 1986), pp. 70–71.
6. L. Trotsky, The Spanish Revolution (New York 1973), p. 322.
7. For Largo Caballero and the Socialist Left see A. Durgan, Largo Cabellero and Spanish Socialism, International Socialism 18 (Winter 1983).
8. For the POUM see in particular V. Alba and S. Schwartz, Spanish Marxism versus Soviet Communism (New Brunswick 1988). This very sympathetic account of the POUM is one of the handful of indispensable books on the Spanish Revolution. See also A. Durgan, The Spanish Trotskyists and the Foundation of the POUM, in The Spanish Civil War: The View from the Left (London 1992) and R. Alexander, International Trotskyism (Durham, NJ 1992), pp. 678–710.
9. The best account of Communist policy and practice is B. Bulloten, The Spanish Revolution (Chapel Hill 1979), another indispensable book since revised in a new 1991 edition. See also V. Alba, The Communist Party in Spain (New Brunswick 1983). There was, of course, no necessary correlation between an effective war effort and counter-revolution as some historians sympathetic to the Republic seem to assume: see for example, P. Preston, Revolution and War in Spain (London 1984), p. 7. So much had clearly been demonstrated by Trotsky and the Red Army during the Russian Civil War. Preston’s understanding is limited, in this regard, by his failure to grasp the enormity of Stalinism, the extent to which it was a counter-revolution.
10. G. Orwell, Homage to Catalonia (London 1985), pp. 7, 8.
11. Ibid., pp. 8, 9.
12. Ibid., pp. 25, 31. For an account of the ILP contingent serving with the POUM militia see P. Thwaites, The Independent Labour Party Contingent in the Spanish Civil War, Imperial War Museum Review 2 (1987) and for Orwell in Spain see B. Crick, George Orwell: A Life (London 1992) and P. Stansky and W. Abrahams, Orwell: The Transformation (London 1979), pp. 199–238.
13. Ibid., pp. 28–29.
14. D. Patai, The Orwell Mystique (Amherst 1984), pp. 15, 158. For a discussion of feminist critiques of Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four see my Nineteen Eighty-Four Since the Collapse of Communism, Foundation 56, Autumn 1992.
15. Homage to Catalonia, op. cit., p. 101.
16. Ibid., pp. 106–111.
17. Bulloten, op. cit., p. 133. For Soviet policy during the Spanish Revolution see D. Smyth, “We Are With You”: Solidarity and Self-interest Towards Republican Spain 1936–1939 from P. Corish (ed.) Radicals, Rebels and Establishments (Belfast 1985). Togliatti, the man who carried out Stalin’s counter-revolution in Spain went on to become the post-war leader of the Italian Communist Party and the darling of the Eurocommunists while Erno Gero was the Communist leader in Hungary in 1956.
18. Bulloten, op. cit., p. 407.
19. The POUM strategy was not to build their party as the revolutionary leadership of the Spanish working class, something they did not believe possible in the particular circumstances of Spanish working class politics, but to persuade, pressure and influence the Anarchists, the decisive force in Catalonia, into completing the revolution. It was this refusal to try and build an independent revolutionary leadership that caused the breaking of relations between Trotsky and the great majority of Spanish Trotskyists who had helped establish the POUM in September 1935. The POUM’s efforts to move the CNT in a revolutionary direction led to it participating in the Popular Front electoral pact and briefly joining the Catalan government, the Generalitat. Trotsky quite correctly condemned these two decisions. More debatable is whether the ferocity of Trotsky’s denunciation of the POUM’s ‘betrayal’ cut him off from the largest grouping of revolutionaries in Spain during the most important revolutionary outbreak in Europe between the German Revolution of the 1918–23 and the Hungarian Revolution of 1956. He certainly succeeded in alienating many of his supporters throughout Europe and in Spain his advice was only heeded by the tiny handful of Trotskyists in the Bolshevik-Leninist Section of Spain. For a contemporary Trotskyist critique of the POUM’s conduct see F. Morrow, Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Spain (London 1963), pp. 86–113 and for more sympathetic accounts see V. Alba and S. Schwartz, op. cit., pp. 186–206 and R Alexander, op. cit., pp. 701–710.
20. Homage to Catalonia, op. cit., p. 119.
21. V. Alba, Catalonia, p. 140.
22. Homage to Catalonia, op. cit., p. 140.
23. M. Shelden, Orwell: The Authorised Biography (London 1991), p. 295.
24. P. Preston, The Spanish Civil War (London 1986). For contemporary accounts of Communist repression of the left see J. McNair, Terror in Spain (London 1937) and F. Brockway, The Truth about Barcelona (London 1937).
25. CEJL 1, p. 338.
26. For Victor Gollancz see R. Dudley Edwards, Victor Gollancz (London 1987) and for the Left Book Club see J. Lewis, The Left Book Club (London 1970).
27. F. Jellinek, The Civil War in Spain (London 1938), pp. 339, 555.
28. J.R. Campbell, Soviet Policy and its Critics (London 1939), pp. 315, 370.
29. R. Osborn, The Psychology of Reaction (London 1938), p. 279.
30. F. Warburg, An Occupation for Gentlemen (London 1959), pp. 202, 250. He describes how he was approached by Communist Party emissaries who explained ‘how all good men should rally to the service of the Party. The temptation was strong, the flattery subtle, the mailed fist daintily concealed beneath a velvet glove. If I played ball with the Party, they told me, they could turn my untried publishing house into a success overnight. They had connexions in every literary magazine in London. Wouldn’t a spate of good reviews be a help to a firm as precariously placed as mine?’ When he refused to co-operate he was dismissed as ‘a Trotskyist reptile’ and ‘a crypto-fascist’ and the Communist Party began ‘crushing the strength out of the political half of my list. It was advising those who would listen not to offer their books to so dastardly a character as myself. Given a little more time it would have destroyed us’. He was saved by the Hitler-Stalin Pact.
31. R. Stradling, Orwell and the Spanish Civil War: A Historical Critique from C. Norris, Inside the Myth (London 1984), pp. 107–108, 109, 120. Lawrence and Wishart actually republished a collection of Claud Cockburn’s reports from Spain, including his attacks on ‘the Trotskyist swine’ as part of their commemoration of the fiftieth anniversary of the start of the conflict, J. Pettifor (ed.), Cockburn in Spain (London 1986), p. 184.
32. CEJL 1, p. 302.
33. B. Alexander, George Orwell and Spain, (ed.) Norris, Inside the Myth, op. cit., pp. 89–90, 96–97.
34. CEJL 1, pp. 302, 304.
35. CEJL 1, p. 339.
36. See M. Smith, George Orwell, War and Politics in the 1930s, Literature and History 6, 2 (Autumn 1980).
37. B. Crick, Introduction to George Orwell, Nineteen Eighty-Four (Oxford 1984), p. 114. See also P. O’Flinn, Orwell and Tribune, Literature and History 6, 2 (Autumn 1982).
38. CEJL 2, p. 303. Here he declares his faith in the working class and at the same time finally rejects the ‘thesis that the war could have been won if the revolution had not been sabotaged’. This in no way lessened his opposition to the Communists for what they had done in Spain and elsewhere.
 



The coup d’etat of November 1980 in Guinea-Bissau has placed a large question mark over the achievement of the PAIGC (Party of African Independence for Guinea-Bissau and Cape Verde) and will inevitably herald a growing disenchantment among that regime’s admirers in the West. At such a time, it is perhaps useful to consider the character of the national liberation struggle in Guinea-Bissau and, more particularly, the ideas of its leader, Amilcar Cabral.
The national liberation struggle in Guinea-Bissau was a major factor in precipitating the overthrow of the Portuguese dictatorship in April 1974. The Portuguese position in the country was becoming militarily untenable with the real possibility of physical eviction in the not too distant future. It was the imminence of military defeat in Guinea-Bissau that finally goaded the Armed Forces Movement into action in Portugal itself.
The defeat of the Portuguese, backed up as they were by the NATO alliance, was a tremendous achievement. To a considerable extent it appeared to vindicate the political ideas of one man, the founder and early leader of the PAIGC, Amilcar Cabral.
Cabral, who was assassinated by the Portuguese secret police in January 1973, has been widely recognised as one of the foremost theoreticians of national liberation in the contemporary world, as an intellectual who tried and proved his ideas in practice. He was always concerned to theorise the national liberation struggle within the categories of a Marxist class analysis, and, in particular, he grasped at what has become a thorny problem for Marxist theory: the role of the petty bourgeoisie in national liberation struggles. While rejecting both the method he employs in resolving this problem and the conclusions that he eventually comes to as inimical to Marxism, his work has a great virtue in that its intellectual honesty makes it all the more transparent. His transformation of Marxism into an idealism takes place out in the open where it can be seen for what it is, without the sleight of hand that usually accompanies such exercises.
Initially, the small group of petty bourgeois intellectuals that had come together to form the PAI (it only became the PAIGC in October 1960) looked to the urban workers of Bissau, Boloma and Bafata as the social force that would overthrow Portuguese colonialism. They agitated and organised among the seamen and dockers, artisans and service workers, and achieved some small successes. Then, in August 1959, Portuguese troops crushed this embryonic labour movement with an exemplary massacre of fifty dockworkers at Pidjiguiti. After this defeat, the PAIGC turned to the countryside, to the peasantry, and to a strategy of protracted guerrilla war to defeat the Portuguese. Cabral was the chief exponent of this change in strategy.
Given the weakness of the working class in Guinea-Bissau, a country without industry, it was certainly true, as Cabral argued, that the workers alone would not be able to defeat the Portuguese. At no time, however, was the possibility of building a working class revolutionary party that could lead the peasantry in struggle considered. Instead, the choice of a rural guerrilla strategy was taken by the PAIGC’s leadership which thereby turned its back on the working class. Inevitably such a shift in the social basis of the party from the towns to the countryside involved more than a change of strategy: it involved a change in the whole character of the struggle and in the objectives that would be accessible to it.
Cabral did not accept this. For him, the leadership in the national liberation struggle was not provided by the working class anyway, but by a revolutionary section of the petty bourgeoisie that was somehow transformed into the proletarian vanguard. In a speech that he delivered at the Tri-continental Conference in Havana in January 1966, Cabral argued that the situation in the Third World ‘offers the petty bourgeoisie the opportunity of playing a prominent – and even decisive – role in the struggle for the elimination of foreign domination.’ He posed two choices for the petty bourgeoisie: either ‘to give free rein to its natural tendencies to become “bourgeois” ... and necessarily subject itself to imperialist control’ or
‘to strengthen its revolutionary consciousness, to repudiate the temptations to become “bourgeois” and the natural pretensions of its class mentality; to identify with the classes of workers, not to oppose the normal development of the process of revolution. This means that in order to play completely the part that falls to it in the national liberation struggle, the revolutionary petty bourgeoisie must be capable of committing suicide as a class, to be restored to life in the condition of a revolutionary worker, completely identified with the deepest aspirations of the people to which he belongs.’
For Cabral, the success of the national liberation struggle was dependent on ‘the capacity of the leaders ... to remain faithful to the principles, and the fundamental cause of the revolution’ and this question had ‘certain characteristics that belong to the sphere of morals’ (pages 135–136).
It is, of course, highly appropriate that this idealistic metaphysics should have been propounded in Havana, the capital of the Cuban Revolution. Indeed, Cabral intended his speech as a summing up of the meaning of the Cuban experience for himself and his comrades, and paid generous tribute to Fidel Castro, a somewhat less candid fellow practitioner.
What Cabral was, in effect, doing was maintaining the theoretical proposition that the working class is the vanguard of the national liberation struggle at the same time as he rejected it in practice. For Cabral, the proletarian vanguard was identified by its ideas, by its subjective consciousness, by its ‘proletarian’ ideology, and not by its location in the process of production. The real working class on the docks and in the workshops failed to develop the appropriate consciousness and was accordingly superceded by the revolutionary petty bourgeoisie. What this consciousness amounted to was belief in the efficacy of protracted rural guerrilla warfare and in the virtues of a planned economy with some degree of popular participation. In order to make the leading role played by the revolutionary petty bourgeoisie in the national liberation struggle fit into the framework of Marxist theory, Cabral had changed the content of the categories of that theory. The revolutionary petty bourgeoisie becomes the proletarian vanguard and the theory remains intact; all that has happened is that materialism has been superceded by a species of idealism. [1]
Now Cabral’s ideas may certainly have expressed the subjective consciousness of the leadership of the national liberation struggle in Guinea-Bissau. They may well have seen themselves as having been transformed from a section of the petty bourgeoisie into the vanguard of the proletariat, as having committed class suicide and been resurrected. This reflects the urgent necessity for them to mobilise the peasantry against the Portuguese colonialists. Far from committing suicide as a class, however, their objective remained to secure their own emancipation and eventual consolidation in power as the possessors of the State, not a Workers’ State founded on a structure of workers’ councils, but a State based on the subordination and exploitation of the masses.
In the midst of the struggle against colonialism when the concern of socialists in the West is quite correctly to support the national liberation movement, the reality can be quite easily lost sight of and the rhetoric of the revolutionary petty bourgeoisie taken at face value. Once the struggle has been won, however, and the new petty bourgeoisie is confronted with the need to consolidate itself and undertake on its own behalf the extraction of surplus value from the workers and peasants, then things become clearer. Whatever the subconscious consciousness of the leadership, whatever their feelings of sympathy and identification with the people, they are constrained by the harsh necessity of ensuring the survival of their state in a world dominated by the major capitalist powers of both East and West. Inevitably, this involves them in the organised exploitation of their own people and everything that follows on from this.
Whereas Cabral was the leader of a national liberation struggle, the other volume under review here is written by John Saul, one of a number of left-wing academics who have attached their sympathies to various ‘progressive’ Third World regimes. In an earlier volume, Essays on the Political Economy of Africa (Monthly Review 1973) that he jointly edited with Giovanni Arrighi, Saul found much to commend in Nyerere’s Tanzania. He wrote of ‘socialist construction’ being underway and stated quite unequivocally that the ‘struggle for progressive solutions to Africa’s development problems’ had been taken further there than anywhere else in Africa. Of course, these ‘progressive’ regimes tend to fall by the wayside as their rulers are shown by events to be not quite what they had earlier seemed, and Nyerere’s regime has proven no exception.
In this more recent volume, Saul has some harsh things to say about the undermining of the ‘socialist dimension’ of the Tanzanian experiment, and the taking over of the Tanzanian State by conservative elements of the petty bourgeoisie, a takeover acquiesced in (surprise, surprise) by Nyerere himself. Whereas Saul had earlier seen the way forward as involving the progressive petty bourgeoisie mobilising the support of the workers and peasants to defeat conservative influence within the ruling party, TANU, and then using the existing State to carry through socialist construction, now he asks whether independent trade unions might not be a good idea and whether it might not also be a good idea for progressives to organise independently of and in opposition to TANU.
As for the question of whether or not the Tanzanian State can be used in the transition to socialism, or has to be smashed, well, Saul still wouldn’t like to commit himself. This is particularly ironic in a book that borrows its title from Lenin’s classic work where there is no such equivocation.
In his earlier volume, Saul put forward the idea that the African working class was a labour aristocracy that had shared interests with the multinationals and their local agents. He now goes some way to modify this opinion and acknowledges that the working class does on occasion enter into conflict with the multinational companies and the State. This conflict seldom rises above ‘consumptionism’ however (there has always seemed something distasteful to me about well-heeled academics dismissing the class struggle as mere consumptionism). For Saul, the working class is not the stuff of which a revolutionary class is made. Instead, he follows after Cabral, whose theoretical contribution he acknowledges, and looks to progressive or revolutionary elements of the petty bourgeoisie. The role of this class is absolutely crucial in the struggle for socialism, not just in Tanzania, but throughout Africa. Indeed, increasingly disillusioned with developments in Nyerere’s Tanzania, Saul has for the time being transferred his sympathies to the revolutionary petty bourgeois regimes in Angola, Mozambique and Guinea-Bissau.
Any notion that these regimes are constrained by the material realities of their situation, he dismisses as ‘sterile determinism’. Against this he asserts ‘the dialectic that exists between will and circumstances’. Fair enough! But the will of a section of the petty bourgeoisie taking power in a poor underdeveloped country is not enough to overcome the circumstances. Only the international working class will be able to do that.
That we should support national liberation struggles in every way we can is elementary for socialists in the West. But this does not mean that we close our eyes to the class nature of the liberation movements and to the limitations that derive from this. On the contrary, we have to argue for independent working class revolutionary organisation within every country joining together in a new International as the only means to overthrow the international capitalist system.

Footnote
1. This procedure is followed by, among others, orthodox Trotskyist commentators on Third World Revolutions though their reasoning is heavily camouflaged. Cliff’s Permanent Revolution, International Socialism (first series) 61, remains the starting point for any understanding of the role of the petty bourgeoisie in Third World revolutions.
 




Hugh Purcell
The Last English Revolutionary: Tom Wintringham 1898–1949
Sutton, 2000, £20
‘You probably have not heard of Tom Wintringham,’ writes Hugh
Purcell, ‘but by the time you have finished this book I hope you
will agree that you should have.’ And he is absolutely right.
Wintringham is one of those people who was well known when he was
alive, but subsequently disappeared from view. His falling out with
the Communist Party (CP) in 1938 meant that he was effectively
airbrushed out of their history and his refusal to embrace the Labour
Party until just before his death excluded him from theirs.
Instead, according to Purcell, he stands alone, as someone who
attempted ‘to explore a distinctively English way to revolution’.
This is, however, not the case. What Wintringharn really stood for at
the height of his influence was a popular front politics that never
really took off in Britain. This is the real reason for his neglect.
Nevertheless, Purcell does make a very good case for a sympathetic
re-examination of the man and his politics.
Wintringham was born in Grimsby in 1898, the son of one of the
town’s most prominent families. He was educated at private schools
before joining the Royal Flying Corps during the First World War.
Here he broke decisively with his family background by serving in the
ranks as an air mechanic. After the war, he went to Oxford
University, but as someone who had moved dramatically to the left. He
visited Soviet Russia in 1920 where he worked as a translator,
meeting John Reed among others. As Purcell notes:
‘Moscow 1920 remained in Tom’s mind as the practical
affirmation of his faith in socialism. This was not the Moscow of the
1930s with its paranoia, purges and misery. The mood was youthful,
idealistic and free. It was still the revolution of the Soviets
rather than the dictatorship of the Communist Party.’
Wintringham returned from Russia a committed revolutionary
socialist and in 1923 he joined the Communist Party. Within the
party, Wintringham was associated with Harry Pollitt and Rajani Palme
Dutt in their efforts to ‘bolshevise’ the party, to turn it from
a propagandist into a fighting organisation. He was appointed
assistant editor to the party newspaper, the Workers’ Weekly,
and was considered dangerous enough by the authorities to be one of
the 12 party leaders imprisoned in the run-up to Britain’s 1926
General Strike. Wintringham served six months and was only released
weeks before the battle began. He was responsible for the covert
publication of the party’s Workers’ Bulletin, the mere
possession of which could earn a prison sentence.
Purcell begins to have difficulties with Wintringham’s
transformation into a Stalinist apparatchik in the aftermath of the
General Strike. He went along with the Communist International’s
Third Period turn and its ultra-left sectarianism without a word of
complaint. Purcell suggests that he kept his head down during this
period, but this is not really credible. One feature of the Third
Period was precisely that party members could not keep their heads
down, particularly if they had Wintringham’s class background.
Moreover, Purcell acknowledges that he ‘penned his share of “class
against class” agitprop’, attacking both the Labour Party and the
left wing Independent Labour Party as fascist organisations.
More important, he played a key role in launching the Daily
Worker, and only someone fully on board the Third Period madness
would have been in such a responsible position. Purcell, it has to be
said, never really gets his head around the way that men and women
like Wintringham, in many ways admirable, nevertheless willingly
subordinated themselves to the dictates of Moscow, no matter how
disastrous. He is not, of course, alone in this.
Wintringham clearly welcomed the Communist International’s 1935
popular front turn. The embrace of the broadest possible alliance
against fascism seemed to offer the CP a way into the political
mainstream. Wintringham was very much to the fore in this endeavour,
becoming the party’s military expert and commentator. He put his
money where his mouth was by going out to Spain to serve with the
International Brigades fighting against Franco in 1936.
As Purcell makes absolutely clear, Wintringham wholeheartedly
endorsed the Communist line in Spain, including the repression of the
revolutionary left, most notably the POUM. Indeed, he joined in the
slander of the POUM, whose leader, Nin, was tortured to death by the
Communist secret police. Nevertheless, it .was in Spain that he began
to fall out with the party.
Wintringham seems to have believed every lie that the CP told
about the POUM, every lie that they told about the victims of the
Great Terror in Russia, and every lie that they told about Trotsky
and the Trotskyists and their collaboration with the Gestapo. What he
refused to swallow was the denunciation of his American lover, Kitty
Bowler, as a Trotskyist. His refusal to break with her led to his
expulsion from the party in October 1938. In Russia, of course, such
a stance would have cost him his life, but Wintringham never grasped
this. His disagreement was with the British party and he never
uttered a word critical of Stalin. Purcell has difficulty with the
way that Wintringham’s experiences never actually led to him
denouncing the Moscow Trials or Stalin’s murderous regime. Indeed,
he was to remain an admirer of Stalin right up until his death in
1949. Purcell does not adequately get to grips with the remarkable
hold that Stalinism had on so much of the left, even outside of the
Communist Party.
Wintringham rationalised his break with the CP with the argument
that whereas he had wholeheartedly embraced the popular front as the
way forward, for the CP it was merely a tactical manoeuvre to be
cynically taken up and just as cynically put down. He argued that
Communist conduct in Spain demonstrated how skin deep the party’s
popular frontism really was. And, of course, the Hitler-Stalin Pact
of 1939 which led to the popular front being unceremoniously thrown
overboard bore this out.
Purcell is much too uncritical of the popular front politics that
Wintringham was to try to sustain throughout the Second World War.
Far from offering a way forward, they were to inevitably end up with
his joining the Labour Party after the war. To be fair, however,
there was some way to go before this result became clear.
A good case can be made that Wintringham actually achieved his
greatest influence during the Second World War. He was one of a
number of individuals (George Orwell, a great admirer of his at this
time, was another) who believed that Britain was approaching a
revolutionary situation in the summer of 1940.
Defeat had completely discredited the old order and growing
resentment at continuing inequalities and injustices in wartime was
fuelling widespread unrest. The organisation that Wintringham saw as
potentially decisive in any revolutionary outbreak was the Home
Guard. To a generation raised on Dad’s Army this seems
positively ludicrous, but at the time there were significant numbers
of people for whom the Home Guard was the arming of the workers and
for whom this was a guarantee against any compromise peace with
Hitler. Wintringham established a training school for the Home Guard
at Osterley Park and taught revolutionary guerrilla warfare to
thousands of volunteers, much to the alarm of the government. His New
Ways of Warfare, published in 1940, sold 75,000 copies in a
couple of months.
The revolution proved stillborn, however. If Britain had been
invaded or if a collaborationist government had taken power the Home
Guard might have become an important part of the British resistance,
but instead Churchill’s Conservative-Labour coalition government
successfully contained the unrest. The authorities took over Osterley
Park and Wintringham and his fellow thinkers were pushed aside.
He continued his campaign for ‘the imperialist war to be turned
into an antifascist war’, arguing the case in his book The
Politics of Victory, published in June 1941. This coincided with
Hitler’s invasion of Russia, which saw the CP turn from opposition
to the war to enthusiastic support for it. This support extended to
the Churchill coalition government and involved ferocious opposition
to the sort of regrouping on the left that people like Wintringham
were trying to bring about. He was one of the architects of
Commonwealth, a loosely organised movement that attempted to
challenge the coalition. For its pains Commonwealth was denounced by
the CP as ‘crypto-fascist’. Although it achieved some success at
wartime by-elections, Commonwealth was never to overcome its middle
class origins. If Labour had remained in a coalition with Churchill
in 1945, as the CP had urged, the movement might have achieved some
sort of breakthrough. As it was it never managed to go beyond
middle class radicalism.
In 1945, Wintringham published his bestselling attack on the
Tories, Your MP, which sold over 200,000 copies – but it
actually helped Labour into power. Only one Commonwealth MP was
elected and Wintringham subsequently joined the Labour Party. His
popular frontism led relentlessly to the embrace of reformism.
Wintringham was to die prematurely in 1949 and was, sad to say, soon
forgotten on the British left.
Clearly Wintringham is an interesting figure, someone who had a
considerable impact during his lifetime, but whose politics, in the
end, were found wanting. Purcell sees him, if he had lived, as a
future Eurocommunist, a contributor to Marxism Today. This
seems most unlikely: Wintringham was much too much a man of the left
to have ever been comfortable in that particular milieu. Much more
likely is that his failure to break intellectually with Stalinism
together with his continued popular frontism would have seen him
embrace some sort of Third Worldism. This would probably have been
irresistible in the aftermath of the Chinese Revolution of 1949.
Of course, this is all so much speculation. Whatever he might have
become, his life provides a useful case study of the impact of
Stalinism on one of the more independent thinkers on the left in the
period between the two world wars.
 




Neil Redfern
Class or Nation: Communists, Imperialism and Two World Wars
Tauris Academic Studies, 2005, £47.50
Academic discussion of the Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB)
has in recent years been dominated by attempts to minimise the
organisation’s subordination to Moscow. From this point of view the
party’s twists and turns derive not from Stalin’s changing
priorities, but from the demands of the class struggle at home.
Even the Third Period of ultra-left sectarianism has been
explained and defended as a response to the exigencies of the
struggle in Britain. Moscow’s instructions were, we are seriously
expected to believe, of no great moment because the CPGB was in the
process of developing the strategy and tactics of the Third Period of
its own volition. And, amazingly, so was every other Communist Party
throughout the world. This is so much nonsense. Moreover, CP members
from the late 1920s through to the end of the 1950s would never have
recognised themselves in the accounts provided by these ‘Moscow-lite’
historians. Moscow was the centre of their universe and they were
proud to be Stalinists.
Indeed the very idea that they decided the party’s political
direction themselves would have been regarded as a dangerous heresy.
The fact that even The British Road To Socialism had to be cleared
with Stalin personally is a bit of a clue here. Even the party’s
reluctant repudiation of the man in 1956, it is worth remembering,
only took place because of orders from Moscow!
While Moscow-lite is a very inferior brew, it can still cloud the
senses and affect one’s judgement. Neil Redfern’s new book on the
CP and British imperialism is a good example of this.
Redfern sets out to explain why the CP ‘enthusiastically
supported the British war effort in the Second World War, given that
most of its leaders had been militant opponents of the First World
War’. He acknowledges the influence of the Soviet Union on the
CPGB, but really only in passing, arguing that what was decisive was
the way that Russian interests ‘dovetailed neatly with the
ideological baggage’ that the party had ‘inherited from the
Second International’. Whereas the party still had a ‘revolutionary
orientation’ in 1935, by 1945 it had embraced ‘a new reformist
strategy’ and ‘completed the transition from Bolshevism to Second
International Marxism’. Socialism, for the CP, would now ‘grow
organically out of mature capitalism rather than be the fruit of revolution’.
How is this reversion to ‘Menshevism’ (Redfern’s word)
explained? Although his argument is not entirely clear, he seems to
regard the hold of reformism and social imperialism over the labour
movement as a product of the super-profits accruing from imperialism.
This explains why the left was at best half-hearted in its opposition
to imperialism and at worst supported it. It was this that created
the material circumstances whereby the CP was relentlessly pulled
away from the revolutionary politics of the 1920s back towards
reformism and social imperialism.
Presumably the process was inevitable and it is difficult to see
what role Redfern can conceive for revolutionaries in imperialist
countries other than supporting national liberation struggles
elsewhere. Anything else is Eurocentrist and indeed we are told that
Trotskyism ‘was even more Eurocentrist than Stalinism’.
Leaving this aside, the main trouble is that, while he has much to
say regarding the CP that is of interest (his discussion of the
party’s response to the 1943 Tehran Conference is particularly
impressive), his explanatory framework just does not work. There is
too much it cannot explain and this leads him into contradiction,
caricature and distortion. On the one hand, for example, the CP is
condemned for giving its colonial work a low priority, but then when
the CPer Ben Bradley was imprisoned in India in 1929, his motives are
put down, at least in part, to paternalism. Evidence is ruthlessly
bent into a shape that supports Redfern’s argument. This is not
good enough.
Redfern seems unaware that the very question he tells us he
intends to answer actually contradicts his central theses. He is
primarily concerned to explain why the men who led the CP had opposed
the First World War, but supported the Second. The fact is, of
course, that his argument cannot explain how it was that these men
(and women) came to oppose the First World War in the first place;
indeed according to his thesis surely they can’t have opposed it
because of the strength of reformism and social imperialism at the
time. The difficulty derives from a general misunderstanding of
reformism and its material basis that it is not possible to develop
here. Let us instead look more particularly at his discussion of Stalinism.
Redfern emphasises that the CP was not a mindless puppet with its
strings pulled by Moscow. This is his caricature of the Trotskyist
critique. Instead he compares the Comintern to an orchestra with the
various musicians willingly following the direction of the conductor.
Leaving aside that it was not music that the Comintern made, this
seems much closer to the Trotskyist critique than his earlier
caricature. However, he goes on to give it a Moscow-lite spin. The
CP, we are told, developed ‘primarily by its own internal dynamic’
and party members ‘were loyal to Moscow because they wished to be’.
This misses the point. Subordination is still subordination, even if
voluntary, and of course, the working out of this subordination was
central to the party’s internal dynamic.
The importance of loyalty to the Soviet Union is clearly
demonstrated when we look at the CP during the Second World War. It
did not rally to the empire when war broke out in September 1939.
Why? Because the Soviet Union was allied with Nazi Germany. It did
rally to the empire in June 1941. Why? Because Nazi Germany had
attacked the Soviet Union. Loyalty to the Soviet Union was decisive,
not the party’s reformism or social imperialism.
Similarly with the post-war period, even though the CP
wholeheartedly embraced reformism, the Cold War saw it subordinate
that strategy to the defence of the Soviet Union. How does Redfern
explain this? The best he can come up with is that defence of the
Soviet Union ‘was a specific and extreme manifestation of
Eurocentrist tendencies’. This is stretching his argument to and
beyond breaking point.
To sum up, there is much of interest in this book and it is
written very much from the left unlike other Moscow-lite histories.
Its failure to make an explanation of Stalinism central to its
argument, however, leads it seriously astray.
 

