

Shanghai. – Fukien has rebelled. Prepared for several months, it came about all of a sudden as a bomb thrown into the Chinese politics. The public was startled by the radical character it assumed, in casting off the Kuo Min Tang mantle, denouncing its rule, turning such a round-about face towards the people, promising to fight for the abolition of unequal treaties and for tariff autonomy, undertaking to give land to the peasants and granting the right to strike to the worker, and freedom of convention, speech, etc., to the people in general. It claims to establish the producers’ power, guaranteeing to such people absolute freedom and equality, “excluding those who are treacherous to the nation and who exploit the peasant and the worker” from enjoying such rights. To overthrow the feudal system and to develop national economy are also points mentioned in the declaration of the new government. What has actuated this independent movement, especially at the time of the low ebb of mass movement? What is its general perspective and relation to the Chinese revolution.
In spite of the fact that this government is called by its enemies as a product of the social democrats and “the third party”, the former 19th route army regarded as the social-democratic fundamental military force, in fact we have no such a social democracy in China in existence, connected even with the. people, not to say with the workers. The military and their politicians and literati may have conceived, such an idea but it never existed in any tangible form. What is going on in Fukien is only a revolt of combination of ex-military men, the military rulers of that province, the politicians, the radical intellectuals and the right nationalists. There is a contradiction between the radical program, and the composition of the government (military in majority). This shows clearly that the government gives chief attention to the military overthrow of Chiang Kai-Shek by means of combination and intrigues rather than to mobilize the masses for the anti-imperialist and anti-Kuo Min Tang struggle. The radical program and the confused ideology are undoubtedly due to the influence of the existence of the “red army”
It seems unlikely that military operations will begin in the near future because both Nanking and Fukien must have time to seek allies, and to get out of the complicated situation of being attacked in the read. But the alliance between the peasant army and Fukien is an accomplished fact. This has a great significance. The blockade which Chiang Kai-Shek has enforced against the Soviet districts has broken down as the peasant army now can receive supplies from Fukien. Thus, the only success which Nanking has claimed for its anti-red expedition of the last two years has come to nothing. Further, if the “red army” alone could embarrass Chiang Kai-Shek so much that he is compelled to change the period for the liquidation of the “red army” from three months to three years, what if the combined strength of both the red army and Fukien would be presented to him? He must have given up the hope of eliminating the red army altogether. Besides, the Fukien movement, if not quickly suppressed, will set an example to the discontented militarists of other provinces who can also come out to denounce Chiang Kai-Shek’s kowtowing before Japanese imperialism or to stigmatize the corruption of Kuo Min Tang rule. So in a certain sense we may say that the Fukien revolt spells the beginning of the end of the Chiang Kai-Shek regime.
There may be several perspectives open before the Fukien government. If it can attain its main objective of overthrow of Chiang Kai-Shek in a quick manner by military combination, then it will degenerate and become conservative, throwing aside the present revolutionary phrases, otherwise it can be made dependent upon the mass movement and draw advantages from it. For example, the finance of the province will become ever more inadequate to feed the growing needs of the army and the way out must be sought in the seizure of the customs revenue and the realization of the tariff autonomy, in putting a stop to the officials’ embezzlement and corruption, in relieving the burden of the petty bourgeoisie by diminishing the taxation on them and by a corresponding increase on the big bourgeoisie. All such needs open great fields for the revolutionary agitation among the masses in demanding the real democratization of the government and the arming of the people. It should he our task to put forth the democratic slogans in a most energetic manner, to support the government so far as its practical steps are really anti-imperialistic, to criticize the tendencies towards compromise. Much can he done if we utilize the declaration of principles of the new government to deepen the anti-imperialist and the anti-Kuo Min Tang movement among the masses. It is usual that the violent collisions of the ruling factions give rise to revolutionary movement. What is now lacking is revolutionary leadership. Let us hope that the political crisis created by the Fukien movement will rouse the masses from the political apathy and will help the spread of the opposition ideas, as the latter represents the most consistent democratic wing in the Chinese Revolution.
November 26, 1933
 



SHANGHAI. – Let us dwell now on the labor movement in Shanghai after the Sino-Japanese conflict. Since millions in wealth were burned in ashes, production was contracted, unemployment increased, the hunger army swelled, the post-war crisis weighs heavily upon the people. The bourgeoisie lost no opportunity to dismiss the disgruntled workers, to lower wages, to intensify the exploitation of labor. The task of the day was to fight for the defense of the workers’ interests against the capitalist offensive. In spite of the unfavorable conditions of struggle, a strike wave developed, the postal workers’ strike, the newspaper printers’ strike, the strike in the silk filatures, the strike of part of the tramway workers, the telephone workers’ strike, the bus conductors’ strike, and other strike and labor disputes. Most of the strikes ended in defeat. The attitude of the employers was too resolute and intransigent, but the workers were also stubborn in their fight. The yellow leaders either sabotaged or betrayed the strikes. In these strikes, it could be seen that the yellow unions, could serve as the prop for the workers to start the strikes. Of all the strikes, the Stalinists had connections only with the telephone workers’ strike and the bus conductors’ strike. The Left Oppostion led the telephone workers’ strike at first, but the Stalinists used all means to break down our leadership. While the strike committee under our influence was really elected by the masses, the Stalinists set up a strike committee elected by their own men, most of whom were not workers. This committee they used to attack our strike committee. The Stalinists clamored that the strike must be ended only when a 100 percent victory ie secured, that they refuse help from any organization whatsoever (the yellow unions included). The telephone company is an American enterprise. When the foremen (under the influence of Nationalist feelings) offered to cooperate with the strikers, the Stalinists put up unreasonable demands to make this collaboration impossible. The employers, seeing the dissension among the strikers, stiffened their resistance. The workers returned to work unconditionally and many were later fired. The bus strike revealed even more clearly the failure of the Stalinist tactics. They at first obtained the leadership of the strike, but they do not know how to adapt themselves to the backward workers so as to draw them into the struggle. .When they declared that they refuse any help from the outside, their leadership was disclaimed by the strikers. The ultra-Leftist conduct of the Stalinists only isolated them from the workers and all the heroic efforts made to stop the strikebreakers were of no avail.
In spite of the revival of the labor movement in the post-war days, owing to the false tactics pursued by the Stalinists, the lack of political propaganda and struggle for democratic demands, the Communists did not entrench themselves in the labor movement. The organizing activities of the workers did not greatly increase. The disproportion between the leadership and the masses’ will to fight is still enormous.
To complete the picture of present Chinese political life, let us turn our attention to what is happening in the red army districts. The government troops have lately gained several victor-es in the Hupeh, Anwhei and Honan provinces. Direct and up-to-date information from those districts, we do not possess. We have read, not so long ago, two resolutions passed by the first delegated congress of the Communist party in the Southern Kiangsi Soviet district (the center of the Soviet districts). We quote the following parts from it to show the real situation in these districts:
The resolution starts by complaining against the line of Li Li San for “not confiscating the rich peasants’ superfluous and better land ... in every many Soviet districts, much of the landowners’ and rich peasants’ land was not confiscated and the land was left undivided for a long time; where it was divided according to the productive implements. It was absolutely a rich peasant line.”
“Proletarian consciousness in the party of the Soviet districts is weak, the backward ideology of the peasantry is reflected in the party...The activities of the workers and peasants are not developed, the alien elements, such as the rich peasants, the merchants and the youth of the landlords and gentry, penetrate into the government and into all the revolutionary organizations. Even the party cadres are filled with such alien elements ...
“The class struggle in the Soviet districts ... is hampered. From the government down to the mass organizations, the organizational relations are extremely loose and many organizations exist only on paper ...
“There are still mistakes and defects in the red army work. First of all, in the reorganization of the red army, the purging of the elements of the landowners, rich peasants and merchants, was not made the central task; rather the task was set of cleansing the army of tramps – quite vaguely – while all the soldiers and non-commissioned officers of the former white army are regarded as tramps ... Up till now, the red army has not yet rid itself of the traditions of the partisan warfare which expresses itself in loose organization, small groupings, undisciplined action, lack of scientific division of labor, ignorance of positional warfare ... The remnants of militarist caste still exist, its concrete expression lies in the fact that bad relations exist between commanders and commanded, between the army and the toiling masses ...
“After the August (1931) resolution of the Central Bureau on the” agrarian question ... there are still Right wing opportunist mistakes, which consist in the concessions made the landowners, gentry and rich peasantry ...
“Although repeated reorganizations are undertaken in the Soviet governmental institutions, there are still landowners, rich peasants and merchants mixed within them. The Soviet government thereby loses the class character of the workers and peasants power ... The basic organizations of the political power – the city and village Soviets – are not organized at all. The village government executive committee and government groups, replace them ... consistently ordering about the masses. The government institutions are busy with those non-governmental functions, such as the obtaining of transport coolies, the entertainment of passengers, etc.
“The former trade unions were not the class unions at all. The employers, the independent laborers, even the monks and oracles join the trade unions. The class struggle of the workers against the employers is not developed. Nothing has been done to improve the workers’ living conditions. The eight-hour day is generally not enforced. The struggles which the trade unions lead are the struggles of the Independent laborers against the peasants ... threatening to break the alliance with the peasantry. The anti-imperialist agitation is generally ignored.
“Very few workers and agricultural laborers are in the party, but the alien elements, like the rich peasants, the merchants, the youth of the landowners, still mix themselves up with it ...
“The militarist remnants still preserve the government as the Kuo Min Tang generals manifest towards the K.M.T. government. They think that the red army is the creator of the government, and the government institutions should be inferior to the red army.”
Thus, in spite of the passage of impotent resolutions condemning bureaucratism, the rich peasant tendency, militarist survivals, etc., for the last two years, matters in the Soviet districts continue to go from bad to worse. The partisan warfare inevitably degenerates when it is not supported by mass movements in the cities. The Stalinists want to deny this truth but, in the long run, they become its victims. Under the cover of Communism, the Stalinists are really converting the Chinese party into a peasants-workers party. The influence of Communism in Chinese politics is practically nil, what the Chinese Communist Party represents is the policy of the petty bourgeois turned desperate. The Manchurian crisis opened up broad possibilities for Chinese Communism to make progress. The KMT government has never been so discredited as in this crisis. The masses of the people are becoming radicalized, but Chinese Communism is paralyzed by its internal weakness and has let its chances go by. The KMT regime is regaining its lost positions and once again stabilizing itself.
We have to begin from the very beginning. The difficulties on the road are great. But under the leadership of the International Opposition and comrade Trotsky, we shall be able to find the correct path, to consolidate our own ranks, to move on slowly but steadily.
 







The letter below, which we have just received from our comrade in Shanghai, will serve also as a reply to the vicious police article which appeared on the question of comrade Chen Du-Hsiu a few days ago in the Daily Worker. The article of the Shanghai correspondent of the Worker, if it had any meaning at all, might have been written in the chancellery of Chiang Kai-Shek. It announced that our comrade Chen was merely going to Nanking to “interview Chiang Kai-Shek”. In China, such “interviews” have a murderous meaning: the word is the cynical expression used to signify that a revolutionist is being sent to his death. The Stalinist crime in this case lies in the fact that they are not only surrendering our noted revolutionist to the Kuo Min Tang assassins without joining in our protest, but are actually covering up the black butchers by disseminating the malicious lie that comrade Chen has been sent under military escort to ... “interview Chiang Kai-Shek. No conscientious revolutionist can remain silent in the face of this horrible piece of Stalinist police work. Raise your voice in protest and demand that the party and the I.L.D. act to remove the stain they have cast on the Communist movement! – Ed.





SHANGHAI. – On October 15, the Kuo Min Tang government and British imperialism dealt a heavy blow to the Chinese section of the International Left Opposition Comrade Chen Du-Hsiu was arrested, and other arrests and raids continued for about three days. Twelve comrades were taken altogether, among them four members of the Central Committee, the rest being functionaries and technical workers. This came about, just as in May 1931, as a result of betrayal, of which there has been an epidemic in these last two years, in the official party as well as in the Left Opposition. For example, in Nanking, responsible workers went to the authorities to betray all the other comrades, so that over 30 comrades were shot. In some local organizations, the party secretary has handed to the police the other party workers. As for us, our best comrades, six of whom are members of the Central Committee, two of May arrests in 1931 took away many of them already dead in prison. The second betrayal followed in August 1931, in which five comrades, one of them a C.C. member, were arrested. There were also several individual arrests made this year.
But this time the loss to us is infinitely greater. Now nearly the whole C.C. (except for two worker-comrades) has been put in prison and you can well imagine the consequences.
 
Bourgeoisie Jubilant
The arrest of comrade Chen has called forth, both in the imperialist and in the Chinese bourgeois press a satisfaction and a wild joy. The Shanghai Times speaks of him as “the father of Communism in China”. The Chinese bourgeois press speaks of his arrest as “the most important case since the drive against Communism started”. Thus, in spite of the slanders of the Stalinists, in spite of the numerous arrests of Communists, the capitalist press still regards the arrest of comrade Chen as the most important one since 1927.
The Chinese Communist Party is decapitated. Nobody, not even in the party ranks, knows the party leader or leaders. Several months ago, I learned that the general secretary of the party is a youth named C. whom I knew well. He is of student origin, sent to Moscow at the end of 1926 to study as a member of the Y.C.I. First as student and then as interpreter, he remained in Moscow until 1929 or 1930, joined the party there and in 1932 he becomes the general secretary of a party which claims hundreds of thousands of members. There is nothing strange in it; he attained the post simply because he is the puppet of the Stalinist specialist on China, Miff. The party’s old leaders have either gone into the “Soviet and Red Army districts”, occupying posts as “people’s commissars” there, or have simply been removed from responsible work, like Strakhov, or have been expelled from the party. The party is physically exterminated under the “leadership” of such Moscow students who are only capable of obeying and transmitting instructions from the Comintern to the lower organizations, and of carrying on intrigues against their adversaries. Thus, a comrade in the high leading party organs once told me that the members of the Political Bureau show absolutely no initiative in the work, but only do what they are ordered. One of our own comrades from Hongkong, who just came out of prison, told me the following: in prison he met a responsible party worker who informed him that in Canton there are not even Communist elements, and in Hongkong there are only two party nuclei which consist exclusively of functionaries sent from the outside by the party. Communist ideas not only cease to penetrate into the masses but they even lose their hold on the old party members. Some vie with each other in delivering thir own comrades to the police: others have recanted and re-entered the Kuo Min Tang to receive jobs there.
 
Chiang’s “Blue Shirts”
Meanwhile, Chiang Kai-Shek has found a new orientation for his policies. He no longer feels able to control the heterogeneous K.M.T. effectively and has therefore organized a Fascist organization for himself, the socalled “Blue Shirts Association”. In actuality, the K.M.T. is a Fascist party in its relation to the workers and poor peasants. But Chiang no longer trusts the K.M.T. and is compelled to lead an independent political existence. This is symptomatic of the fact that the K.M.T. is in the process of disintegration. Therefore the edge of the “Blue Shirts Association” is directed more against Chiang’s political opponents inside the K.M.T. This association has its “blood and iron groups” in Nanking, Hankow and Shanghai, to initiate the “movement of extermination of opponents” or the “blue terror” They make secret arrests and assassins’ attacks. The cadres for this “blue” movement, Chiang Kai-Shek draws from two sources: (1) the former Whampoo cadets; (2) the students from Moscow. Chiang Kai-Shek often gives high pay to those renegades and Moscow students. He often puts the question to them: How did Stalin eliminate Trotsky? His press openly advocates that he should apply the same methods to his political adversaries as Stalin did to Trotsky, or Mussolini to Nitti. There are now more than 300 Moscow students in Chiang’s service. They are fighting for the non-capitalist development of China and the land to the peasants. Of course, not only Chiang Kai-Shek but other groups of the K.M.T. – under one cover or another, social democracy, peasants’ and workers’ party, etc. – draw recruits from the renegades from Communism. Owing to the absence of mass movement, these attempts have not come out into the open but group themselves around various magazines.
The entry of these renegades into the K.M.T. is the outcome of the Stalinist school of educaton. The Stalinist school suppresses free speech and free thinking, obligates the students to memorize the Marxian-Leninist catechisms mechanically, without understanding their inner connections, without remolding the mind, only disorients the best elements in our own ranks, facilitates it for alien elements to adopt protective colors, and at the decisive moment, – they turn against us. The Stalinist school does not educate the new generation from the point of view of Communism, i.e., of permanent revolution, but from the point of view of vulgar democracy, i.e., class collaboration. Stalin’s policy is always directed towards weakening the position of the C.P. and strengthening that of the enemy. It is disastrous indeed that during the revolutionary ascent, the Chinese party as a whole was put at the disposal of the K.M.T. and during the counter-revolutionary triumph, a part of its forces serve the K.M.T. as traitors. Re-education is needed to turn us into genuine Communist but under the blows of reaction and the prejudices sown for years, this is an extremely difficult task, which accounts for the slow progress the Chinese Opposition has been making.
 
Chen’s Record of Struggle
Comrade Chen has been the most prominent figure in the Chinese revolutionary movement for the last fifteen years. Born in 1879 of a rich Mandarin family, he carried on revolutionary activities from the time of his youth, mainly in the literary field, as the editor of newspapers and teacher of middle schools. He was abroad in Japan several times. At that time the revolution was directed at the Manchu dynasty, and it was national and democratic. The revolution of 1911 ended in a failure, in the setting up of the military dictatorship of Yuan Shi Kai and then Tuan Chi Jui. The former capitulated before Japanese imperialism on the “21 demands”; the latter was a notorious puppet of Japan.
Comrade Chen, in distinction from the quasi-revolutionists of that time, of the Sun Yat Sen type who aimed to overthrow Yuan Shi Kai and Tuan Chi Jui by military adventures, set himself the task of winning the youth by devoting himself to propaganda work. He founded the monthly called La Juenesse (The Youth), which played a most important role in the history of Chinese culture and social movement. In the name of science and democracy, he waged a merciless war against the teachings of Confucius which, as a tradition for 3,000 years, hindered the development of revolutionary thought among the youth. La Jeunesse also contributed to the reform of the Chinese language, to replace the old dead language in literary composition by the spoken language; this had the same significance as the replacement of Latin by the vernacular languages in Europe in the 16th century. Since then, writing is no longer for a small number of scholar’s but rather for the masses. This period (1916–1919) called the period of “ideological revolution and literary revolution” paved the way for the development of the mass movement, beginning with the anti-Japanese student demonstration on May 4, 1919. During this period, comrade Chen, as dean of the Literature Department of the Peking University, was forced to resign because his literary activities aroused strong opposition among the conservative circles, just as they aroused the mass movement and revolutionized the mind of the youth.
It is characteristic that the Kuo Min Tang, at the head of which stood Sun Yat Sen, even at that time looked upon the ideological and literary revolution with suspicion, met it half-way, and followed it when it became popular. Needless to say, the K.M.T. government tries every means today to restore the dignity of Confucianism and to spread the use of dead language in writing At the height of the student anti-Japanese movement, comrade Chen, a former professor but an ardent revolutionist, wrote a leaflet denouncing the treacherous Tuan Chi Jui government and he – the only one to do so – distributed the leaflets in the streets of Peking in order to direct the movement against its internal foe. He was thereupon arrested and put in prison for several months. After his release, he went to Shanghai and there he founded the Communist party in 1920, with several comrades, most of whom later became renegades and went into the K.M.T. He was arrested twice by the authorities of the French concession in 1921 and 1922. The last time he was released only because the authorities bowed to the pressure of many mass organizations.
 
Chen and the Epigones
In 1922, he attended the Fourth Congress of the Communist International as the delegate from the Chinese party. Later on, a leading comrade told me that he made remarkable progress when he returned to China. What an immense development he would have experienced and how easily the tragic fate that was suffered, might have been averted, had there been a correct leadership in the Comintern! His role in the Chinese revolution of 1925–27 is well known. I only wish to remind hero that up to May 1927, at the 8th Plenum of the C.I., Stalin and Bucharin still defended comrade Chen’s policy against the criticism of the Opposition. The Chinese Communist Party was called a model. But several months later, when the defeat of the revolution was too evident, Stalin and Bucharin suddenly threw all the responsibility upon comrade Chen. Even if their contentions were true, that comrade Chen in opposition to the “correct” directives of the C.I. had conducted a false policy, the act of Bucharin and Stalin who came out to attack him only when the revolution was approaching its tragic end, greatly resembles a Chinese expression: “Let one fall into the well and then throw stones at him”. Comrade Chen was a member of the Central Committee and the general secretary of the party since its foundation and up to August 7, 1927, when he was deprived of work and made the scapegoat of the Stalin policy.
After the defeat of the Chinese revolution, comrade Chen declined the repeated invitations to go to Moscow, knowing that he had nothing to learn from the epigones. Only in 1929 did he begin to make the acquaintance of comrade Trotsky’s writings on the Chinese revolution and he convinced himself of the correctness of the Opposition. Owing to such convictions and his refusal to fight against “Trotskyism”, he was expelled from the party in the Fall of 1929. Since then he became the leader first of one of the factions and then of the united Opposition. He contributed all his energy, his time and his means (modest though they were), that is, all that he possesses, to the movement. The K.M.T. government put up a high reward for his arrest, but he lived in the workers’ district of Shanghai, attended many meetings and directed the work, wrote articles and appeals and even supervised the technical work. In recent months, he was seriously ill, confined to bed.
 
A Heavy Blow
The K.M.T. has finally achieved its aim, utilizing the traitor in our ranks. He has been transferred to Nanking, and we do not know what fate is to befall him in the end. The K.M.T. government is not lacking in its desire for revenge. It is out of the question that the masses will speak, because they are in an amorphous state. But there are many influential Intellectuals, scholars, professors and journalists who, in view of his past services to Chinese culture, to the revolution, and because of his eminence, urge leniency towards comrade Chen. There are slanders being deliberately spread against him by the K.M.T. as if he had requested to see Chiang Kai-Shek. The first to “believe” such rumors are the Stalinists.
Comrade Chen’s revolutionary and literary activities for the last 15 years reflect his epoch with both its strong and weak sides. It was the period of the national awakening of the petty bourgeois students and the young proletariat, and many currents of socialist and revolutionary thought of the post-war epoch found their way into China. Events developed too rapidly to allow political fighters a systematic and serious study in the midst of these cross currents. Comrade Chen developed to Communism in a series of stages, therefore with some inconsistencies. Being limited by the fact that he knows only the Japanese language (he knows English poorly), he was hampered in obtaining a thorough Marxian education. He had to lead the Chinese revolution at the time when the Comintern leadership had already passed into the hands of the epigones. His development was not supplemented and assisted in due time. He is characteristic of the constant striving for progress but the remnants of old thought also weigh upon him. At a time when the Opposition urgently needs his leadership and his political experience, when his defects might be overcome under comrade Trotsky, he has been snatched away from our midst by the K.M.T. government – the greatest loss sustained by us in the last two years.
October 27, 1932
 



SHANGHAI. – The dominant event now in Far Eastern politics is the Manchurian occupation which startled the world like lightning from the blue. Japanese imperialism has carried out the wishes and plans, which it entertained for years, to subjugate Manchuria to its own territory. It chose the right moment to strike since the world economic depression has so seriously affected the United States of America and England, even as it chose the right moment during the World War to put up the famous twenty-one demands upon China. The Japanese imperialists are always at work to keep China in a state of schism and discord, and to make the militarists fight each other in order to fish in the troubled waters.
After the suppression of the revolution, after the slaughter of tens of thousands of the revolutionary masses, the Nanking government is degenerating to the same fate as the former Peking government. It can offer no resistance against the aggression of foreign imperialists, except that it still uses many revolutionary phrases which are anachronistic reminiscences of the past revolution. In the face of a predatory war launched by Japan against China, the generals of the Chang Hseuh Liang group only retreated as the Japanese army advanced, and laid down arms to let the Japanese army have a free hand and complete control over the territory where they were the rulers. They look on helplessly at the Japanese bombarding burning, pillaging and killing.
 
The Resistance of the Chinese Masses
The Nanking government, at the head of which stands Chiang Kai-Shek, is no better. Chiang Kai-Shek preaches “calmness” and “endurance” to the people just as the Manchurian generals practise non-resistance in delivering the people to the claws of Japanese imperialism. A wave of indignation and fury is spreading throughout the whole of China, students are out in the streets haranguing the crowd, mass meetings are being held, anti-Japanese associations organized; the anti-Japanese boycott is to be strengthened, circulars, leaflets and placards distributed. But unfortunately the protests and resistance among the people up to now are chiefly words and sentimental phrases which are characteristic of the petty-bourgeois movement. The workers are not now participating actively in the anti-Japanese imperialism movement because they are not quite recovered from the wounds they suffered, and there are still rigorous restrictions against them.
What is to be done to beat off the foreign invasion? What will be the outcome of it? Many public and legal organizations are clamoring for a war against Japan. But a war against Japanese imperialism means a revolutionary war. It is impossible for the Kuo Mln Tang government to conduct such a war because it fears the awakening of the broad masses. The only alternative for the Kuo Min Tang government is to appeal to the League of Nations and to America for interference in favor of China .
Kuo Min Tang’s Shaky Position
Until now it only received a rebuff from the League of Nations. After all, the latter is quite in line with Japanese imperialism, expressing satisfaction over the sophistic Japanese explanation that the military invasion is not military occupation, etc. The only road open to the Nanking government is to negotiate directly with Japan, to put up with the loss of territory and to swallow the insult. But in the long run, will the people not be exasperated by the government’s capitulation to the clattering of weapons and the unsheathing of swords by Japan imperialism? The logic of events should lead to the serious shaking of the Kuo Min Tang rule and should open many possibilities for Communist agitation.
The Kuo Min Tang rule has experienced this year the most severe crisis since its advent to power in China in 1927; its inner deep antagonisms between the Chekiang and the Kwantung factions, the revolt of the Northern militarists, the peasant war in central China, the growing misery of the masses due to heavy taxation and high cost of living, the unprecedented flood disaster, and the Japanese occupation of Manchuria are bound to exert a revolutionary influence upon the masses. Here and there we hear always the bitter tone of enmity from the lowest strata of the masses against Chiang Kai Shek, Chang Hsueh Liang and the Kuo Min Tang because they advocate non-resistance to the Japanese aggression. But where is the Communist Party which can utilize successfully the hostility of the people against the Kuo Min-Tang to overthrow its rule? In other words, where is the Communist Party, the only party existing in China, which is against all shades of the Kuo Min Tang?
We need to write the history of the Chinese Communist Party in the last two years in order to understand the present situation of the Party. Between September 1930 and January 1931, there were two overturns in the Party which resulted in the complete elimination of the Li-Li-Sian group from leadership. It was sacrificed as a scapegoat to cover the adventurous sins of the Stalinist E.C.C.I.
 
Influence of the Past on Present Chinese C.P.
It is really amusing to read the Comintern’s letter, of last November to the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party, condemning the policy of the Li-Li-Sian group. The gist of the letter was that “the course of armed uprising is already decided, the significance of the establishment of the Soviet government lies in the fact that the Chinese Communist Party is on the road towards armed uprising in the big and biggest cities”, but “comrade Li-Li-Sian saw the ripening of the revolutionary situation on a national scale,” and “proposed to start an armed uprising in Hankow when the Chinese Communist Party has in that area only two hundred Party members and one hundred and fifty red trade union members.”
But the executor Li-Li-Sian should have fully the right to ask the sages of the Comintern why they decided on the course of armed uprising in the big and biggest cities when they themselves admitted in the same letter that: “the rising tide of the labor movement, generally speaking, even in the decisive industrial cities (Hankow, Shanghai, along Yangtse, not to mention Canton, Hongkong, Darien, Harbin, etc.) lags behind the peasant movement. Even in Shanghai and Hankow, the spontaneous strike struggle did not develop rapidly. In the May and August demonstrations of this year (1931) ... the participators were only the vanguard of the vanguard. The proletariat is very weakly organized.” The defeat of the “red army” at Changsha in August 1930, and the subsequent regime of white terror made the E.C.C.I. shudder at the consequences of its own policy, and was the real reason for replacing the Li-Li-Sian leadership in order to save the face of the C.I. and to sidetrack the wrath of the Party ranks.
The letter blamed Li-Li-Sian for the failure “to organize and strengthen the revolutionary base, to unite the Soviet districts, to consolidate the conquests already made ... to organize the retreat and draw in the reserves”, and for the attempt to carry out “the tasks of the occupation of Changsha and the preparatory march on Hankow which the Red Army has not the strength to fulfill.” Upon such feeble arguments the E.C.C.I. announced the line of Li-Li-Sian to be principally antagonistic and mutually exclusive from the line of the E.C.C.I. and to be anti-marxist and anti-Leninist”. They adopted two formulas: to consolidate the revolutionary base” and “to struggle for the victory in one or several provinces”.
 
The Protective Ambiguity of the Stalinist Formulas
The Stalinist directives are always double-meaning and therefore infallible. Since the sixth congress of the party (1928), the perspective of the party had been to “struggle for victory in one or several provinces.” Whoever was doubtful of this perspective at the time of low tide of the revolution was called a liquidator and counter-revolutionary. But when the most loyal and most consistent Stalinist, Li-Li-Sian, seriously strove for this perspective (capture of Changsha and the preparatory march on Hankow), then he was all of a sudden found not to have consolidated the revolutionary base, he was branded as anti-Leninist and having principally nothing in common with the line of the E.C.C.I.
The letter of the E.C.C.I. was fatal to the party and opened a new page in its life or, rather, its degeneration. Politically it means the complete ideological disarming of the party, the loss of its perspective and orientation. Hitherto the whole party had been educated by the perspective, although a false one, of the immediate seizure of power “in one or several provinces” and “the armed uprising in the big and biggest cities”, but with the downfall of Li-Li-Sian in the party, this perspective was scattered to the winds. This perspective is replaced by such empty slogans as “Defend the Red Army”, “Defend the Soviet Government”, “Defend the Soviet Union”, “Down with the Kuo Min Tang”, “Down with Imperialism”, etc. In principle the party rejected the democratic slogans. The slogans of armed uprising and Soviets are not taken off the agenda. It is necessary to prepare. But either this perspective will not be taken seriously by the party ranks, or the party in the future will head into another catastrophe, the blame for which will be laid upon the executors. Such is the mechanism of the Stalinist leadership. Therefore, the letter of the E.C.C.I. swore that only those who have nothing in common with Bolshevism can interpret this line as a line of retreat Just the contrary, this is a completely disordered retreat which sowed confusion among the ranks of the party and lessened their confidence in the party leadership.
 
The Weakening of the Party Apparatus
Organizationally, the letter of the E.C.C.I. means the mechanical removal and the expulsion of responsible but not so meekly obedient party workers. Most of the old leading members and cadres were removed and replaced by inexperienced and theoretically poorly educated students returned from Moscow who enjoyed absolutely no confidence in the party and who are distinguished by their absolute obedience to the directives of the E.C.C.I. (its representative was Miff. Therefore, these students are also called Miff’s group). Some of the former leaders were relegated to local work. Others were expelled and formed a Right opposition which bears a prominent economist tendency. This opposition at first attracted many workers in Shanghai and North China and has its own centre and local organizations. Still other important workers, removed from positions, went over openly to the enemy, and organized skillfully the spy work which led to the arrest of tens of important party comrades (among them comrade Hsiang-Chu-Fa), to the disclosure of underground party organizations, and to the standstill of party work. The arrested comrades were shot immediately without any ceremony.
The party press often complains of the unprincipled and personal fights of the different groups. They become distrustful of each other and lack the spirit of comradeship. So long as the free discussion of the problems of the revolution is prohibited, and the leadership dominated by careerists, and the party demands obedience and lip-service from the members (members who fear to be expelled save themselves by formal recantations; those who are able and persevering are found outside the party); so long as these conditions exist, the party, as an organization which groups together men struggling for ideas, ceases to exist. The Chinese party is thus liquidated and destroyed by Stalin. He has completed what Chiang Kai-Shek has left undone. All that remains is a faint shadow of the party.
Yet we read in an appeal to the Comintern, R.I.L.U., etc., by the C.C. of the Chinese C.P. that it spoke as “the Communist party of China with its 190,000 members and the millions of workers and peasants ––”! (Inpreccor, No. 38). And still the rabid reaction rages throughout China. In fact, in the Shanghai Eastern district – the biggest industrial district – there are party members only in one big factory, numbering about 20, but when meetings were called, those attending were not as many as five! The late Hsiang Chu-Fa, in his report to the fourth plenum of the party (January of this year) said:
“The red trade union movement has sustained great loss and damage, the membership in the whole country greatly decreased. To take the example of Shanghai, the membership (in the red trade unions) has dwindled from 4,000 to about 1,000. In Shanghai, we have no connection with many workers’ struggles, there are many strikes which we cannot lead.”
In other industrial cities, the situation both of the party and the red trade union movement is only worse. There is not the least indication to prove that things have improved for the better.
The aforementioned letter of the E.C.C.I. has set the central tasks of the day for the party as follows:

To select and consolidate immediately the real red army of workers and peasants. Even at the beginning it numbers only 40,000 to 50,000 strong.
 
To establish immediately a powerful and capable Soviet government with a majority of Communists and get the best non-party workers, peasants, and soldiers to join in it.
 
In the non-soviet districts to develop the economic and political mass struggle and in the process of struggles to organize the masses.
 

Actual Conditions in the “Soviet” Areas
Thus the chief attention of the Stalinist bureaucrats is paid to the Red Army and the Soviet government, and the slogans “Defend the Red Army”, ‘’Defend the Soviet government” are written as placards on all occasions whenever there is a big event taking place. The workers in the cities are induced not to believe in their own organizations and strength but to believe in the liberating role of some force outside them – the Red Army and the Soviet districts. But what are the real conditions in the Soviet districts and the Red Army?
First of all, it was Stalin who said at the 16th Congress of the C.P.S.U. that in China “it was said that there is formed a Soviet government.” But later on the letter of the E.C.C.I. categorically denied this and said: “there is not yet a Soviet government in China; if there is, it exists only in the leaflets, on paper, and is not a realized power.” A letter published by the party organ, Party Construction discloses the real condition in the Soviet districts which entirely confirms the views expressed by the Left Opposition. Let us quote a part of it.
“Concerning the influence of the party among the masses,” the letter from the Western Hunan and Hupeh: Soviet district runs, “because the propaganda work was not done on a general scale and done badly, the masses ... consider the Communist party is little better than the Kuo Min Tang, and in many places the masses adopt the attitude that since they are the subjects, it doesn’t matter what party comes to rule them”.
“Most party leaders in the Soviet districts are kept secret from the party ranks. The Communist members do not know what the Communist party is. At the time of the suppression of the Wang-Ching-Wei group (Kuo Min Tang Re-organizationists), they wept at home because they thought they had joined the reorganizationists. The responsible party workers forget the party. For three or four months, the party organizations and nuclei have not held meetings.”
In the mass organizations there are no party groups.
“The majority of the comrades of the red districts are corrupt, become bureaucrats and express a Right wing tendency They think that since political power is already conquered, nothing more is to be done, they engage themselves for whole days in the hunt of women ...”
“The responsible comrades of the Soviet government do not give solutions to the general practical demands of the masses. At the same time the rich peasants occupy two thirds of the positions in it. The majority of the commissars are bureaucrats, so that the masses have no confidence in the Soviets and address the commissars as ‘sir’, just as they addressed the former governors.”
“Owing to the fact that the masses do not understand the Soviet, therefore in the red districts there are concealed many reactionary elements, and the Soviets are helpless toward them ...” Party Construction – N. 3-3-1931)
 
Mismanagement in Peasant Affairs
The editor of this organ pointed out that such things happen also in the Kiangsi Soviet districts. The party press and the letter of the E.C.C.I. complained that the rich peasants, and even the small landlords creep into the Soviets, into the Red Army and into the new organs of power. The land was divided in favor of the rich peasants; the poor peasants, the agricultural laborers and the coolies are hot organized into unions. The Soviets are not elected but appointed, etc., etc. But the Chinese Stalinists, together with the E.C.C.I. attribute all this to the faulty line of Li-Li-Sian. Therefore they issue on paper such slogans as “Against corruptions”, “Against bureaucracy”, “Against the Right tendency”.
They fail to understand that the causes lie deeper: in the nature of the peasantry, which is completely incapable of independent political action; that when the city proletariat remains passive, it is inevitable that the peasant guerrila warfare degenerates.
The red peasants partisans have withstood three campaigns started by the Nanking government against them during the past year, even though troops, armed with modern munitions, often outnumbered them two or three times. Yet the red partisan army has defeated them successively, killing two divisions commanders. The weakness of the government army lies in the fact that dissensions exist among the generals and the soldiers are not quite willing to fight (they complain against their officers, underpay, bad treatment), while the red partisan army enjoys the support of the peasantry; this gives them a big advantage in conducting the war. If Chiang Kai-Shek is helpless even in the face ol the red partisans in one province, Kiangsi, when in the cities, dark reaction governs, how can he cope with the upheaval of the entire nation?
The Kiangsi partisan warfare in a certain sense is a standing indictment of the crimes of Stalinist leadership in the second revolution, when it capitulated before the bourgeoisie. This time the Stalinist leadership capitulates before the peasantry, concentrates its whole work in the partisan warfare, dissolves the party into the peasant masses, giving up city work; makes the proletariat look up to the red partisan army as its savior just as it formerly made the proletariat believe in the bourgeois Kuo Min Tang as its savior. Let us entertain no illusions. The peasantry either follows the bourgeoisie or follows the proletariat.
It is just at this time, when the Manchurian events stir the whole nation, when the broad masses are indignant over the non-resistant policy of the Kuo Min Tang, when the mass movement flows over the dams of the Kuo Min Tang, when the students and the downtrodden masses come out spontaneously and write in handwritten placards against Japanese imperialism, just at this time, when the leadership of the Communist party is required, there is no Communist party. In face of such a great hurricane which arouses millions to the danger, the Chinese party completely fails to understand the meaning of this invasion as the grabbing of Chinese territory, the wringing of concessions and special rights which are possible because the Chinese Revolution is at its lowest point. The party sees the Japanese invasion only as an intervention against the Chinese revolution and the Soviet Union. Therefore their slogans, “Down with the intervention against the Chinese Revolution and the Soviet Union”, “Defend the Red Army and Soviets”, etc., are not grasped by the masses.
What an irony of leadership if we are to remember the following part of the letter of E.C.C.I. which said: “The E.C.C.I. deems it not only feasible but necessary to maneuver with the imperialists – we must at the same time with all means weaken the alliance of imperialism with the Chinese counterrevolution, to avoid the decisive conflict with it till we consolidate ourselves, to postpone the decisive struggle with the imperialists.’’
The Manchurian event is a great warning to the revolutionary Communists in China when a national ferment is not utilized owing to the absence of a Communist party. The ferment is so deep and strong that not only the lower sections of the Kuo Min Tang are more pronounced dissatisfied with the policy of the official Kuo Min Tang, not only is the military grip to a certain degree slackened so that the masses are to a great extent free to write slogans, hold meeting and express views; but even in the Nanking government, the strong bulwark of reaction and counter-revolution, certain opinions are expressed against the random slaughter of Communists because they are vigorous youths, and that the Kuo Min Tang itself is guilty since it cannot put the country in order. The masses need leadership. Provided with correct tactics, the Communist party would grow rapidly.
 
Progress and Hardships of the Left Opposition
The Chinese Left Opposition, after a long period of disunity, no sooner had achieved unity under the leadership of the International Secretariat and comrade Trotsky, then the blows of the Kuo Min Tang fell upon us. After the arrest on May 21–22 of 13 comrades, one of whom is a member of the standing committee, another important Opposition worker was arrested on August 16th. Despite the blows dealt to our organization, we still march forward, publishing a journal, organizing workers. In Shanghai, we are organizing anti-Japanese imperialism associations among the Kuo Min Tang workers.
Our central organ, The Spark, now has been transformed from a semi-monthly into a weekly, unfortunately in mimeograph form. Besides, there is a local Shanghai semi-weekly for the workers; we are planning to start another legal and printed paper. The workers now are beginning to move and we shall grow with their movement. The sustenance of the national movement hereafter will chiefly depend on whether the workers will actively enter the arena with anti-Japanese strikes and manifestations.
Despite the fact that the Stalinists continue to slander us and call us liquidators and counter-revolutionaries, the ruling Kuo Min Tang has a sober view upon us. The Stalinists fail to compromise us by expulsion; the public and the working-class recognize us as Communists, just as we never fail to recognize Wang Chang-Wei and Co. as Kuo Ming Tangists despite their expulsion by Chiang Kai-Shek. By the expulsions, the Stalinists only weaken Communism and make possible their bureaucratic self-preservation.
In the theses of the propaganda department of the C.C. of the Kuo Min Tang, sent to its local organizations, after analysing the controversy between the Stalinists and the Trotskyists, they reacted in the following words to the controversy: the tactics of the “Trotskyist” group towards China are more venomous and dangerous than those of the Stalinist group. After the defeat of the Stalinist tactics of guerilla warfare, the Communist party will go over to the Trotskyist tactic. In the near future, there will inevitably be a split into two parties.” The Kuo Min Tang indeed knows which of us is the more serious enemy. It is a better answer to the Stalinist slander than any on our own part. We hope only that the time is not far distant when this “danger” will be turned into a real one.



Shanghai, China
October 2, 1931


 
NIEL-SIH



 



We have just received the following alarming news from one of the Shanghai comrades of the Chinese Bolshevik-Leninists, dated June 23, 1931:
After such a long silence. I am writing to you at the most difficult moment that the Chinese Opposition is experiencing. On May 21–22, thirteen comrades were arrested by the Chinese police in Shanghai. Six of the comrades are members of the Central Committee of the United Opposition (the national congress of the various Opposition groups was held on May 1–2). Four of the comrades are members of the standing committee, and there thus remains only one member of the committee (comrade C.). We were about to start work systematically after so long a split in our ranks. Our united organization was hardly in existence for a month when this severe blow was dealt us. We are compelled to restore our organization under the most difficult conditions of dark reaction. The event occurred because a traitor who was formerly a responsible comrade went to betray us to the police. We are sure to make up for the loss we have suffered this time. In answer to the blow of our enemies and the traitors, our comrades will double find treble their efforts to close our ranks and heal our sores …



 


N.S.



* * *
The terrible information which our comrade communicates to us follows directly upon the news published by the Daily Worker of the martyrdom at the hands of the Chinese nationalist assassins of the secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, comrade Hsiang Chung Fei. The sanguinary terror which the counter-revolutionary Chinese bourgeoisie has conducted against the proletariat and peasantry, claiming its victims by the tens of thousands leaves little room for doubt that the arrested comrades, including the leaders of the Left Opposition, are in imminent danger of execution – providing that this punishment for their revolutionary devotion has not already been visited upon them by the butchers of Chiang Kai-Shek. The victims of the Chinese white terror, practised by a barbaric bourgeoisie which mounted to power four years ago on the stirrup held for it by Stalin, Bucharin, Martinov and other Mensbeviks, must be protected from the Chiangs and Wang Chin Weis by an iron ring of solidarity of all the workers in the world. The voice of protest must sound so loudly that it compels the executioners to release their prey.
Demand the release of the imprisoned Chinese revolutionists!
Demand an end to the horrible white terror of the Chinese bourgeoisie and their imperialist patrons of America, England, France, and Japan!
 



SHANGHAI – The Chinese revolution of 1925–27 was drowned in blood by the joint forces of the imperialists and the national bourgeoisie with the help of Stalin. The Communist Party suffered a series of defeats in the struggle and became completely impotent both by physical extermination of the white terror and the demoralization caused by Stalin’s theories. The Sixth (last) Congress of the Party held in June 1928 did not sum up the lessons of the greatest revolution in the East and straighten our political line in order to prepare the third Chinese revolution; instead it deepened the past mistakes and disarmed the Party ideologically and politically before the bourgeoisie.
The Congress defined the character of the next Chinese revolution as still a bourgeois democratic one and refused to see that the course and experiences of the 1925–27 revolution have shown that the solution of the tasks of a bourgeois democratic revolution can only lie in the dictatorship of the proletariat. The Congress gave ambiguous expressions concerning the present stage of developments, saying that although there is no broad mass revolutionary upheaval, it is nevertheless inevitable; we can already see weak symptoms of this upheaval but we must not overestimate them.
 
An Open Road to Adventurism
Thus the Congress did not give correct and definite estimations of the present period as the one between two revolutions, and did not put up transitional, revolutionary democratic slogans for the conquest of the masses. Instead it opened all doors to every adventurist explanation of the resolution. Every manifestation of discontent among the masses, no matter what character it assumes no matter how sporadic and spontaneous it is, a defensive strike or a mutiny of the soldiers, or the riots of the rickshaw coolies in the breaking up of tramways – all this is put into the scheme of the approach of the great mass revolutionary upheaval is seized upon to prepare the uprising or general strike. Those who do not believe this way are, of course, Trotskyists and therefore liquidators.
By defining the character of the next Chinese revolution (or the present unfinished one, according to the Stalinists) as bourgeois democratic, the Party raised in its Program of the Chinese Revolution at the Present Stage ten demands, as for example: Expropriation of the enterprises and banks of foreign capital; establishment of the workers-peasants-soldiers Soviet government; confiscation of the lands of all landlords and transference of all of it to the peasants. This means that the enterprises and banks of Chinese capital shall not be touched and violated in the revolution. It also gave elastic formulae concerning the peasants’ movement, such as,
“It is not correct deliberately to force (or to intensify) the anti-rich peasants struggle ... but this is not to mean that we should give up the class struggle against the rich peasants ...”
Such formulations naturally become repulsive and excite indignation among the rank and file of the Party members under the conditions of sharp class struggle antagonisms in China after the revolution. Already in the enlightment campaign on the Sixth Congress, the workers in unit meetings demanded why the enterprises of Chinese capital should not be confiscated by the revolutionary power. The workers were not silenced by the scholasticism of the Party functionaries and said in indignant protest: “You are the second Chiang Kai-Sheks, only without arms,” and then quit the meetings.
The tactics towards the rich peasants, when put into practise, can only mean the union with them but not the struggle against them. The rich peasant in China is most hated by the poor peasants, and by the village laborers, because he is a usurer, robs the poor peasant by making loans at heavy rates of interest. Now the Party calls upon the poor peasants not to force the struggle against the rich ones when they should be the direct object of attack. What did the poor peasant answer? In the province of Hupeh, for example, they said in one meeting: “We shall make no more revolutions. What good does it do us?” They slept in the meeting instead of taking an interest in it, that is, they passively resisted the official policy. In some other provinces, the rich peasants made their way into the Party, filled its ranks and even occupied leading posts there. When the Central Committee issues its directives to such Party locals, with slogan against taxes of every kind, against rent and payment of loans, then these locals only carried out the directives against taxes but not against rent and loans.
 
Zig-Zagging Policies
Because of the Stalinist leadership in the Comintern, the Party is left without any policy and definite line. It is helpless before events. Right on the eve of the war between Chiang Kai-Shek and the Kwang-Si clique in the Spring of last year, the Central Committee of the Party categorically stated that no war is possible between these two militarists’ groups, and this in face of the feverish military preparations and transport of arms which convinced even the local Party organs of the inevitability of war. Only yesterday it spoke of not forcing the struggle against the rich peasants and denounced the Trotskyists for such a standpoint. Today, it opens a campaign in the Party press against those members of the Party who show hesitation in the struggle and announces itself ready for fighting the rich peasants to the bitter end. Yesterday it said that Chiang Kai-Shek represents the bourgeoisie against the “feudal power” of the Kwang-Si clique. Today, it says that “the Kiang-Su (the province where the Chiang government is located) ruling class is dominated by feudal elements”. All these theories are changed like the weather or one’s linen. What serious revolutionist can have confidence in such a leadership? In the sphere of action, the Party leadership shows no less light-mindedness. Since the first of May, the Party has again entered the era of adventurism. Demonstrations were held in the streets according to the calendar of revolutionary festivals, if not with the masses then with the Party members alone. Instead of “taking possession of the streets”, some hundred people together with the bystanders, stand on the sidewalks of an appointed street at an appointed time, then someone gives the signal with firecrackers, some slogans are shouted, leaflets are thrown into the street, and then there are some arrests, most of the participants and observers going quietly home.
Of course such farcical demonstrations can only lower the standard of Communism, make the Communist workers leave the Party’s ranks, and arouse the antipathy of the workers. The attendants at the demonstrations become less as the former become more frequent and desperate. When the attendants diminish, then workers are hired to show up in the streets! No serious agitational work is developed in the factories or works, in the important big factories only two or three Communist workers remain and even then no regular meetings take place – sometimes for two months. The local organizers get in touch with them only when it is necessary to enlist them in demonstrations.
 
Decline in Membership
The membership under such conditions is miserable. According to an official admission in a circular of the Shanghai Eastern district (the biggest industrial district in Shanghai), the membership decreased since last August from 85 to 82. The membership in all Shanghai, according to the most optimistic figure, is about 800. There are many other industrial cities where the Communist workers do not count more than ten. We owe all this to Stalin’s blind policy of adventurism, to the destructive work of the Stalinists which alienated the Party from the workers. Indeed, things have even gone so far that in some Shanghai factories, the Communist workers try to organize their own unions behind the backs of the official leadership and oppose their meddling in their affairs.
The characteristic feature of this period of adventurism is that it is combined with opportunism of the worst kind. The C.C. last year sent Communists into the army of the Left Kuo Min Tang generals to cooperate with them in the military campaign against Chiang Kai-Shek. The Party has sent representatives to attend the anti-Chiang Kai-Shek conference in Hong Kong in which the reactionary militarists and the Left Kuo Min Tang participated. Many lower Party workers were taken in by the Left Kuo Min Tang’s military adventure against Chiang Kai-Shek. Others followed the tail of the Left Kuo Min Tang in the economic struggle and trade union tactics. At the top of the Party, a wild campaign is developed against the Left K.M.T. full of invective and abusive words, but behind the scenes, the official leadership coquettes with these same Lefts, organizes the armed uprising together with them. The Central task and slogan of today’s official leadership is the general political strike, partisan’s warfare, armed uprising, organizing the local uprisings, preparing to establish the revolutionary power, etc., that is, to run further away from the workers in order to combine with the Left Kuo Min Tang and become in fact the instrument of the petty bourgeoisie.
 
The Guerilla Warfare
As to the guerilla warfare, in many places it becomes “aimless burning, killing and pillaging under the leadership of the declassed elements” (from the Party circular), since it lacks a mass basis. It sometimes violates the poor peasant’s property because the armed forces of the landlords and rich peasants are too strong to permit of plundering. In other villages, the guerilla warfare which has some mass basis, divides the land among the peasants and annuls loans, doing something in the interest of the peasants by exterminating the landlords and bureaucrats. But these acts are too far from the important cities to exercize any influence upon them, and besides when it assumes a more menacing character, it is overpowered and driven away by the government’s troops.
Since last year, the Party has concentrated all its propaganda work in the struggle against “Trotskyism”, because the Communist Opposition has begun to work in China. Since then, it has taken a series of organizational measures against us. It fights most fiercely against one slogan, the Constituent Assembly, denouncing it as the slogan of the Left Kuo Min Tang. Thus, the constituent assembly, together with the 8-hour day, the confiscation of land, and the fight for the complete independence of China and self-determination of nationalities within China, which form our transitional revolutionary democratic demands to mobilize the masses, are “liquidators’ demands” in the eyes of the Stalinists. But that does not in the least prevent the official leadership of the Party from organizing the “League for the Struggle for Freedom”, together with the discontented petty bourgeois elements, intellectuals and professors, which is necessarily a decorative and helpless institution like the Anti-Imperialist League all over the world: a veritable tail of the petty bourgeoisie.



 
April 13, 1930


Niel-Sih



 







NOTE: This article by one of the leaders of the Chinese Opposition was received after our last issue was off the press. It gives a first hand picture and Marxist analysis of the guerilla warfare now going on in Southern China and serves as a thorough reply to the falsehoods and anti-Marxist nonsense which the official Party press (particularly its Chinese “expert” Doonping) publishes on events in China. Our next issue will contain another letter from comrade Niel-Sih. – Ed.)





SHANGHAI – TO have an idea of the real importance of the official Communist Party, it should be noted that according to the official figures the membership in Shanghai does not exceed one thousand. The organization has no active life; all is concentrated in the hands of the apparatus. The situation is still worse in the provinces.
The recent congress of the Party at Dazhan-Sus proclaimed that the revolutionary situation was “ripe” and appealed for the general strike and the armed uprising in the cities, and for the development of the guerilla war in the country.
Certain strikes imposed from above were terminated either with a lockout by the bourgeoisie or with bloodshed; in the best case, by the economic defeat of the workers. A spirit of passivity prevails within the textile industry which is the principal industry iu Shanghai. The bourgeoisie conducts a systematic offensive against the workers, replacing men in textiles by women and children.
Two or three Communist workers can sometimes be found in the most important industrial enterprises. For a long time nobody took the trouble to keep in contact with them. But the First of August saw the beginning of a period of artificial explosions: the Party organized demonstrations, one after the other. Outside of the kernel proper of the membership, the demonstration only attracted some chance passers-by. For the most part they proceeded as follows:
In a busy street, with many passers-by, small merchants, buyers and idlers, a bunch of Communists arrive and begin to shout: “Down with the Kuo Min Tang! Long live the Communist International!” and distribute leaflets. But this method gives no serious results: the leaflets fall on the sidewalk and street and are swept up with the dirt by the municipal street cleaners. A dozen demonstrators are led to the station house. Next day, the Party organ proclaims that the demonstration was magnificent, with thousands of participants, when only about one or two hundred Party members could be seen. Such demonstrations were frequently launched for the most futile motives.
On the other hand, Communists are sent to the Left Kuo Min Tang generals in order to help them in the constitution of new troops. It is even said that the Communists sent a delegate to the conference for a bloc against Chiang Kai-Shek. This conference was recently held in Hong Kong. It goes without saying that while it maintains its collaboration with the Left Kuo Min Tang, the official Party and its organ, The Red Flag, conducts a rabid campaign against the Left Opposition.
The situation is still worse among the provincial Party forces. No campaign has been conducted against the Kuo Min Tang for a long time, on the belief that was a finished phase and that after their disillusionment with the Kuo Min Tang the workers would rejoin the Communist ranks of their own accord.
In reality they did nothing of the kind. The Left Kuo Min Tang showed considerable flexibility, even taking the lead in numerous strike movements. In short, after the defeats of the demonstrations organized on the initiative of the C.P., many workers can be seen abandoning the Party and going over to the Left Kuo Min Tang and joining the yellow trade unions. This is what happened especially among the miners of Tang-Chan, near Tien-Tsin.
In the provinces, the strikes, acts of sabotage and other conflicts were often provoked in an entirely artificial manner in order to justify the schema of a revolutionary recrudescence. This sort of demonstration succeeded in embracing only a restricted part of the workers’ forces and contributed more to weakening than strengthening the movement
 
Rich Peasant Elements in Party
The very small proportion of proletarian elements within the Party frequently leads to the decay of the movement in the villages. Also, the rich peasants often join the Party. Easily solidarizing with the struggle against taxes, the assessments on domainal land leases and other state impositions.
Conversely, these same rich peasants show themselves basically hostile to the directives of the Party on the leases between individuals and usurious loans. In those regions, the poor peasants break away from the revolution, become discouraged and go to sleep at meetings. The movement has no hold on the class of poor peasants because it does not constitute a struggle against the rich peasants.
In the villages of the Tung-Cheiu and Kwang-Si provinces, the Party organizations are peopled with lumpen-proletarian elements or bandits whose armed detachments often cover themselves with the name of Red Army. Further in the same province of Tung-Cheiu the rich proprietors call themselves Communists in order to seek an alliance with these armed groups. Such proprietors often pay the “Red” chiefs so as to be authorized, under their protection, to levy rental rates on the poor peasant. When the peasants ask why these Communists levy rents, they are told that it is for various needs, including the provisionment of troops. Such troops of so-called Communists do not limit themselves to levying contributions on the rich, but also on the poor, and in general carry on numerous exactions and violence, arousing the hatred of the peasants and compromising the names of Communism and the Red Army.
Everything shows that with such a weak development of the revolutionary spirit in the villages and such an oppression of the proletariat, the guerilla war in the country can lead to nothing but pure banditry. In any event, that is the situation in the province of Kiang Su.
Frequently, also, troops of partisans proceed to the temporary occupation of small localities only in order to give their chiefs the opportunity to enrich themselves at the expense of the population and the State treasury. This it what is happening especially in the Hupei province.
 
Tchu-Deh’s Forces
The detachment of the Communist Tchu-Deh, composed of the remnants of Ye-Tin’s forces, has been reinforced by new groups of rebels. Pursued by the regular forces, this detachment goes from Right to Left, utilizing the lack of any contact between the governmental forces of the four provinces of Hunan, Kiang-Si, Kwantung and Fukien. This detachment, or at least its nucleus already exists since 1927. It wages war without cessation. It escapes all pursuit, taking refuge in the mountainous parts of the four provinces mentioned above. Tchu-Deh’s detachment distinguishes itself advantageously from the groups of bandits in that it really pursues a revolutionary aim. As soon as it invades a new region, it proceeds to share the land among the peasants, proclaims the annulment of debts, constitutes village Soviets, furnishes the poor peasants with provisions as far as it is possible, so that as soon as the government troops arrive the detachment leaves nothing but regrets among the peasants.
Personally, Tchu-Deh is a former Chinese student in Germany, a Communist, formerly a divisional general under the Wang Chin Wei government. The operations of this detachment, however, produce only a weak impression here because in the present general circumstances, they lack perspective. What the Moscow Pravda says, cited by the Left Opposition press, is manifestly exaggerated is order the better to serve the needs of the “Third Period”.
Our group has just issued its first appeal for the establishment of a Left Communist. League. The work is only beginning.



 
January 25, 1930


Niel-Sih



 

