

The Progressive Miners of America are now facing a life and death struggle against the operators, the State, the gun thugs and the Lewis machine. For the past several weeks, the policies of the Right wing leadership have weakened the union and now the rank and file are beginning to assert themselves in order to save the PMA. As yet, it is by no means a losing fight. Proper steps and correct tactics now can make up for the lost ground and will result in a victory and in the development of the struggle to a higher level.
In class struggle – against the Peabody, Horner, Lewis forces – the PMA surged forward, and like a flash out of the dark night heralded a new stage in the American labor movement. After four years of crisis, after the American workers had been driven back year in and year out, when the whole class was still in disorderly retreat from the capitalists’ onslaught on wages and the standard of living, the Illinois miners called a halt and stood their ground. This acted as a temporary rallying ground for the class as a whole. New life began to surge, new hopes began to rise.
But as soon as the union stabilized itself, the Right wing policies in the union took shape and began to dominate. Now it is time to call a halt, to smash the class collaboration policies and to swing out again into the channels of class struggle.
The Illinois miners’ revolt and the birth of the Progressive Miners of America came at a period when the American working class was breaking with its past and entering a new period of labor history based upon the entirely new foundation.
This change in class relations in America, and the contradictions it reflects in the Progressive Miners of America are not understood by the majority of the leadership of the new union. They do not understand this condition and are feeling their way forward the best they can. Quite often they take a few steps backwards. No one can place too much blame upon this leadership. Rather, one must look to the vanguard of the working class and find out how they have understood the situation.
Only one current of Communism, the Left Opposition, understood this situation, laid the theoretical foundation for the rise of the new union, just as the Illinois mines laid it in a material way through the blood of their ranks. All other Communist currents failed miserably. The Lovestonite, Right wing Communists, to this day do not understand what the struggle is about and instead have lost themselves in the fetishism of fear of dual unionism. They say the miners should not have left the Lewis union.
The Stalinists played an equally miserable role. Only after the union was a reality, after it had fought its first major battles, did the Stalinists stop throwing mud at the union. At no time did they understand the upsurge. At no time did they try to criticize its natural shortcomings politically. Now they are trying to make up for lost time and in their clumsy way, they are blundering as usual. Stalinism stands condemned to a greater degree than the progressive leaders who made serious mistakes in their struggle against Lewis.
We have no time to portion out “justice.” The PMA is in a life and death struggle and the Right wing policies must be exposed it is to live. The Left wing forces must be united. Much has already been said in the columns of The Militant about the mistakes of the Right wing and of others. Much more can be said but the main danger now is the danger that the Left wing will not unite, if the Left wing cannot find common minimum demands in action, if they are to remain divided, then the Right wing will continue in its ruinous policy.
There are many progressives who would like to organize a Left wing that excludes the Communists because they think the Right wing may raise a howl and claim that the Communists are trying to capture the union. On the other hand, there are Stalinists who would like to have mechanical control and leadership assured in advance. Both these forces must come to their senses. The militant miners must do all possible to guard against both dangers. No substantial Left wing can be organized without the Communists. No Progressive Miners Union can survive in this period of labor history if the Communists are hunted inside of it like rats, as they are in the unions of the A.F. of L. labor fakers.
The permanent crisis of millions of unemployed, the relief which will pass over to a form of social insurance, the vast army of idle surplus labor that will permanently press down the wage level; the capitalist struggle to maintain a falling rate of profit at the expense of the workers – in short, the Europeanization of the American working class, has already set in. This vast economic change in America and in world capitalism and the new class relationship lie at the bottom of the new period of American labor history. In this, the struggle of the Progressive Miners of America is a prelude to coming storms and battles of the American workers. Trade Unions can no longer stabilize themselves as in the past decades. Reformists must adapt themselves to the new conditions if they desire to serve their masters. But they will not have solid footing. The class struggle of the American proletariat will make life miserable for them.
In this sense, the Right wing policies of the PMA must not be confused with the Right wing of the average A.F. of L. union. There is distinction, which was not brought about by the leaders. The distinction has been brought about by the different conditions and ability of the leaders to adapt themselves to these conditions.
For example, the Gillespie Mass Meeting on Decoration Day heard Flaherty and Pearcy speak about how the action of the bosses was driving the workers into becoming Reds. Flaherty said that if fighting for the union means being a Red and a Communist then he was a red.
The union under the Right wing leadership is slipping fast. The Right wing knows which way the wind is blowing and is already adapting itself to the condition with radical phrases. But the time for phrases is past. We need action now, before it is too late. The more advanced element of the Left wing must proceed to organise a Left wing in every local. No political discrimination. They must fight for the following program, which is not the private property of the Left Opposition, but the collective opinion of other forces as well.
The members must fight for rank and file control and in no way must confuse this with the wrong slogan of “rank and file leadership.” The Left wing must fight for class struggle policies and against the policies of class collaboration. Every attempt, on any trumped up charge, to expel Left wing militants because they are Communists must be fought by the whole membership.
Mass action must replace the present passive attitude of the union. Mass action as the base of the legal fight of the Taylorville cases, the Webb-Wang case and the Mooney case etc., must be started at once. Mass picketing must be resumed.
The Union must take up the fight of the unemployed throughout the entire field. The organization of the unemployed in every coal county into unemployed organizations having the backing of the Progressive Miners of America will enable these workers, who are in the main miners, to obtain more relief than they are getting now. This will keep up the fight and strengthen tremendously the struggle against the operators. Some places (Carlinville and Springfield) the Relief Agents are driving thru forced labor for relief. If this is accomplished, the operators will see no need of paying even a five dollar scale.
The struggle for the six hour day and five day week with wage increases must be put forward as a concrete demand of struggle. The struggle for wage increases to meet the inflation prices (30 percent increases in some mining towns already) must be started.
The miners’ union has already been very successful in drawing in the women. The Ladies Auxiliary has often been the backbone for some spineless creatures in difficult situations. The union must draw in all the youth in the coal camps who are unemployed, potential miners or potential strike breakers, Their power, added to that of the Ladies Auxiliaries, will increase the fighting capacities of the union.
The talk and action of sending organizers to other fields does not answer the important question of how to spread out nationally. The organizing of the Left wing in the UMWA in other fields is necessary, but the main thing on the order of the day is the CALLING OF A NATIONAL CONFERENCE. Invite the West Virginia miners, the Nova Scotia miners, the National Miners’ Union and all Left wing groups in the UMWA. This is the main task of the PMA. Any play with words and talk of a national organization without this move will play into the hands of the Right wing and eventually, the operators.
The Left wing miners should organize their own Left Wing. No one can do this job for them. However, they must not get the opinion that only a coal miner knows anything about tactics for coal miners and only a bricklayer knows anything about tactics for bricklayers, etc. The advice and the help of the whole Left wing must be utilized. The miners’ Left wing caucuses should, however, be for and of miners. We do not need any advice about the danger of outsiders. This is a reactionary slogan. What we need is Left wing action. And the quicker, the better.
 



The speedy adoption of the Industrial Control Bill was no surprise to the industrialists. Before the bill became law three conferences of the railroad presidents, the coal operators and the iron and steel men were held in Chicago. Long before President Roosevelt signed the bill, the new administrator, H.S. Johnson, was busy at work on his job as the head of industrial control. Within the first week after the bill became law five major industrial groups, which, in normal times employ two-thirds of the workers of America, were in session working out their industrial codes.
The iron and steel, soft coal, automobile, oil and textile bosses are busy planning how they can increase profits under the terms of the bill. The twenty leading manufacturers of oil burners have already drafted their industrial code and sent it to Washington for approval. The railroad presidents commenced the good work with an announcement of a 22½ percent wage cut.
The Industrial Control Bill which is accredited to Roosevelt, was, in reality, originated by the leading financiers and industrialists. Their democratic office boys, headed by Roosevelt, only carry out their orders. The Industrial Control Bill is a necessary step to tighten up the decaying structure of capitalism at home. It is aimed to hurry the process of centralization and concentration to enable the American imperialists to obtain a position of advantage in the intense and bitter international economic and military struggle for world markets and trade advantages. The small producers and others who will be eliminated in the process are opposed to the bill, as are a handful of capitalists. The competition and anarchy of capitalist production will be “organized” on a higher level. However, the leading section, and the real rulers of the country were behind the bill. Those who put up a howl, such as the merchants and manufacturers, were not objecting to the bill, but to the section which gives lip service to the workers’ interests. There are a section of the open shoppers who continue to speak plain English. They are not yet familiar with the new kind of talk, copied from the European reformers – a language which gives lip service to the workers’ interest every time a new attack upon the working class is to be launched.
 
A Form of State Capitalism
The Industrial Control Bill, as a form of state capitalism, is a desperate attempt to find a way out of the contradictions which engulf capitalism. Traylor, the La Salle Street banker, speaking before the soft coal operators in convention at the Drake Hotel in Chicago, where they were planning how to make more profits said, “the program of the new administration is an effort to save ourselves from annihilation.”
“There is more security in the new deal, whatever that may be, than there is in the communism of Russia, which might be our program if we failed in the old stand-pat program which you and I believe in.”
We are informed by the bourgeois economists and the rest of their liars that the “planned economy” is to inaugurate an era of “fair competition”. But have not these apologists for capitalism informed us for the last score of years that any governmental interference, capitalist or otherwise, into private business, will wreck our industrial system and eliminate fair competition? Industry and government always were partners and always will be, because government can be nothing else than an instrument of suppression used by the dominating economic group. The only difference is that in the past the relationship was more disguised only in emergencies, in wars, and in the period of decay capitalism is the relationship of the economic masters and the government office boys stripped naked before us.
The conferences already held, and what little has leaked out from them, clearly indicate the line of attack of the industrialists in complying with the Industrial Control Bill. The relation to labor will first be kept in the status quo where ever possible. Where necessary, the industries will fulfill the requirements of,, the law, which, at the most, call for a “safe-and-sound” class collaboration scheme.
The Chicago Tribune, reporting the steel men’s conference, says,
“The Youngstown steel companies have been forming ‘employees councils’. In none of these movements does the word ‘union’ appear.”
“The Industrialists, it is said, are trying to steal a march on the American Federation of Labor, which through President Green recently announced the start of a nation-wide drive to unionize the industries.”
 
How the Coal Operators Take It
The soft coal operators have fought any attempt or suggestion to change the status quo. In Illinois they will deal with the unions but in the rest of the fields they will deal with the unorganized. The Chicago Tribune quotes a coal operator as follows: “Our job is going to be one of the most difficult. It is comparatively easy for the makers of shoes to get together and add a dollar to the price of shoes. There is no substitute for shoes But how can you add an arbitrary dollar to the price of a ton of coal. A few million building owners get out a pencil and start figuring how much they can save by using oil, or gas, or electricity.” The industrialist conferences are secret but any one who has an ounce of brains can easily see that their secret is, how they can add another dollar on a pair of shoes or a ton of coal. If prices go up thirty percent, the kind-hearted capitalists and their government will beat the drums and announce a five or ten percent raise. And the capitalists will pocket the twenty percent difference ...
The Industrial Control Bill is a capitalist reform. They drove this bill through without the pressure of the working class, and yet the fear of the 17 million unemployed was one of the whips that drove them to make this a law. If there had been a working class pressure, under the leadership of social reformers who sit on top to hold in check this pressure, the bill would have been to a far greater degree sugar coated with phrases about labor and labors rights. The difference between reforms and “social” reforms is the difference between the absence of working class pressure altogether and working class pressure misdirected by the misleaders and agents of the capitalists in our ranks. Without the pressure,as is the case with the Industrial Control Bill, the capitalists can drive through their form of State capitalism without the service of the social reformers to keep the restless working class in check.
 
How the Labor “Leaders” React
The labor leaders are attempting to jump on the band wagon and help the capitalists put over their Industrial Control Law – of course, with paid jobs, the same as in the war period. The Right wing of the Progressive Miners are competing with Lewis for the job of shackling the miners to the new slavery. Pearcy took a special trip to Washington for this purpose. The Communists, the only ones capable of pointing out the meaning of the Industrial Control Bill, and of rallying the class to action against the capitalist offensive are bound hand and foot and gagged by the Stalinist bureaucracy, who do not measure up to the task. (See the article on the Gillespie Conference, elsewhere in this issue).
The “planned economy” of the capitalists will make the future of the workers under the “new deal” worse than the past. The “Century of Progress” witnessed the further centralization and concentration of wealth and capital in the hands of fewer and fewer capitalists while the vast majority have been driven to deeper levels of misery and degradation.
The working class battle against the capitalist offensive organized by the Industrial Control Bill will have to be fought in the sphere of unemployment relief, the struggle for wages, hours, and the unionization of the workers into class struggle unions. To do this, the working class must be told what the “planned economy” means. The Communists must present a Marxian analysis, organize the class, especially to head off the action of the Greens, Wells and Lewises, who desire to utilize the State capitalist measures for their class collaboration schemes.
 
The Workers’ Answer: Class Struggle Organization
It is not difficult to understand that a law which gives the capitalist and workers “equality” on paper means nothing in reality, except giving the strongest organized force the right to do what it pleases. In this case the capitalists are well organized and entrenched. In addition it is they who have made the laws of the “game” which we must play. Our lack of pressure, due to the lack of any worthwhile, powerful, organized industrial unions as well as to a blunderbuss leadership within the Communists ranks (that of the Stalinists) gives the capitalists the overwhelming odds in deciding the whole question.
There is only one way the working class can answer the capitalists and their Industrial Control Laws: The organization of powerful industrial unions of class struggle, capable of bringing working class pressure upon the capitalist system. Upon such a foundation, the American working class can build a movement that will become powerful enough to abolish capitalism.
We must oppose the Industrial Control Law; present a correct analysis of the Industrial Control Law; agitate and propagate to rally the class; organize a powerful Left wing in the A.F.L.; unite all the Left wing forces nationally such as the TUUL, the PTUEC, the CPLA, etc. for common action amalgamate the craft unions, such as the 21 railroad union, etc.
We must answer the capitalist drive with a powerful united front drive of the workers against the capitalist offensive.
 



Springfield, Ill. – The Workers’ Committee, led by Karl Borders, was the main organizing force of the Chicago unemployed conference on June 13th, which ended in a broad united front of the existing unemployed organizations and the establishment of a National Unemployed Federation.
The call for the conference stated that no Communist would be seated. The press reports further emphasized this fact and the credentials committee appointed by the Borders’ Committee ignored the credentials of the Unemployed Councils and fraternal delegates from the workers’ political organizations until a heated, three hour discussion on the credentials committee report obtained a majority vote against them and for the seating of all delegates present.
This first victory against the Right wing was an open revolt of that very select conference called by the Borders’ Committee itself. It was a revolt of delegates from all parts of the country who realized that Communists cannot be excluded from the Unemployed Federation.
After the report of the credentials’ committee, the conference divided into two sections, the Right and the Left, with plenty of struggles within these two main floor tendencies in the caucuses and committees.
The determining factors of the Left wing bloc fought for the seating of the Unemployed Council delegates, for an Unemployed Federation, for the Leninist United Front tactic as proposed by the Left Opposition, and for an executive committee to include representatives of all political tendencies from the Left to the extreme Right.
The struggle to have unity on the floor by the Left wing bloc enabled the Left to carry every major struggle and thereby, to take another step forward and to save the conference from any reactionary decisions.
After the committee reports were amended, they were then adopted unanimously, except that of the constitution committee, with Dennis Butt as chairman, which received a vote of 87 to 17.
This means that the Right wing endorsed the decisions of the conference which it had called.
Now we are informed by Borders and his committees that they are splitting away and that they advise others to do the same.
The Borders Committee desired mechanical control of the Executive Committee. When it could not obtain this and when the enemies of working class unity, who fear unity, put pressure on Borders, he attempts to split our ranks.
Borders learned a second lesson this time. First he learned that the workers demanded a genuine united front, and second, he learned from his own organization that his attempt to split the Unemployed Federation brought a split in his own Workers Committee. The majority of the Workers Committee, led by George Leach and others, are continuing with the Federation. Borders received a majority vote on the city central committee, but the Unemployed Federation received the majority of his members and the largest locals!
 



Gillespie, Ill. – The class collaboration policies of the Right wing of the Progressive Miners of America has been weakening the union in its struggle against the operators and their agents. The red baiting campaign of the operators aiming to divide and weaken the union forces, has been picked up by the Right wing element and is now being followed up in an attempt in the Springfield sub-district to expel about three dozen militant Left wingers. The first three slated to go are Joe Angelo, Freeman Thompson and Voizy.
In the period of formation of the PMA, special provisions were made to admit into the progressive union all militants expelled by the Lewis-Fishwick-Walker group. Workers who were the first to lead the struggle against Lewis and company and who laid the groundwork upon which the PMA was built. Now, President Pearcy does not remember or is trying to forget these provisions. The Right wingers tell these militants to first get a job and then they will obtain a card. However, all are members of the union and have been functioning for months. Further, one cannot get a job in the mines unless he has a union card. Perhaps Pearcy wants them to get a job in the scab mines?
The Left wing is organizing to smash this attempt to exclude and expel the most militant element in the PMA.
The need of an organized Left wing in every local of the PMA to fight for a program of class struggle and against the steady shift to the right and the policy of class collaboration, as pointed out for months in the Militant, is now a living reality in the coal fields. The Stalinites are trying to catch up with events in Illinois.
 
After the National Miners Union
was defeated and became a paper organization in Illinois and the Left Opposition proposed the return of the Left wing in the UMWA, the Stalinites opposed the Left wingers who took this course. Later when the rank and file movement split away from Lewis and company and the Left Opposition proposed that all Left wingers enter and build a Left wing in the new union movement the Stalinites boycotted the movement and its conventions. Still later, when the revolt broke out and the Progressive Miners of America was established, the Stalinites did not understand the movement, stayed out of it and used most of their energy and the columns of the Daily Worker to throw mud at the union and its leaders and at no time did they present proper political criticism and directives.
Such a policy by the Stalinites played into the hands of the more reactionary element, split the forces of the Left wing, and thereby helped intrench the Right wing in the saddle at the very start.
The turn of the C.I. toward the united front after the German defeat forced a turn in America and in the coal fields. The Stalinists changed their policy in the coal fields and in the last few mouths have had a proper program that was far superior to their previous wrong program in the coal fields. The Stalinists have realized the necessity of a Left wing in the PMA, for more than one reason. But their method of building a Left wing shows no improvement upon the past. They have already forgotten their new turn and returned to their old formula.
On May 21, they decided to organize a Left wing and start at once to call a state conference one week later on the 28th. They consulted no one who is not a Stalinist or close sympathizer of the party and preceded to call the state conference. They said they tried to reach everybody but did not have time, and with such a flimsy excuse proceeded to exclude everybody except themselves and those who stumbled upon their plan and broke in on them.
In the caucus, they proceeded, over the advice and motions of the Left Opposition miners’ fraction and others to organize a provisional committee, and adopt a draft program. They gave the committee power to call another conference later and to get in touch with all other Left wing groups, some that were formed before the caucus.
Instead of a provisional committee on the narrow foundation of Stalinism and the adoption of a draft program, asking other groups and tendencies TO COME TO US, the Left Opposition miners’ frac-tioh. proposed that we elect a negotiations committee and that this caucus GO TO THE OTHER LEFT WINGERS, and that together, these forces, upon a broad foundation, through the united front, call a meeting where a provisional committee is established. In the meantime, as a first step the L.O. miners proposed that we organize Left wing groups in as many locals as possible.
The Left Oppostion miner’s fraction will do all that is possible to iron out the difficulties created by the Stalinites and bring all Left wing tendencies into one broad united front Left wing group. The Left Opposition miners fraction at the same time realized that many of the other Left wing tendencies will not go as far as we desire. But at the same time we realize that only the inclusion of the broadest layers will be able to defeat the Right wing, the Operators and their Lewis agents.
 



The June 11th Gillespie Conference, called by the Progressive Trade Union Educational Committee, consisting of Left wing trade unionists in this section ended by preventing the establishment of a New Federation of Labor and by reaffirming the decisions of the previous conferences. The backbone of the conference, as usual, was the delegation from the Progressive Miners of America and the numerically largest force from other organizations was under the control of the Stalinists.
The policy committee took a correct position by rubber stamping the program and policy laid down at the previous conferences and by bringing in some proposals for concrete action and for committees of action to be established in the different sections of the country to work toward the coordination of all Left wing groups in the trade union movement.
However, the Stalinists, who had the largest number of delegates in the conference, and the policy committee which they controlled, failed miserably to measure up to the task confronting the American working class and the needs of the conference. To call a conference to rubber stamp the decisions of the previous conference is a waste of energy. Conferences are not called for such a purpose. A conference of Left wing trade unionists must consider the most pressing problems of the class, point out the dangers developing and confronting us and map out a program of action for the class to fight against the capitalist offensive.
 
Thrust of Industrial Control Bill
The most menacing capitalist measure confronting our class and the least understood by our class at this stage is the Industrial Control Law of the capitalists and their state. In the future, when the labor history as well as the economic history of America is written, this measure will stand out in all its capitalist ugliness as an attempt to hold up a tottering structure and beat down the workers.
The Gillespie Conference was the only Left wing conference of trade unionists held in this period and the logical starting point to rally the American workers against the Industrial Control Law and to fight the labor misleaders’ plan to tie the American workers to this scheme.
The Left Opposition delegates and some of the other delegates realized this danger and the needs of our class. We were fighting independently against this industrial Control Bill in the past and could easily have found common ground at the conference. Delegate Hugo Oehler drew up a resolution (appearing in this issue of the Militant) giving a political analysis of the Industrial Control Bill and endeavoring to use the Gillespie Conference as a starting point for a national fight to prepare our class to fight the capitalist offensive.
The Stalinists could not equal the task because they could not understand the situation. They have not yet learned to point out the dangers ahead, to foresee the blows. They can only feel blows when they fall upon their heads. Their policy committee, in reporting, rejected our political analysis and instead brought in a report with a one-sentence motion which said merely that we go on record against the Industrial Control Bill. Delegate Oehler entered his resolution which was rejected by the Stalinists as an amendment and then the fight started.
 
Stalinists Set Up Straw Men
The Stalinists set up straw men and proceeded to tear them to bits in their fight against our resolution. They said: Oehler wants to waste our time calling conferences to fight the Industrial Control Bill; what we want is mass action of the workers. They said our resolution was too long, they said everything imaginable but they did not show where the resolution was wrong, where the analysis was false. The Stalinists opposed the international approach in the resolution with shameful and narrow-minded localism. The Stalinists must some day learn that action must be built upon correct analysis.
The task of the Gillespie conference gathered together from all parts of the state was not to rubber-stamp our previous policy, but to present a correct analysis of the most dangerous move at present of the capitalists against the workers, and to map out a program of action upon a correct analysis in order to fight against it.
Delegate Payer told the Stalinists that in Germany they did not realize the danger of Fascism until after Fascism had smashed the party, that they do not understand anything until it falls upon their heads and are repeating this blunder here; that this Left wing conference, called on the eve of the Bill becoming a law, should be used as a starting point to organize the American workers against the capitalist offensive and present to the workers a correct analysis of the Industrial Control Bill.
The leaders of the P.M A., the Right wing counters by circulating petitions, and at that, not against the Industrial Control Bill and the dictatorship it will establish over the coal industry, but merely against having Lewis appointed Czar of the coal industry, asking that the Progressive Miners Union be also considered by the Government when they select the Czar! Instead of the brutal dictatorship of Lewis they want to give the workers a sugar-coated dictatorship, as though it makes any difference how you’re killed, by hanging or by the electric chair.
Finally, when the vote was taken, the Right wing P.M.A. delegates, the delegates who were for a new federation, and the Stalinists voted together against our amendment. The vote was 72 to 17. Our vote was a conscious vote of Left wing miners and other delegates, who like ourselves, realized the importance of using this conference to start a fight on this issue and to present a correct analysis.


Resolution on the Industrial Control Bill
The American working class has lived through four years of the world crisis which has violently shaken the American structure and completely changed the position of the working class. In this period the offensive of the American capitalists against the working class has continued on all fronts. The working class has been driven back in disorderly retreat. Wages have been reduced and the standard of living has been reduced below the necessity level. The unemployed number over 18 million. Private charity has long ago broken down public and governmental relief has proven inadequate to cope with the present situation.
The labor leaders and reformers have done nothing to check the offensive. Everywhere the misleaders of labor and the agents of the capitalists in our ranks have held in check the workers resistance and have only functioned to console the workers after the capitalists have delivered their deadly blows.
The struggle of the Progressive Miners of America, in revolt against the corrupt Lewis machine, the Operators and the State was a heroic attempt by the miners to stem the tide of the capitalist offensive, to stop the retreat of our class. The struggle of the Illinois miners acted as a temporary rallying center for the whole class. Then the pressure of the enemies’ forces and wrong policies of the leaders swerved it from its course. It is not yet too late to correct these errors and utilize the Progressive Miners of America as a rallying center for the whole American labor movement. For this a daring leadership and policies of class struggle are needed. Admission of Capitalist Bankruptcy
Following these attacks the capitalists and their government, thru the Roosevelt administration, are driving through the Industrial Control Bill, which will strengthen the dictatorial power of the capitalists over the working class. When the Roosevelt administration declare an emergency existing and proceed to “solve” the emergency by the Industrial Control Bill, through government partnership, it is an open admission of the decay and breakdown of capitalist production, an admission that the gigantic productive forces can no longer cope with the situation and be used, under private ownership, to feed the millions of wage slaves.
It is a capitalist attempt to find a way out of the contradiction between socialized production and private capitalist appropriation by establishing a form of State Capitalism. Within the framework of the capitalist mode of production these contradictions cannot be solved.
The seizure of power of Fascism in Germany has intensified the contradiction of world capitalism and has strengthened reaction throughout the world. The defeat of the German working class is a defeat of the whole world working class. The Industrial Control Bill, as a dictatorial measure over the working class, is part of this reaction and the struggle between the imperialist powers to gain a point of advantage for the struggle for the redivision of the earth.
 
Subsidy to Decayed System
The government partnership, thru the emergency law and the Industrial Control Bill, will result in government subsidy to the decayed industries of American capitalism, such as coal and railroads, etc. It is an attempt to uphold a tottering and decayed structure by shifting the burden upon the working class and by eliminating small exploiters. Trusts were opposed in the past but Cartels will now be organized by the government.
The big capitalists intend to eliminate the weak and small concerns in all industries as well as to establish a monopoly price of a group of favored capitalists. The Industrial Control Bill is an attempt to organize production, but instead it will “organize” capitalist competition on a higher plane. It is an attempt to eliminate competition, but instead will lead to a greater anarchy of capitalist production. It will intensify all of the basic contradictions of American and world capitalism. The Industrial Control Bill is an attempt to hold up the falling rate of profit by the reorganization of industries and by beating down of the workers standards to a new low level.
The agrarian crisis has prevented the farmers from paying the debts owed to the bankers. The Roosevelt measures to help the farmers is to help the farmers pay the bankers what they owe. This agrarian measure and the Banking Law, which gives the government unlimited power of inflation, were necessary steps and parts of the big capitalists’ plan that the Industrial Control Bill fits into.
The Industrial Control Bill and its arbitration scheme for labor and capital is an attempt to set up an elaborate class collaboration plan to head off the developing class struggle. It will establish dictatorial power over the American working class. The bill with a government inflation policy will establish a high MONEY wage but a VERY LOW REAL WAGE for the American workers.
It is an attempt to side-step the dole and social insurance and in its place, give the equivalent of the dole, in the form of a money wage, through public works, which is nothing more nor less than a cloak for forced labor in exchange for relief.
The Europeanization of the American working class is at hand and with it goes the intensification of the class struggle. The Industrial Control Bill is an attempt to hold in check the rising tide of class struggle, and to place the workers in the harness of class collaboration.
Our trade union movement is to be harnessed to the capitalists and their state. Agents of the capitalists, the Lewises and Greens, will be selected to control the labor movement. A strike against the exploiters of labor will be a strike against the government. The struggle of the workers for our class interests will be outlawed.
The June 11, 1933, Gillespie Trade Union Conference, called by the Progressive Trade Union Educational Committee, goes on record as opposed to the Industrial Control Bill and its sugar coated, class collaboration, anti-working class provisions.
The Conference goes on record favoring the calling of a national united front conference of all labor organizations in the United States, to be held in Chicago in the future, to rally the American working class to fight the capitalist offensive, to map out a program of action to protect the workers interests and to rouse our class to action.
The Conference gives the incoming national committee power to act for this united action, for joint action with all working class organizations. (Introduced by delegate, Hugo Oehler)
 



The United Front From Above
The July 4–5 Unemployment Leagues Columbus Conferences was a united front from above between the Mutseites and the Stalinists. Weeks before the conference convened the Musteite-Stalinist bloc was formed with the rank, and file of both organizations knowing nothing about it. The C.P.L.A. group ran the conference while the Unemployed Council representatives sat in as fraternal delegates waiting for the Musteites to pick the chestnuts out of the fire of the Ohio conference which was red hot with flag-waving, patriotic Americans who conducted religious revivals in the morning before the conference opened.
The united front from above called for a state federation of the Leagues and Councils; the adoption of the Unemployed Insurance Bill of the Stalinists; a committee of fifteen from the Leagues, Councils and the National Unemployed Federation; and a conference in Washington, in December, when Congress convenes, where an amalgamation of the unemployed organizations is to take place.
 
The Political Tendencies
The Musteites objected to any talk of political control or political tendencies. However, they saw to it that they elected fifteen Musteites out of twenty-two on the executive committee of the Unemployed Leagues. Other political tendencies within the conference struggles were the Right wing flag wavers the socialists, the Lovestoneites, the United Workers Party, the Stalinists and the Left Opposition.
 
The Musteites
The C.P.L.A. aim to use the Unemployed Leagues as the foundation for their Labor Party. Opposition to their Labor party aims did not come from the Stalinists who have formed a united fron from above with them. Opposition to the C.P.L.A. by the flag-wavers in the state conference forced them to concentrate their energies to retain political control, and for the time being open agitation for the Labor party was pushed to the background.
One must recognize the mass unemployed movement the C.P.L.A. have, but at the same time on must recognize that it is still flag-waving, religious, mass miseducated by Musteism. Much of the unemployed Leagues’ growth can be accounted for by the fact that the city and county reactionary forces are using the Leagues as buffers against the Unemployed Councils.
The Hunger March on Columbus, led by the Unemployed Councils, was met by the police with clubs while the Unemployed Leaguers conference in Columbus was approved by the authorities. The “Workers’ Patrol”, established by the Unemployed Leagues to keep order, armed themselves with clubs. The Musteites cannot be accused of arming this patrol but they are guilty of miseducation which led to this end.
Steam roller tactics of the steering committee of the Conference controlled by the Musteites equal those of the Stalinists in methods of cutting off opposition, trampling on workers’ democracy and’ gagging the delegates from discussion on the most vital problems confronting the conference. When the Musteites saw they could not control the conference 100 percent and obtain what they wanted, they referred very important question to the incoming Executive where decisions would be rendered. A conference that cannot decide the vital questions itself and refers such to an incoming executive that has not yet been elected is in reality no conference.
 
The Socialists
The few socialists on hand played a negligible role in the conference. If they did have policy differences, no one found it out because their steering committee wasted their time mainly on secondary points of order.
 
The Stalinists
The united front from above netted the Stalinists nothing. They did not obtain the committee of fifteen, they did not obtain an endorsement of their BILL, they did not obtain an endorsement of the December meeting. Muste gained the most out of the united front from above. However, this much can be said, now that the Musteites have the executive committee and the power to make the decisions that the conference should have made, they will be able to complete ths original agreement by the continuation of the united front from above. The bloc of Leagues and Councils lost at Columbus but they hope to make up for this by December.
While Muste and Hathaway were roaming the conference grounds arm in arm the Daily Worker, in an editorial, accused the Musteites of breaking the agreement. When the Stalinists steering committee saw how reactionary the conference was the Unemployed Council representatives decided it was time to be ready in case they had to change horses in the middle of the stream, to negotiate with the Left bloc of the conference around the National Unemployed Federation, of course trying to exclude the Left Opposition members present.
 
The Right Wing
In the state conference of the Unemployed Leagues the flag-waving patriots took the conference out of the hands of the Musteites. A revival atmosphere filled the air more than once. This bloc of Ohio delegates numbered 300 out of the 500 in the national conference, were mainly composed of Right wing elements. The bulk of the remainder were Musteites. They had tremendous influence on the national conference and determined its main course. The Musteites fought this Right wing where they threatened the Musteite control but the Musteites did not take one step beyond this in a political fight against them.
 
The Free Lancers
The Musteites catered to the progressive free lancers, slobbed all over them and roped some in on this basis. Dennis Batt was also present, but he paddled his own canoe. He was made chairman of the Constitution Committee that drew up the Musteite Declaration of Independence. In the main, Batt supported the Musteites.
 
The Lovestoneites
The Lovestoneites were criticized by Lovestone for their concessions at the Chicago Unemployed Conference so they came to Columbus ready to bargain with Muste. But Muste had already closed his deal with Stalinism and did not care to deal with the Lovestoneites. The Lovestoneites, through their unemployed organizations which are affiliated to the National Unemployed Federation, presented a draft program for a new federation to the Columbus conference. They did not present this to the Federation to which they are affiliated. If the Lovestoneites had been able to obtain a “better deal” at Columbus they would have deserted the Federation which they are affiliated with. The old Lovestone policy, the two-faced game, cannot be discarded by their group.
The Declaration of Independence or rather Declaration of Workers Rights, a political document of the Musteites is signed by the Constitution Committee headed by Batt and the Steering Committee of the Conference which includes four Lovestoneite signatures. Does Lovestone agree with the action of his fraction?
The political tendencies primarily carried on a struggle around the three positions; of the Right wing, socialist grouping; the centre, Musteite-Stalinist bloc and the Left wing around the National Federation of Unemployed which included the Left Opposition. Tine Lovestoneites flirted between the centre bloc and the Left bloc.
 
Left Opposition Delegates
A fraternal delegate from the Left Opposition was given the rights of a fraternal delegate but the Musteites overcame the problem of reporting a fraternal delegate from the Communist League by reporting through the credential committee that the report on the fraternal delegates will be given later. It was never delivered. Left Opposition members, representing unemployed organizations from all parts of the country as regular delegates and fraternal delegates representing a substantial number of unemployed in different organizations were at the conference.
 
The National Federation of Unemployed
The Unemployed Councils are affiliated to the Federation but they came to the Ohio conference fighting the Federation because they do not have mechanical control of it.
The Musteites have two members on the national committee of the Federation so they establishd a division of labor. The members of the national committee could talk for the Federation but the other Musteites took the floor to speak against a resolution calling for affiliation. One must listen to the words of leaders of the different tendencies but one must see that the action conforms to these words. At Columbus the words and deeds of the Stalinist-Musteite bloc were two altogether different things.
The Muste-Stalinist bloc attempted to establish a committee of fifteen, composed of members of the Leagues, Councils and Federation which would give the Muste-Stalinist bloc 13 of the 15. This committee was to call a conference to amalgamate all the organizations into one. The Left bloc objected to this attempt at mechanical control of the unemployed movement and the exclusion of other larger unemployed organizations on the provisional committee, for example, the California unemployed organization which has 150,000 members. Other organizations should likewise have been considered in the provisional committee.
So far the Stalinists obtained nothing from their united front from above, and the Musteites obtained, only a hollow victory. The Musteites are trying to marry their child, the Unemployed Leagues, to the Stalinist Unemployed Councils, but the reactionary child, the product of the miseducation of Musteism, objects to the marriage. However, the continuation of the united front from above will no doubt force the deal.
The Left Opposition fraction in the unemployed organizations will continue the work started at Chicago for the unification of the unemployed movement. The Muste-Stalinist bloc at Columbus and the Right wing flag-waving element prevented the working class from utilizing this conference to its fullest extent. The temporary setback can be overcome in the coming months by intensifying the work for the unemployed program of the Left Opposition and the building of the National Unemployed Federation.
 



The defeat of the German working class by Fascism through the betrayal of social democracy and Stalinism has already had its repercussions in the Communist Party of the United States. The revisionist policies of Stalinism having already sapped the main vitality of the American party, it was shaken from top to bottom by this repercussion. The Stalinists do not realize the cause, but they do see the effects.
An acute party situation has been revealed. An extraordinary party conference was called to cope with this situation. The conference has issued an open letter to the party members.
The open letter is the most confused, worthless piece of trash ever issued by an extraordinary party conference. It is an attempt to prevent the disintegration setting in, in the party, at a rapid pace due to the defeat of the German proletariat and the smashing of the Communist party in Germany. It is an attempt to cover up, to prevent a real analysis from being made, to prevent an understanding, and to enable the bureaucrats to retain their hold upon the party and the apparatus.
The party fathers admit that they are guilty of every crime imaginable in not carrying out this, that, and the other Plenum resolution. According to their own report they have failed in every field of activity. Why has the party failed? “Because we have not carried out the Plenum resolution.” What must the party do to correct these errors? “The party must increase its activity, must intensify its work in the shops and basic industries.” Such in brief is the sum total of the open letter of the American Stalinists.
A review of the party conferences and plenums since the Stalinists have had power reveals a whole series of admissions of failure and errors – “because the line was not carried out” – always accompanied by a conclusion that more activity is needed to overcome these shortcomings. From ordinary mistakes they have at last arrived at extraordinary mistakes, in the present open letter.
The party is instructed to make “a RAPID TURN to revolutionary mass work among the decisive section of the American industrial proletariat.” Every plenum and conference ordered a NEW TURN, they have been constantly turning, but they have not yet turned the corner. The “extraordinary” analysis of class relations in America on the one hand informs us that there “is a new severe attack of the bourgeoisie on the toiling masses,” and on the other hand, that there is a “serious beginning of a revolutionary upsurge of the masses.”
Every plenum and conference of the Stalinists had informed us that there is a beginning or a revolutionary upsurge. This revolutionary upsurge of the American workers has confronted us in every resolution for the last several years and in this same period the working class has been driven back in disorderly retreat by the capitalist offensive.
If the Stalinists were able to distinguish the hind end of a class battle or a revolution from the front end; or an offensive from a defensive struggle, they may be able to get somewhere, but they do not.
The further disintegration of Stalinism on an international scale after the defeat of the German party and on the eve of the recognition of the Soviet Union by the United States is further shifting the party to the Right, to opportunism. The retreat from their ultra-Left course to the Right will be covered up with empty phrases about revolution and revolutionary upsurge.
The Marxian position of the Left Opposition on the German events has gained many new recruits and many more sympathizers within the party and around the party for the Communist League of America. The crack in the Stalinist apparatus is widening. The open letter of the Extraordinary Conference is an attempt to head off the revolt against Stalinism and keep it in safe channels.
 



Part 1

Part 2

Part 3

Part 4

Part 5

Part 6

Part 7
 



The recognition of the Soviet Union by the United States, with long term credits and trade relations is a desirable step and would be a most favorable condition to offset the difficulties and contradictions confronting the Soviet Union, primarily due to the wrong policies of Stalinism. The possibilities of recognition by the United States have been increased due to the difficulties pressing down upon American imperialism. America is by no means intending to change her stripes. It has become profitable for American capitalism to recognize the Soviet Union and unless some new developments upset the present relationship, it probably will.
Diplomatic and trade relations with capitalist nations by a workers government are born of realistic necessity and constitute for it, a temporary concession. It should not be explained to the workers as a peaceful co-existing of two systems, as Litvinoff does.
Likewise, the treaty with Fascist Germany and the latest moves in regard to the Chinese Eastern Railroad can only be understood if one realizes that they are necessary steps due to the mistakes of Stalinism and are a sign of weakness and not a sign of strength or the “victory of socialism”.
With recognition, America will attempt to use her experts and agents inside of the Soviet Union to undermine the workers’ government and to establish relations with the enemies and Thermidorian element. At the same time America will be forced to help Germany find a way out, in order to save the billions invested there. Germany is already moving in the direction of attack on the Soviet Union, as the path of least resistance
Imperialist recognition of the Soviet Union carries with it the danger of counter-revolutionary activity within the Soviet Union. Such action is to be expected. Our policy must be to overcome these contradictions carried with recognition by imperialism. It will be extremely difficult to overcome these difficulties with the policies of Stalinism. The Left Opposition must say this frankly. The Left Opposition, while understanding and approving the forced concessions such as the treaties with Fascist Germany, etc., must at the same time warn the world proletariat that the contradictions carried with these concessions cannot be overcome if the policy of Stalinism continues. The criminal policy of Stalinism in the Soviet Union and the C.I. must be replaced with a return to Marxism; the theory of socialism in one country and all that flows from it throughout the world Communist parties must be replaced with the Marxian theory of the Permanent Revolution.
 



Weeks have passed since the Industrial Recovery Act became a law. In this time big business and its government have been drafting codes that are ushering in a new form of industrial slavery.
The road layers of the working class have not yet been organized to resist and to fight back. This is due to the confusion that exists within the ranks of the organized forces of the class.
The A.F.L. leaders, the Right wing in the Progressive Miners of America and the conservative independent unions are supporting the I.R.A. The socialist leaders are singing praises to the “great forward step”. The majority of the other forces are in confusion.
The Stalinists, as usual, were not equal to the task. The Stalinists did not recognize the danger until after it had fallen upon their heads
Now, at last the Stalinists have called for action to fight the Industrial Recovery Act. They are calling a national conference in Cleveland, August 26–28, for all trade unions, unemployed organizations, and others; to protect the trade unions, and to rally the class against the capitalist attack.
We welcome the fact that the Stalinists and Musteites, who are jointly calling this conference, have at last realized the necessity of the struggle, but they have not presented a program suitable for resistance to the bosses’ attack. HOW to fight the capitalist offensive is the most important question.
Anyone can criticize after the event! We are criticizing the program and method of calling the conference prior to the August 26–8 conference. Further, we were the first to raise the cry of alarm, to give a Marxian analysis, and to fight for the mobilization of the class against the capitalists’ new attacks. At the Gillespie Trade Union conference a delegate of the Left Opposition presented a resolution, prior to the act becoming a law. A bloc of Stalinists and Right wing delegates voted down the Left wing of the conference fighting around the resolution (See the <>Militant</> of June).
The national conference called by the Muste-Stalinists bloc is a caricature of the proposal presented at Gillespie last June. A few weeks later, at the first national unemployed conference since the act became a law, at the Columbus Muste-Stalinist conference, the Left Opposition again raised the question of the Industrial Recovery Act, especially dealing with its effects upon the unemployed. We were the only ones to raise our voice on this subject. The Muste-Stalinist bloc ignored this vital question. At last they have realized its importance. But how are they going to fight it?
In regards to the Needle Trades Code, the Right wing proposed a 30-hour week and a definite minimum wage. The Left wing, Stalinist group proposed a 40 hour week and said nothing about a minimum wage. Later the Freiheit said that was a mistake but without stating what should be done.
Preparations for the Cleveland Conference are under way. A trade union conference was called in New York, July 15th. The Stalinists passed out a draft resolution. This is a step forward and has some good proposals but the draft leaves out an answer to the trade union question. So does the resolution dealing with the Needle Trades that was passed out. So does the call for the Cleveland conference.
In all of the preparations for the Cleveland Conference, the Stalinists refuse to answer the following qustions (Let us hope they answer them in the near future): Do the facts refute the Stalinist theory to wit, that the A.F.L. is on a decline and is being liquidated and that therefore we must split locals away and build parallel unions all along the line? Will the Industrial Recovery Act help to rearm the A.F.L. leaders in their hold upon the trade union movement? Should we hasten to bbuild a Left wing within the A.F.L.? Should the weak, Left wing, paper unions return to the A.F.L. en bloc and function as a Left wing there. To ignore these questions, in the needle trades resolution in the New York Conference resolution and in the Cleveland conference call, is to ignore the most vital question of trade union policy and tactics in the struggle to protect the class, its trade unions and to repel the capitalist offensive. The Left Opposition answers these questions in the positive now as we have in the immediate past.
The working class have no voice in drafting the codes for the different industries. Only the pressure of the class through class struggle will force concessions from the enemy class. How to organize this class pressure effectively against the capitalists depends upon how we answer the questions of trade union policy and tactics. The capitalists and their government hope to maintain the status quo among the working class. Where this is not possible they will attempt to guide the pressure of the class into company unions. Where the pressure reaches beyond these channels they will try to guide the force into safe and conservative channels such as the A.F.L.
The organization of the unorganized into industrial unions under Left wing leadership is our main task. The immediate practical task, which cannot be separated from the main task is the organization of a Left wing within the conservative unions. The revolutionists must work in the organizations where the masses are.
The Stalinist-Muste bloc has not yet answered these questions. We have already lost years ecause of the Stalinist blunders in this field. The time is short. An answer must be given and should be presented before the Cleveland conference.
The call for the Cleveland Conference is signed by 82 individual representing about 50 organizations The representatives of the most important organizations have signed as individuals, which means the organizations are not yet backing the conference. Many paper organizations are officially represented. Out of the 82 signers 42 are Stalinists and their sympathizers, 15 are Musteites. They have obtained a few others whom they are using as a window dressing. In other words, the Cleveland call is a united front from above between Stalinists and Musteites with a sprinkling of others to give it a good appearance. This is a continuation of their united front from above started at the Columbus, Ohio, unemployed conference. A united front from above cannot be covered up by a list of 82 signatures. What counts is the political tendencies and numbers actually represented.
The conference is making a bad start and the call has failed to answer the most burning problems of trade union tactics. In spite of these lbunders and shortcomings, the conference should be given full support. The class conscious workers and Marxists must fight for a correct trade union policy, in order to put life into our desire to fight the capitalist offensive which has taken on the form of the Industrial Recovery Act.
 



(Continued from last issue)
Political Factions Within an Organization
The united front is the tactic that enables us to bring together the combined pressure of various organizations of the working class. But one finds that a conference of many political tendencies or a trade union that has many political tendencies raises another problem within the broad problem of the united front. A conference or organization that has many different political tendencies will, in the main divide between Right and Left and Centre. Working agreements, of a temporary measure, on one or more issues, within the conference or organization, will to a great degree determine which section of the conference or organization, Right-Centre or Left, will dominate the organization or conference. This united front is conducted on the same basis as any united front. However, the complicated situation causes intensification of contradictions between political tendencies which proceed at a more rapid tempo.
 
Is It Proper to Break a United Front?
A united front is only a temporary agreement on immediate demands in action and must be preserved as long as it functions for the CLASS INTEREST. If the development of the struggle and the united front for one reason or the another is transformed from the basis of class struggle to that of class collaboration and the Right wing is about ready to betray or sell out – it is the duty of Marxists and revolutionists to point out, and to warn of the danger, and if it cannot be corrected, then the Left wing must break the united front BEFORE THE BETRAYAL. Such action will result in a temporary setback, not due to the break but due to the sell-out. However, if the Left wing has conducted itself correctly, broke away in time, and still retains the confidence of the masses, who could not see their position at the time of the break, the Left wing can lead in the reorganization of the forces, or in checking the retreat and prepare for a come-back.
 
Compromise
The united front of different working class organizations, in the first place, is an attempt to increase the pressure against the capitalist class, and in the second, a give-and-take proposition between the organizations. In the final analysis it is a victory for that organization and its leadership whic knows what to give and what to take. The representatives delegated for the united front conference and those who will do the negotiating must know in advance what the objectives, of the united front and the organization are and within what framework they must work.
Compromises on secondary questions can and must be made and all the more so when friction is about to split the conference or organization. However, one must know how to distinguish between compromises and compromises. The same word can be filled with two different contents. One must never compromise on principle, while one can compromise on other factors It is up to the representatives and delegates to know the difference between these two words of compromises.
For example, at the June 1933 Unemployed Conference in Chicago the report of the program and policy Committee was amended on the question of the united front, to first strike out the clause, “the right of political criticism”, and second, to strike out and change the word “force”, in the sentence which said “any organization not entering the united front must be forced into it.” The committee compromised on the word force and changed it to a milder form, but the committee would not budge one inch or compromise on the question of political criticism. The question of political criticism is a question of principle but the question of modifying the word force is not.
 
Leaders and Leaders
After a group of labor fakers have sold out and betrayed the workers it is often the style to condemn all leaders. One must be able to distinguish between difference kinds of leaders. It is always in place to call for rank and file CONTROL and no revolutionist or Marxist is opposed to rank and file control. It is out of place and wrong to call for rank and file LEADERSHIP. Rank and file leadership is an empty slogan, yet as harmful as the slogan of the “united front from below”. Both are inverted non-Marxian slogans.
(To be continued)
 



The decay of world capitalism is the condition that prepared the foundation for the Industrial Recovery Act.
The Industrial Recovery Act can be summed up as follows:

It is an attempt to prop up a tottering and decaying capitalist system.
 
It is an attempt to organize production; instead it will enlarge all of the basic contradictions.
 
It is an attempt to regulate competition; instead it will intensify competition.
 
It has the elements of state capitalism.
 
The defeat of the German working class by Fascism has caused a political regrouping in world politics and has accelerated the American imperialists’ attempt to reorganize the internal economic forces in preparation for more effective international struggles and for war.
 
It reveals to a greater extent the true role of the state as an instrument of suppression for the dominating class. The partnership of government and industry is not new. Only the form of a relationship is changing, from a concealed to a more open form.
 
It will organize Cartels through government aid.
 
It will result in a government subsidy to the big capitalists and the “sick” industries and is part of the plan to raise the price level of commodities.
 
It is a method of eliminating the small producers.
 
The establishment of the codes and the minimum wage for each industry, suitable for the big capitalists with large constant capital, modern methods of production and a high degree of exploitation, will eliminate the small producers who cannot live up to the new form of competition.
 
The right to curtail production through the code agreements is a weapon in the hands of the big capitalists against the small producers.
 
It will result in a lower standard of living for the American workers.
 
Speed up and rationalization will be intensified.
 
The real wages of the working class will be reduced regardless of what the money wage may be.
 
It will establish a low minimum wage which will become the average and then the maximum.
 
The reduction of hours as presented by the code is the stagger plan. The 30 hour week is a denial of and a caricature of the six hour day and five day week.
 
It will establish a class collaboration machinery to hold in check the working class. Arbitration will be established for every industry.
 
It is an attempt to head off the class upheavals in the near future.
 
It is an attempt to prevent strikes. It will outlaw strikes. Strikes will be against the bosses’ government. The capitalists will hide behind the American flag to a far greater degree.
 
The code makes provisions for a money wage increase of from 5 percent to 10 percent to prevent strikes due to the rapid rise in commodity prices.
 
The workers’ “rights” under the code only begin after the employees threaten to repudiate the employers’ slave codes – then the capitalists and their government will resort to arbitration to prevent strikes.
 
It is an attempt to side-step the dole and social insurance, absorbing some of the unemployed through the stagger plan and by the inauguration of a public works program for the benefits of the contractors’ and capitalists’ profits, to employ some of the unemployed for the equivalent of relief.
 
It is an attempt to prevent the establishment of class struggle unions and instead to maintain the status quo, or to establish Company Unions – or safe conservative unions such as the A.F.L.
 
It is an attempt to reorganize the surplus labor power to the high productive forces of American industries.
 
The Industrial Recovery Act is an admission of the bankruptcy of the capitalist mode of production and is an unworkable substitute for the solution – the revolutionary overthrow of the capitalist system and the establishment of a Workers’ Government.

 



(Continued from last issue)
Against United Front from Above
An opportunist deviation which is sure to land the revolutionist in the swamp is the united front from above. When the leadership of an organization comes together and decides over the heads of their membership or without the participation of the membership, except by bureaucratic decree, what to unite on and how to unite you can be assured that wrong start will not bring the desired results.
The united front between leaders, the united front from above, is a denial and violation of the united front of the working class. The united front of the leaders guaranties in advance the victory of the Right wing, the opportunists, and the labor fakers over the Left wing, the revolutionists, in the united action.
 
Against the United Front from Below
The Stalinist “Third Period” united front from below is the most harmful caricature’ and denial of the united front possible. If an organization desires a united front on some concrete issues and proceeds to send the call to all organizations it is sure it can control, mechanically or ideologically, but refuses to send the cull to other organizations of the working class, because the leaders, of the other organizations are fakers, because of fear of losing control – and instead invite the rank and file alone to unite, over the heads of their own leadership, the results will be a lasting service rendered to the misleaders and the fakers and a set-back for those who carry on the united front from below.
It would be excellent if the task of winning misled workers were so simple. If the united front from below were a short-cut to winning the rank and file from the misleaders, our task would already be an accomplished fact. This would imply a rapid transformation of a misled rank and file into an educated rank and file which has shaken off its misleaders and their petty bourgeois ideology. The education of misled rank and file work-e’rs is not so simple that it can be accomplished by telling them to unite with us over the heads of their leaders. The united front BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS, when the leadership and the policies of the organizations can be put to a test, to enable the rank and file to see leaders and programs in action – that is the way to Educate and win the rank and file.
Workers belonging to organizations have faith in their organizations and often, their leaders. They are placed in a position where they must function THROUGH THE ORGANIZATION if they desire to continue as members because of faith, convictions, (no matter how false), or job control. By asking these workers to unite with us over the heads of the leaders and the organization through the united front from below, we are telling these workers to break with their organization on the one hand, and giving the misleaders an excuse for sabotaging united action, on the other hand. The united front from below strengthens rather than weakens the misleaders of the other organizations. When we invite the whole organization and the Left wing responds and the Right wing leaders decline, it is far more difficult for the Right wing leaders to fight the united front than it is when they have a chance to fight united action through the excuse of the “united front from below” – over the heads of the leaders and the organizations.
 
The Relation of the United Front from Above and Below
The united front with leaders and the united front from below are both wrong. A united front must be BETWEEN ORGANIZATIONS of the working class (or the working class (or between political tendencies, groups and factions, etc.) You do not appeal ORGANIZATIONALLY “from below”. You bring PRESSURE on the organization from below. You win the rank and file from below to force the ORGANIZATION into the united front. Have the other organizations elect delegates through their organizational channels to the united front regardless of who are selected as the delegates. You try to obtain Left wing delegates but you take what you ge – what they elect. If the organizations, send misleaders and betrayers they must be seated in the ignited front representing their respective organization.
The dialectics of the united front between organizations is to win the rank and file (below) and expose the leadership in action (above). This concept of below and above has nothing in common with “united fronts” put forward under those labels.
 
United Fronts and Individuals
The united front is not a tactic to corral a group of prominent individuals, liberals, and artists, who do not represent organizations or political tendencies.
A united front must have its foundation in WORKING CLASS ORGANIZATIONS. Such a united front can use as an auxiliary a few prominent individuals and friends of labor. They must play a subordinated role and in no case should they be given the leadership of the movement.
 
“Guarantee” Leadership of the United Front
“Join the united front against the capitalist class under the leadership of the Communists” (the Stalinist formula) – is the best way to formulate what is not a united front. We Communists hope to win ideological control and leadership through our superior program, but no one, not even those who have the prestige of the October revolution, can mechanically obtain leadership of the movement in advance. United fronts are not called under our leadership, or any other leadership.
It is wrong for one organization or political current to set up the provisional committee and adopt a draft program and call the other organizations to the united front. There are certain exceptions where emergency demands speed, but those who take the initiative must see to it that the program and leadership is lift open to be -decided at the conference, where all working class organizations have delegates, even though the conditions force the initiative upon one political current. In fact, one political current will always take the initiative, but this has nothing in common with the Stalinists, who interpret this to mean, “under our leadership”.
(To Be Continued)
 



(Continued from last issue)
Another So-Called United Front
In the hey-day of the “united front from below” the Stalinist called many united front conferences, sending calls to all organizations under their ideological and mechanical control and asking all other workers to break with their leadership and join the “united front”. The T.U.U.L. and the I.L.D., the W.I.R. and the fraternal organizations, as well as any A.F.L. local where the Left wing was strong enough to send a delegate, received a call.
The delegates at the conference, no matter how many paper organization or real organizations they represented, represented one political current: Stalinism – with the exception of the Left Opposition which was always kicked out the door, and several stray delegates who ran the gauntlet by accident. Month in and month out the same organizations sent delegates to the “united fronts”. Each time the conference ended with the Stalinists capturing themselves, through the “united front from below.”
The united front is a tactic of uniting, in temporary agreement, different organizations, and different political tendencies. To call together several organizations under socialist party control is not a united front, any more than the calling together of those organizations under Stalinist control constitutes a united front. United front action must be between organizations, but at the same time must embrace more than one political current. Each political current entering the united front is expected to rally those organizations and forces it has control over.
The Mooney Congress held in Chicago in May, with about two dozen political tendencies; and the Unemployment Conference held in Chicago in June, with fifteen political tendencies – are first steps toward the Leninist United Front action. However, the number of workers put in motion and not the number of political tendencies is decisive.
 
The United Front as a Maneuver
The reformists say that the communists are insincere and that the call for a united front is a maneuver. If this is so then the reformists have nothing to worry about because if the Communists call a united front upon such a flimsy foundation, the Communists and not the reformists will lose. Of course the united front tactic or rather, the rejection of the united front tactic by Stalinism has played into the hands of the reformists, but in the main this is merely an excuse of the reformists to avoid taking part in the united front.
On the other hand, one must not take the word maneuver in too narrow a sense. If by maneuver one means a trick than we are opposed to a maneuver, but the fact remains that every move of any military or political force is a maneuver. In this latter sense, every united front action, like all other political actions, is a maneuver. The thing for the revolutionist and honest worker to find out is: Is it a correct maneuver, one that benefits the working class – or a false maneuver?
 
Non-Aggression Pacts
The reformists and opportunists and misleaders will prevent a united front as long as possible, but once more the mass pressure and conditions force them to make a move toward the united front they immediately attempt to set up certain provisions which will guarantee them from the “evils of exposure”. One of their favorite means is to attempt to form a “non-aggression” pact with the others participating in the united front. They demand that while the united front is conducted, the organizations should refrain from criticizing each other. If one agrees to refrain from political criticism, then the misleaders are sure they will be able to retain their control and will not be exposed in action for their traitorous acts. Anyone who agrees to refrain from criticism during united front action forsakes one of the basic conditions of the Leninist united front. The right of minority expression and political criticism must be guaranteed at all times. Only fakers would ask for such a pact and only fools and Stalinists would agree to such pacts. Stalinism, like the social democracy, has its own crimes to cover up.
In the last several years in Germany, while Fascism was marching forward with rapid strides, while Stalinism was in its “third period”, the social democratic betrayers were rendered the greatest historical service possible by the Stalinist united front from below. When over the threshold of state power Fascism gained, and was already and the pressure from below made the social democratic leaders offer the Communists a united front, but with the “non-aggression” clause, the C.I. statement and answer agreed to refrain from criticism. Again, following the “united front from below”, the agreement to refrain from criticism rendered social democracy more service. This was repeated at the Mooney Congress in Chicago by the Stalinists.
(To be continued)
 



The United Action of the Working Class
The confusion within the ranks of the working class on the question of the United Front is primarily due to the present leaderships of the Second and Third International. All leaders who fear a test in action, leaders who fear a comparison of policies, leaders who retain control of their organizations by bureaucratic methods – and those who are the direct agents of the capitalist class within our ranks – fear the united front of the working class. The pressure of the masses through the united front places a heavy burden upon all misleaders and non-Marxian leaders. That leadership which has a correct policy and uses a little common horse-sense will be favored to the highest degree by united action of the working class.
For these reasons, many organization are systematically kept out of united front action or are miseducated purposely by leaders who cannot stand the test. Those leaders who fear the test demand either a non-aggression pact (social democrats) or leadership of the movement conceded in advance (Stalinism), where the workers are told to join the united front under Communist leadership. Other forms used by these misleaders and non-Marxian leaders are the united front from below, or the united front of leaders alone, or the united front of leaders in negotiation behind closed doors. All such “united fronts” are false, are a denial in substance though not in name, in order to cover up and to avoid the test in action which flows from the Leninist united front.
The two most powerful working class organizations in the world the social democrats and the Stalinists have been miseducating the reformist and revolutionary working class on the question of the united front. Likewise, the reactionary A.F.L. leadership fear this powerful working class weapon. The most criminal of all in miseducating the working class, are the Stalinists. Why – because we expect nothing else but confusion, opportunism and miseducation from the socialist and reactionary labor leaders; such leaders join united action only after mass pressure forces them into the united front; such leaders openly oppose revolutionary Marxism as practised in the Russian revolution by the Bolsheviks under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky.
But those who claim to abide by the decisions of the Communist International, as the Stalinists do, and who in reality have systematically revised Marxism, must be exposed for what they are worth, all the more so because they have usurped the October Revolution and have under their influence the greatest number of revolutionists that must be won over back to internationalism, to Marxism.
If we consider two periods of the history of the errors of Stalinism on the question of the united front, which by no means was the most harmful error, but which flowed from more basic deviations from revolutionary Marxism, we can realize how great is the confusion contributed to by Stalinism. On outstanding example, in the first stage of the blunders, was the united front with leaders, in the British General Strike and in the Chinese Revolution In these struggles the Stalinists and their bedfellows, the Right wingers, threw overboard all the lessons and experiences of the Russian Revolutions. They violated the ABC of how to make a united front and to set the masses in motion and how to break a united front when the allies begin to break and openly betray the movement. After a aeries of such blunders and errors, the defeat of the Chinese revolution had the sobering effect of waking them up. But to wake up and to find the correct path – – are two different things and the first without the latter will only lead to new mistakes. After burning their fingers badly while playing around with the leaders, the non-Marxian Stalinists swung to the other extreme, to “correct” the error’ without admitting the error, and thereby, the notorious “Third Period”.
The opportunist Right zig-zag of the united front – from above – had the full support of the Right wing but the Stalinists’ ultra-Left zigzag – to the united front from below – was not consistent with the Right wing opportunist line of policy and the united trout with leaders. Whereas, the British General Strike and the Chinese Revolution were the outstanding examples of the Right-Centre (Bucharin-Stalin) mistakes on the united front from above with leaders, the victory of Fascism in Germany is the crowning defeat and expression of the “united front from below”. As Trotsky says, Stalinism will go down in history as the leader of defeats. The wrong concept of the united front as well as the defeat is the result of a more basic revisionism of Marxism by Stalinism. Throughout this whole period the International Left Opposition has carried on a fight against the Stalinists and social democrats and other political currents and their position on the united front and since then, history has confirmed the correctness of our position on this tactical and strategical question as well as on more fundamental questions of Marxism.
(To be continued)
 



The dictatorial power embodied within the Industrial Control Bill which is now a law has been called by many, including the Stalinists, a Fascist measure. The Stalinists are well known to mislabel everything they take hold of. In Germany the Stalinists called the Bruening government, the Von Papen government, the Von Schleicher government – Fascist dictatorships. And thereby, they helped to disarm the German workers when real Fascism did arrive.
The Industrial Control Bill is not a Fascist measure. Every capitalist government is a dictatorship and just because transitional steps from the democratic form to the dictatorial form are taking place as a reflection of the further concentration and centralization of capital, that in itself is no proof of Fascism or of steps toward Fascism. The concentration and centralization of capital carries with it the centralization of government. Dictatorial measures are only one of the features of Fascism. The common features between the Industrial Control Law and some of the measures of Italian Fascism lie in the fact that both contain forms of state capitalism. These common features can also be compared to some of the measures in Germany after 1918 when the social democracy introduced State capitalist forms.
As long as there is no serious working class pressure, as long as the working class of America do not threaten the capitalist rule, there will he no danger of governmental and state changes to Fascism. The Stalinist talk about the Hoover commission’s Fascist measures and the Fascist measures of today will only disarm the workers to the real danger confronting the working class. We cannot replace the Marxian analysis of the Industrial Control Bill or any other capitalist measure by giving these measures high sounding names. In America the real Fascist danger, if one wants to talk about it at present, lies outside of the governmental structure and in the embryonic Fascist organizations. They will grow with the increased pressure of the working class against capitalism, unless the Communists know how to oppose them effectively.
The best help that Stalinism could render capitalism at this stage is to continue mislabeling as social Fascism and Fascism movements for which they have no understanding and as a substitute for a Marxian analysis.
 



The government money policy in relation to the national recovery act of the present administration has reached a critical stage. A struggle within the camp of the big bourgeoisie over methods to be used against other imperialists, the middle class at home and the workers of the world has been brought to the surface. In the first stage of the NRA this struggle, which was officially inaugurated with the election of Roosevelt, was somewhat concealed. Now it has broken out in the open.
It is no accident that the present controversy rages around a secondary issue such as the monetary policy. It seems to be an excellent point of attack for the opposition capitalists. At the same time it is a convenient cover for the more important struggle. Due to his government position Dr. Sprague was in a key position to launch an attack. His resignation as treasury financial adviser is hailed by the press as a step that will bring into sharp relief the different views on the monetary question. This is true. Nevertheless the question remains a secondary one.
 
Dr. Sprague’s Statement
Dr. Sprague understands the difficulties of the capitalist system as a whole. More significant on this score than his criticism of the Roosevelt money policy was the following statement by Dr. Sprague:
“Capitalism cannot survive unless we get together, tackle and solve these major problems which are breaking it down, which have already partially broken it down. I should say that, failing solution, the final breakdown will come two years from now.”
Of course this is only half of the story. The other half, which Lenin warned our class about, is that without a revolutionary party a revolutionary policy and revolutionary leadership, there cannot be a successful revolution no matter how difficult the situation of capitalism is.
 
Drastic Steps To Be Taken
In the money policy of the government, all of the mild methods of inflation have been tried. Now indications are that more drastic steps are to be taken. This is one of the reasons for the present attack of the “sound money” advocates. Some say that Roosevelt is fighting the inflationists with inflation, meaning that he is using mild forms of inflation to head off direct currency inflation. Others do not desire to be kept in the dark as to the government policy and hope that the attack will force the issuance of a statement, indicating more completely the objectives of the present drift in the Roosevelt monetary policy. The European economists, reviewing the steps taken by the United States, inform the dollar defenders that they took the identical steps several years ago.
But underlying and more fundamental than the offensive over the monetary policy of the administration is the struggle of the capitalist group working for greater government and industrial centralization against the capitalist individualists. And also there is the struggle over the question of the financial undertakings and expenses of the government for which at present there are no means of equalizing through government income. Some argue that the middle class will have to bear the burden with increased taxes. Others contend that the issuing of green-backs and currency inflation is the best method. This is not only a conflict between the big capitalists and the middle class. It is a struggle within the camp of the big capitalists themselves as to the best method of consolidating and maintaining their power at home and abroad with the least friction. The struggle against the pound and the franc on the international field is as fundamental as the struggle against the other classes at home. For, in the last analysis, the leading imperialists desire to have the dollar sailing the seven seas as the dominating international exchange when monetary agreement can be reached on a basis satisfactory to America.
 
Increase In Foreign Trade
The increase in foreign trade for the month of October is reported enthusiastically by the capitalist press which attributes a considerable part of this gain to the depreciation of the dollar in relation to the pound and the franc. Soviet recognition and trade, through credits on American terms, are regarded as a step to increase the exports and regain markets. In addition to this America holds a favorable position in the Pan-American conference.
The tinkering with the financial structure is only a surface scratch of the problems and contradictions confronting American imperialism. At the most such measures can only provide short breathing spells. The more fundamental problems will have to be “tackled and solved” to prevent, a break-down.
 



Although the Pan-American Conference is not expected to adjourn before December the 24th, it can be clearly seen already that American Imperialism dominates the conference; and nothing will be approved that does not serve the interests of Wall Street. Criticism of American imperialism did break through the barriers, but the representatives and puppets of Washington prevented this criticism from jeopardizing the position of the Yankees in Latin America. Giraudy, head of the Cuban delegation launched an attack against American intervention in Cuba. He correctly pointed out that intervention has taken place even though its form has become more subtle under the Roosevelt administration. Argentina’s foreign minister, as chairman, defended the United States and prevented the criticism from developing. He prevented a Peruvian delegate from launching an attack on American imperialism, and guided further criticism from other delegates, who had taken courage, into safe channels.
 
Secrecy at Conference
Secrecy prevails at Montevideo as it does at all capitalist conferences. Some of the lesser puppets, who were not obtaining as much attention from the U.S. delegation as the delegation of more favored countries, because they had less that the exploiters of the north wanted, put up a protest against the secrecy, but to no avail.
Mexico led in the attack on the conference. This is not surprising. American relations and domination there stand at a more favorable position than in the past, and the Washington delegation desired to devote their time to more troublesome spot in Latin America. The conference itself is little more than a rubber stamp. The real work is conducted by means of audiences with the Secretary of State of the Colossus of the North. The Steering committee, which is composed of those who enjoy this privilege, is the real conference.
In considering any action of the Pan-American Conference one must always keep in mind its structure. It was constructed by American imperialism for its own use against the other imperialist powers and against the weak capitalist countries and colonies of Latin America. One of the many jokers in the statutes of the Union, which assures American domination, provides that the United States Secretary of State shall always be the president of the Union.
 
U.S. Hits at Rivals
Many of the concessions and agreements for America’s interest obtained at Montevideo will not be known. But the main proposal presented by Hull, horse traded by the Argentina delegates for the “Anti-War Pact”, and since rubber stamped by the conference, is the Tariff Plan. The plan proposes reciprocity pacts and tariff reduction in order to lower the present trade barriers. The proposal called for no treaties, conventions or legal commitments by the conference. It left this open for a free scramble. Such “Custom Unions” obtained by the United States will be another blow by America against Europe. The United States-Colombian pact has already been signed as a straight reciprocal agreement. Negotiations with Argentina and Brazil, for similar bilateral pacts, are already under way.
The Hull Plan also provides for safeguarding the internal struggle of the American imperialists through the NRA and similar projects. The plan provides that the tariff reductions must not interfere with “the operation of temporary emergency and other extraordinary measures compromising domestic recovery programs.” This plan for tariff reduction has stirred up discussion in the States. Some say it is a complete change in policy on tariffs while Moley, who just recently resigned as Assistant Secretary of State, says the Hull proposal contradicts the NRA. If the NRA is for the construction of a self-sufficient economy, of organized capitalism, or of “Intra-nationalism” minus its internal or foreign part, it is doomed to failure. But the real purpose of the NRA is something else; and so long as the capitalists supplement it with new measures at each critical turn it will more than justify itself as a breathing spell. The Hull proposal does not contradict the needs of the NRA at a certain stage. Neither does it run counter to the interest of American imperialism in general. It is admirably adapted for these capitalist needs.
 
Behind the Tariff Plan
The attempt to reorganize production on a higher level under the NRA at reduced cost and, at the same time to reorganize labor power and obtain greater control over it, encounters the necessity, at a certain stage, of new markets for capital and commodities. This the Hull Tariff proposal seeks: to prepare for. In fact the most urgent need of American imperialism is a greater share in the already divided world. Otherwise the decay will be faster and the class storms more violent. No matter which road America follows she cannot avoid these problems.
The administration knows what is needed in relation to the internal reorganization attempted under the NRA. Besides the Dollar-Pound struggle, Washington is taking four other important steps. Two of them are well under way. They are the recognition of the USSR and the Hull Tariff proposal and Tariff agreements with other countries in Latin America and Europe. The two others are the plan to establish a privately owned export credit hank, through which the RFC intends to finance American exports, and the setting up of export expansion machinery with George Peek in charge. Each step listed is a part of a general plan to cope with the above burning problem of American imperialism.
American imperialism must do things in a big way in order to maintain her dominating world position. At the Pan-American conference the U.S. handles a whole continent which she hopes to place more firmly under her domination.
 



The Seventh Pan-American Conference convened December 3 at Montevideo, Uruguay with twenty-one nations represented. The American delegation, headed by Secretary Hull, arrived prior to the conference to line up puppet delegates and to attempt to iron out and side-track some of the most difficult problems that are sure to upset the conference if they are thrown open for discussion on the floor. This is the first Pan-American conference to be held since 1928. It is convened at a time when the economic life of Latin America is almost at a standstill as a result of the crisis within the leading imperialist nations, particularly the United States. These secondary capitalist nations of Latin America have long ago been subordinated to the imperialist powers. The leading capitalist nations, such as the United States, have attempted to shift part of the crisis burden onto the lesser nations of Latin America.
The conference has been compared to the last London conference. The capitalist press says the Montevideo meeting will succeed and will accomplish for America, what the London conference failed to accomplish for world capitalism. However, the set-up is entirely different even if economic problems hold the center of the stage at the Pan-American conference.
At Montevideo there will be a meeting of unequals. The leading capitalist nation in the world is able to hold a conference with 20 other nations under the self-made jurisdiction of the Monroe Doctrine the enforcement of which Roosevelt hopes to modernize with his “new diplomacy”. The London conference was a battle of the leading imperialists of Europe and America; the Montevideo conference is the set-up of American imperialism. Most of the delegates are puppets; others will be forced to cringe before the might of Yankee imperialism or stand the consequences. The other imperialist powers, particularly, England are forced to pound away within the conference in an attempt to prevent America from constructing something tangible for itself, England will do this primarily through such forces as she can muster within the Latin American countries for policies that will lie cloaked in the form of “national” demands of this or that Latin American country.
In the past, Argentina has been the main opposition force to the United States in the Pan-American conference, not only because of its weight within South America but because England has been fighting American Imperialism tooth and nail in the struggle for domination within this first rate Latin American country.
War and revolution will be discussed extensively in the different caucuses. Bolivia and Paraguay are in the midst of the Chaco war. Peru and Columbia have not yet settled the Leticia affair. The Cuban revolution is in the foreground. Secretary Hull attempted to inject America’s “good will” into the Chaco War before the conference, but Paraguay rejected his “kind” offer. A labor delegate from Haiti caused uneasiness, and showed that all was not so well in lining up safe and sound delegates to the conference, when on the first day he condemned American’s 15 year military action in Haiti, intervention in Latin America, and the present financial supervision in Haiti which reveals how the Roosevelt government is driving ahead with great speed for better imperialist domination.
Revolutionary Cuba has not spoken yet. But it is very doubtful, if the petty-bourgeois government will go beyond words, and this only for the sake of bargaining power and compromise with American Imperialism. It is very doubtful if the voice of the oppressed workers and peasants will even get a word into the proceedings. What opposition does materialize will be that of the nationalist bourgeois opposition to American imperialism and of spokesmen for British imperialism.
The economic factors and questions to be considered at the conference take on a varied number of forms. The American imperialists are attempting to avoid these problems which will interfere with the further development of the NRA and the struggle of the Dollar vs. the Pound. The U.S. Government issued a statement on November the 9th, which said in part:
“Unsettled conditions, such as European commercial quota restrictions, make it seem desirable for the United States to forego immediate discussions on such matters as currency stabilization, uniform import prohibitions, permanent custom duties and the like.”
A real discussion on the above points, and not mere talk by puppet delegates, would really be stepping on Uncle Sam’s toes. That is the reason America hopes to keep these points off the Agenda. The question of debts is important, but America does not care to talk debts when her creditors are bankrupt and may ask for a moratorium; rather it is wiser to see what can be done to use these debts as clubs to line the countries up for further economic penetration by America. That is what the delegates of the Wall Street government hope to accomplish. America as the creditor, facing this condition, is opposed to debt discussion; many of the debtors, on the other hand, hope to force discussion. As a compromise American imperialism will agree to discuss debts so long as the discussion does not lead to decisive action.
Regardless of what form the economic discussion may take one thing is certain. The conference is an American Imperialist set-up for the benefit of American imperialism. To strip the issues bare, the U.S. imperialists are primarily interested in the following, from an economic standpoint: To strengthen their position and control over Latin America in the struggle against the other imperialists. To arrange long-term credits for private and public projects, which will enable America to export surplus capital so vital for America’s internal life and, at the same time, enable her to use these projects to further consolidate her Latin American empire.
The American delegates are empowered to offer a half a million dollars as a start for the Texas-Santiago highway, to assume the major share of the expense of an engineering survey for a proposed Central American–Rio de Janeiro railroad. These projects will open up the doors for capital investment and the further extension of American imperialism. The aims of the U.S. Government in the Pan-American conference are the further extension of American domination, the elimination of other imperialist contenders and a straightjacket for the workers and peasants of Latin America to prevent the Soviet idea that raise its head in the Cuban revolution from becoming a living reality in the Western Hemisphere.
The conference is only two days old. Although it is America’s setup. There are factors within it that may get beyond the control of Wall Street. The results of the conference will be discussed in a later issue of the Militant.
 



Government proclamations dealing with economic measures are issued so often it is difficult to keep up with them. This in itself reveals the mounting difficulties which confront the dominating imperialist power in the decay stage of capitalism. The resort to governmental economic measures in an attempt to “bring back prosperity” is a game that has no end simply because capitalism has contradictions which the most powerful of governments cannot solve or eliminate. In this circumstance the task of the capitalist government is to adopt “such measures as will place the ruling class, in the preliminary struggles and preparations for a re-division of the earth, in the most favorable position against the other imperialist powers and the working class at home.
Such is the purpose of the NRA and all of the other measures taken by the government since it was compelled by the situation to work more in the open. As soon as one government measure is used up and faces breakdown new decrees are issued. At one stage the slack is taken up at a critical moment by the Civil Works Program – a form of government relief which is half charity and half stagger plan. At another time the cracks are plastered over with an expanding monetary policy in a series of steps which range from going off the gold standard and placing unlimited power in the president’s hands to the gold-buying policy and now to the silver policy of the government. At other times critical stages are maneuvered through by the recognition of the U.S.S.R., the Hull Tariff proposal, or the establishment of the Federal Surplus Relief Association, etc.
President Roosevelt has extended the blanket code four more months, to May the First. This was necessitated by the fact that, the process of reorganization, at the expense of the workers and the middle class, has not gone fast enough. There are only two variants possible – or modified forms of these two variants – that the ruling class can take in relation to the NRA and its international supplementary measures. They must either return to the past and give up the “governmental experiment in business”, or proceed further on the present path. It can be answered with certainty that there is only one road ahead for American imperialism. That is the road of increased governmental control and regulation of American economy. A rich variety of forms leading toward state capitalism is possible, providing the proletariat does not interpose its own solution and made short work of the whole mess.
The government measures designed to insure a more favorable position for American imperialism on the international field dovetail into those measures which aim to reorganize production within the country. None of the government measures is exclusively internal or international. However, the NRA is primarily an internal object; the majority of the other measures supplement the NRA internally and extend the economic war out into the international arena.
The government monetary policy in its successive stages is not merely a series of internal measures to boost prices, as the administration would have us believe. In the final analysis it has greater international importance. One may safely say that the central contradiction concealed: within the monetary policy is the struggle between the Pound and the Dollar for world supremacy. But England and the United States are not the only two countries striving for a bigger place in the sun. Other imperialists are putting up a desperate fight for the same goal. These struggles inevitably cross this struggle between the Pound and the Dollar, and often monetarily stand out more prominently. An example of this is to be seen in the ratification of the international agreement for the re-monetization and stabilization of silver and the president’s proclamation on this question.
A new government organization of far-reaching powers, recently established is the Federal Surplus Relief Corporation. The New York Times says it may exercise “any and all powers” that may legally be delegated to it under the NRA, the AAA and the Emergency Relief Act. It may “purchase, store, handle and process” surplus commodities of any kind. It may attempt to “adjust the severe disparity between prices of agriculture and other commodities.” Subject to Federal and State laws it may “purchase, hold, own, mortgage, sell, convey, or otherwise dispose of ‘real and personal property of any sort, and in general, carry on any and all business necessary for the relief of the existing national emergency’.”
This, will act as a sort of a second line trench behind the NRA. It brings out into bold relief the great difference between the present reorganization for capitalist reproduction and that which followed past crises when capitalism as a world system was “healthy” and developing. It exposes the spots of decay even in U.S. economy, the dominating section of world economy. Capitalism has now reached a stage where the process of decay is “organized”. There is such a thing as “organized capitalism”, but in a sense completely opposite to that conveyed by the capitalist theorists. Decay on a world-wide scale, proceeds on an “organized” plan; only in this way can the capitalists retain power.
In Germany, the main defeated nation in the last world war, this “organized decay” took on its most violent form – Fascism. America, the main victor of the war and the strongest power now, has been able, up to the present time, to escape both the revolutionary destroyers and the Fascist saviors of capitalism. Nevertheless, it does not escape the need of reorganization by the curtailment and destruction of productive forces that must not be replaced. In previous crises during the growth stage of capitalism the process of reorganization always proceeded by the destruction of certain productive forces and commodities; but the new cycle started out with a more highly developed technique of production than that which obtained before the crises. This destruction of productive forces and commodities is not the new feature of the present stage. The important new fact is that the process of destruction is proceeding in an attempted “organized fashion’” by means of government subsidy where political exigency requires it, and without a reorganization on a superior technical level. In the decay stage of capitalism, within which American economy is included, iron shackles are fastened on the productive forces.
This does not mean that the cycle of reproduction and the creation of surplus value cannot again proceed. The NRA and the other measures are working toward this end. However, the rate of surplus value, will diminish progressively unless war and revolution alter the whole situation.
The NRA already has greatly assisted the process of reorganization and centralization of industry and government. But by no means has it solved the problem. A new problem confronting the present rulers is the army of permanent unemployed and the prospective Europeanization of the American workers, that is, their political awakening. Against this new and added danger from the working class the executive committee of the capitalist class has created the NRA. They foresee this danger and aim, by means of the NRA, to shackle the rising class in advance. The NRA has a far reaching economic effect but its effects on social and class relations will be even greater.
The middle class has not been roused to action yet. The stage is only being set through the NRA to squeeze them on a far larger scale. No one can predict which way this class will move. Already the farmers have shown open hostility to the NRA. This has forced concessions and has only postponed struggled on a wider scale. A section of the capitalists which had enjoyed monopolistic positions in certain industries have been opposing the NRA. They already enjoy a special position within their field. The government measures are of ho value to them unless they are on the inside track. That group of capitalists which has the inside track is carrying on a struggle for domination within America against other groups of contending capitalists and is using the NRA for this purpose. Many of the higher-ups in the “sound money bloc” and “gold-bloc” happen to be with that group of capitalists which is under attack.
The working class is being disillusioned. New measures will be attempted to keep the discontent from crystallizing into definite channels of class struggle against the NRA and all that goes with it. The reduction of the living standards off he whole class is proceeding as rapidly as the NRA becomes a “success”. The political awakening of the workers will be greatly advanced in the general process now taking place.
 



The sharpening class relations in Germany have reached the point of civil war. This is posing in the most acute fashion the analyses and programs of the factions of the Communist International. This analysis must flow from the fact that the weight of the contradictions of world capitalism finds their most difficult relationship in Germany, revealing it as the weakest link in the world capitalist chain. Our victory over Fascism in this situation depends upon the ability and action of the Communists in presenting the correct program for the situation in Germany.
The gigantic antagonisms between imperialism, which have been intensified since the last world war, finds their deepest expression in Germany. The interests of the world imperialists are bound up with the interests of the German bourgeoisie in their struggle against the proletariat. If American and other imperialists leave Germany to her own fate in the German extension of the October revolution, the door would be left open for the deepening of internal difficulties and convulsions at home. Across this contradiction between the imperialist powers themselves runs the contradiction between world imperialism and the Soviet Union. These contradictions are tied up in one knot in the present German situation.
To untie this knot, means to answer the burning question of class relations in the interest of the working class. Hitler and Fascism answers this question in the most clear cut fashion for the bourgeoisie, even though they show great signs of weakness and confusion. For this Fascist shortcoming, the errors of Stalinism have more than compensated. Fascism has already one foot over the threshold of state power and the Stalinist straitjacket is hindering the free action of the vanguard of the working class. Hitler dissolves the Reichstag, the Prussian Diet and calls for elections on March 5. Between now and elections he will see to it that the Communists and all other workers’ organizations are not able to participate according to their parliamentary strength and thereby insure a “legal” victory of Fascism.
Social Democracy has not outlived its usefulness for the ruling class, it cannot adequately serve the interest of the capitalists in the immediate acute situation but it can and does constitute an active reserve force ready to serve its master as a moment’s notice Social democracy can only be shattered by a proper united front tactics in order to win the worker socialist from the leaders, thereby the base upon which the social chauvinist and “Iron Front” fighters rest can be torn away.
One force that is at present in the background, but which has weight of first magnitude in Germany, is American imperialism. During and since the last world war and since the last war it has been the stabilizing center of world capitalism against the revolutionary struggles for power of the proletariat. A working agreement between German Fascism and American imperialism is necessary for capitalism to utilize the Fascist hordes against the working class and the Soviet Union.
America’s participation in the last word war on the side of the imperialist rivals of Germany was of decisive importance in the defeat of Germany. It was second in importance only to the effects of the October revolution upon the German working class in the 1918 revolution which overthrew the Kaiser. American capital, in the form of war loans and war equipment, gave the necessary impetus to the tired and shattered armies fighting Germany. American postwar loans continued this necessary prop of decaying European capital ism in order to insure foreign markets for American production.
 



“The problem of the mutual relations between the United States and Europe was very intimately bound up with the question of Fascism and social democracy. Only the defeat of the German revolution of 1923 made it possible for American capital to begin the realization of its plans for the (momentarily) peaceful subjugation of Europe. Under these circumstances, the American problem should have been considered in its full magnitude. Instead, the leadership of the Fifth Congress simply passed it by.” (Trotsky – Strategy of the World Revolution)
Such an analysis as early as the Fifth Congress would have enabled the Comintern to consider properly the role of American imperialism, and also the changing and developing new class relationships in Germany – both of which problems are not understood by the Comintern even to this day.
The defeat of the German revolution in 1923 made possible the “Americanization” of Europe through the Dawes Plan, the Young Plan, etc. Upon this defeat and the triumph of Stalinism in the Comintern, the necessary base for a new alignment of class relations in Germany was established. The propping up of the structure with American capital laid the objective base for capitalist stabilization. The triumph of Stalinism, upon the wave of revolutionary regress, laid the subjective base for the “return” of social democracy as a crutch for crippled German capitalism Meanwhile capitalism nurtured the Fascist force for the coming showdown with the “Marxian swine”.
In this period, while capitalist Germany was walking upon the crutches of social democracy and the American dollar, the main task of American imperialism was the problem of preventing the extension of the October revolution, of propping up decaying capitalism, and of maintaining thereby the dominating imperialist position and the super-profits that go with it.
Around Germany and its reparation problem in this post war period revolves the complex of capitalist contradictions. Today around Germany and its Fascist hordes the same thing is seen in a higher form. The key to the international situation, as Trotsky has said, is Germany.
American investments in Germany are tremendous.
Their protection is a major concern of our imperialists. In the past, every mark Germany paid in reparations was more than equalled by loans from American imperialism. But to keep this up indefinitely is not possible to American profits. From this flowed the new problem of the Hoover moratorium, the reparation “settlement” and the war debt question.
The moratorium and reparation settlement were frantic attempts to hold in check the inevitable civil war in Germany. These moves were not successful. But they were able to strengthen the reactionary forces of Fascism against the proletariat. Between he contradictory problem of profits and the prevention of the extension of the October revolution, the American imperialists have been jumping, in the hope that a parallel line of march can be obtained for these two factors in the decay of capitalism.
Normal bourgeois rule in Germany is desired. But American imperialism knows enough to change its attitude when the time demands it. The German capitalists were slow and by no means unanimous in changing from social democracy, to coalition, to Bonapartism and now – to Fascism. The American imperialists will show these same contradictions in their change of position, and a slower tempo. Already a growing section of the American capitalists are in favor of “Hitler and Hindenburg – since the Bonapartist attempts have been dislodged by the sharpening class relations.”
In South America, American imperialism has supported in turn reactionary, liberal, and “revolutionary” governments and has resorted to armed intervention – depending in each case upon the class relations and imperialists relations, according to the profit interest of American capital. Germany will be no exception. The only difference is that the explosive class relations in Germany are at a far higher stage than in South America, where the flames of revolt can be far easier held in check. Therefore, far more precaution has been shown by ruthless American imperialism.
 



A Fascist victory and the defeat of the German proletariat would lay the basis for ironing out the most pressing contradictions standing in the way of the imperialist war on the Soviet Union. Fascist Germany and American capital, With the other imperialists, would transform their economic war into a military war against the Soviet Union, using Fascism as the spearhead of attack. In the post-war period, defeated Germany stood in toe way of a well organized military operation and direct attack upon the Soviet Union. A Fascist Germany eliminates the sharpest expression of this contradiction. This does not mean that social democracy is just that many degrees better when it rules. It means that the position of class relations is to that degree different. The position of the working class and its party is different. Social democracy drugs the proletariat. Fascism annihilates its organizations.
Italian Fascism has the most agreeable relationship with American imperialism. Italian Fascism does not rest upon the same economic base that a victorious German Fascism would have. The White Terror government of Hungary after the Hungarian revolution, as well as other White Terror governments of the Balkans, have the best of relations with the American imperialists. But Fascist Italy and all of these White Terror Governments can not disorganize the world working class to the same degree that German Fascism, in the event of victory, could. The economic base below these forces is different.
The Stalinists consider Mussolini in Italy or Pilsudsky in Poland as just another form of bourgeois rule, and then conclude that Fascism in Germany would be similar. Such governments are indeed a form of bourgeois rule.
But from the class point of view there is a vast difference between social democracy and Fascism. And one must add to this, that with the Fascist variety of bourgeois rule there are differences and more pressing dangers. Fascism in Germany would make Fascism in Italy look like child’s play. Because WORLD CAPITALISM is in a more critical situation, Fascism takes root in a more developed country – as the expression of INTERNATIONAL relations.
The danger of an imperialist war between Japan and America in the Orient must be kept on the proletarian order of business but cannot be separated from the imperialists’ contradictions and the key situation in Germany. The contradictions between the imperialist powers on the one hand and the Soviet Union on the other finds expression in Germany and in China. Both situations must be approached from the international point of view and the proper connection of their economic and class relationships obtained.
In these preliminary struggles of the imperialists for the redivision of the earth these two dangers points reveal Germany as the weakest link and America as the dominating imperialist power.
Japan has advantages at the present in its present position in the Orient in this struggle for the re-division of the earth but the American imperialism’s hold upon the European imperialists, through war debts and through the billions invested in Germany, and America’s economic weight, gives her a lever far greater than that held by Japan, for world struggles in general and struggles in the Orient against Japan.
American imperialism is watching with vulture anxiety the gains of German Fascism. If Fascism triumphs in Germany reaction will be strengthened throughout the world. The American workers will be confronted by a wave of reaction. Greater capitalist prospects for a way out of the world crisis will be obtained.
A united front of reaction against the Soviet Union will alter, even though it intensifies the antagonisms between the imperialists. And America on top of the decay heap of world capitalism has far more to gain than to lose in much a new alignment for the coming imperialist war. All of this providing – Fascism is victorious in Germany. But this is not yet a settled question. The time is not yet too late to turn the tide into a successful proletarian revolution, thereby smashing Fascism – and the pillars of American Imperialism.
 



The drive to SAVE THE MILITANT is the first order of business of the League and its sympathizers in the present period. We are confronted with the most serious financial condition possible and unless we obtain several hundred dollars, the very existence of the Militant is threatened. On top of this, the Post Office threatens to revoke our mailing rights if we skip another issue.
What are you doing about this? Have you called on your fellow-workers and ask for contributions? Help Save the Militant. Send in your contribution at once and then visit your friends and collect funds for the Militant.
The Militant has performed an international revolutionary duty to the class and the party in keeping the Marxian theories and the Bolshevik-Leninist needs of the day before the English-speaking workers of the whole world. While the press of Stalinism sways between opportunism and adventurism the Militant has held high the international revolutionary principles of Marxism. The need of the organization is not a retreat to a semi-monthly but an Increase in propaganda in order to keep pace with the growing activity of the League and the sharpening world events. In all parts of the country the demand for our press and our literature is on the increase. The demand is one positive side of the problem. The other side is the organizational end. We must send out organizers, but all this will fail of accomplishment unless the Militant is kept before the workers each week.
You cannot allow the financial difficulties to drown the voice of the Militant. You must strain every resource to help SAVE THE MILITANT. Send in your contribution at once, solicit funds for the Militant. Rush all Funds to the Militant, 126 East 16th St., New York City.
 



Chicago, Ill. – The Chicago Unemployed Conference held at Lincoln Center on May 13, 14, 15, ended by forming the National Federation of Unemployed Workers Leagues of America, with the national office in Chicago, and the election of a National Committee of 15.
 
Huge Representation
Three national organizations, two others in the process of forming national, state, sectional and city organizations, represented 40 organizations with 826 branches, from 16 states and 25 cities with 96 delegates from all parts of the United States. The Workers’ Committees, Workers Leagues and Unemployed Councils were represented. The Ohio Independence meeting, to be called by the CPLA and the Industrial Workers Unions, both in the process of forming national unemployed organizations, were also represented. Fraternal delegates from political organizations were also present, Al. Glotzer representing the Left Opposition.
Political tendencies from the extreme right to the extreme left attended the conference which was the high mark up to the present in the united front of workers’ organizations. The following political tendencies were represented through different unemployed organizations: Republicans, Democrats, Agrarian reformers, progressives, Borders’ group, socialists, Right wing socialists, militant socialists, left wing socialists, anarchists, Industrial Workers of the World, Musteites, Stalinists, Lovestonites, Right-centre Communists, ultra-Left communists and the Left Opposition. The different political tendencies were, in the main, divided into two different positions at the conference as Right wingers and Left wingers, with the I.W.W. delegates jumping back and forth. Struggles within the two main tendencies marked the high points of the conference and made it possible, thru the ironing out of secondary differences on immediate demands, to conclude the conference with unanimous decisions. The amendments to the reports of the committees were either adopted or rejected and then the report as amended was adopted unanimously.
The greatest numerical weight of the conference was held by the socialist delegates, who were instrumental in calling it. But the hopeless split between their Right and Left wings and the political bankruptcy of the main current of the socialists made them a sorry figure in the conference, which swamped them in defeat and wrapped them up in their own contradictions by obtaining unanimous decisions on the amended reports.
The Left Opposition’s Objectives
The delegates from the unemployed organizations representing our political views (Left Opposition) went to the conference with the following objectives:

To fight for the seating of all unemployed organizations, especially the Unemployed Councils, which the Borders Committee had specified in the call would not be seated.
 
To have the conference adopt the correct position on the united front and establish it as a working basis for the unemployed organizations.
 
That the perspective of the conference be the establishment of one national unemployed organization.
 
To oppose any political, racial, color or creed or discrimination in the unemployed organizations.

These objectives became the established principles by conference decision because other delegates – on the one hand, independent of our and on the other hand, through discussion with us – fought for the same positions, thereby enabling the united Left wing to carry its program.
Our delegates, while concentrating on the above issues were unable to lead an adequate fight for the slogan of the six-hour day, five-day week, with increased pay, which in the main was lost in the resolutions committee.
Several draft programs from different organizations, including a statement of the Left Opposition were passed out to the delegates. Our statement will appear in a coming issue.
 
The Floor Struggles
The first difference of opinion in the conference came when the credential committee reported, leaving out the credentials of the Unemployed Councils. Delegate Oehler moved an amendment to the report of the credential committee asking for the seating of the Unemployment Council delegates and the fraternal delegates from political organizations that were also left out. Delegate Waters, of the Workers Leagues, amended this by specifying the number of votes they could have. This was agreed to by the representatives of the Unemployed Councils to enable the Left wing of the conference to concentrate on one instead of two amendments. The amendment to seat the delegates from the Unemployed Councils and fraternal delegates carried by a vote of twenty-nine and a half to twenty-five and a half, thereby establishing at the start the principle of no exclusions from the united front. Without the support of the Workers Leagues, the Lovestoneites and the Left Opposition, the Stalinists would not have been seated.
The second important struggle revolved around the question of what kind of an organization this conference would establish. Some delegates, led by the Worker’s Leagues, desired a national organization. Others wanted a continuation of the original Federation and the delegates from the Unemployed Councils merely wanted a continuation committee and united front local and sectional committees. The Musteites, who are calling the July 4th conference, supported the position of the Unemployed Councils.
The report of the constitution committee was rejected, the committee dismissed and a new one elected with Dennis Batt from the Detroit Citizen League as Chairman. They brought in a report favoring a National Federation with city, county and state federations. A Reverend delegate from the Workers Committee amended the report of the committee and advocated a national federation of organizations which give the local units the right to enter or stay out of the federation. The committee and many delegates pointed out that it is in the local units and not in the national committee that we have the struggle for immediate needs and that there the need for united action is the greatest. National or state unemployed organizations joining the federation should see that their locals take part in the city federations.
The Stalinists, who at first did not want a centralized federation, decided to support the amendment and one of their speakers, Lamson, had already supported the amendment. However, Stalinist delegates were open to reason and after some discussion with us changed their position and threw their support to the report of the committee which advocated an organization with the city, county, and state federations leading up to a national federation. The vote was 56 for the majority and 32 for the minority report. The final vote to adopt the disputed section received a vote of 73 for and 17 opposed, and then it was adopted as a whole unanimously.
The constitution lays down the following additional important decisions: There shall be no discrimination against race, color, creed or political opinions. The Federation is to establish the closest relationship with the EMPLOYED workers through the trade unions, industrial unions, and all other workers organizations. The Federation has the perspective of establishing one national unemployed organization.
 
The Committee on Program and Policies
The third struggle of importance in the conference revolved around the report of the committee on program and policy and tried to tear the committee to pieces and dismiss them. They especially took exception to the program’s position on the united front. They did not succeed in dismissing the committee. They did succeed in causing two of the committee, who supported the majority report of the committee, to resign. The rest of the committee agreed to stay and fight it out with them as well as Guss of the Unemployed Councils who was to bring in a minority report on the question of work relief, a social insurance Bill and the soldiers’ bonus.
The program and policy committee came in the second time with a unanimous report, cutting down the original program but actually only condensing its form, and stating so in their second report. Guss, of the Unemployed Council, in compromising on the minority report did so for the sake of unity, in order to be able to better fight the Right wing tendencies fighting the report as a whole which the Unemployed Councils, in the main, supported.
When the committee made its second report, the struggle revolved around the formula of the united front. The struggle revolved around the following formula, presented by delegate Oehler:
“In this united front each organization retains its organizational independence; refrains from slander and personal attacks against each other; but maintains the right of minority expression and freedom of criticism. Under no circumstances can the united front exclude an unemployed organization from participating. Should any organization attempt to prevent the entry of its organization into the united front, continued effort must be made to force them into the united front.”
The objection was to the right of minority and political criticism and the word “force.” The committee finally compromised on the word “force” and it then read “to obtain their participation in the united front.”
 
A Big Step Forward
The whole Left wing was united on this formula, including the Stalinists who had voted down the same proposition presented by the delegates “at the Mooney Congress just a few weeks before. When the vote was taken only 17 voted against the formula of the united front. Then the report was adopted unanimously.
The National committee elected consists of the following with representation reserved for other important organizations not sufficiently represented:



Chairman, Tom Dixon – Workers Leagues
Vice-Chairman, Guss, Unemployed Councils
Secretary, Leach – Workers Comm.
Treasurer, Statman – Industrial Workers Unemployed Unions
Conners – Allen County Indiana Unemployed Association
D. Harrington,: – United Producers of Washington
V. Didwell – Peoples Council of Bellingham
Lamson – Unemployed Councils
Hugo Oehler – Unemployed Union of Gillespie
Truax – East Ohio Unemployed Unions
Zimmerman – Workers Leagues
Lore – S.E. Mo. Unemployed Leagues
Mattock – Workers Leagues
Welsh – Association of Unemployed, N.Y.



The Conference marks a real advance!
 



The Mooney Congress was a big step forward for the Communist Party and had many positive qualities, which we must acknowledge at the start, even though Communists do not stop to pat themselves on the back. It was, at the same time, top heavy with a whole series of the most elementary and fundamental mistakes and blunders that can always be expected from Stalinism. At least one can say, without fear of contradiction, it was a big step in the correct direction, even though only a start.
* * *
The success and step forward is due primarily to the rejection of the “united front from below” by the Communist Party and the acceptance of the united front between organizations. In a few months this policy has been able to obtain greater results than the Stalinists, with the united front from below, could obtain in the whole past period. In fact, the last few months has demonstrated that the united front of organizations has done more to expose the Socialist and A.F. of L. misleaders than all the slander of the Stalinists and their theory of social-Fascism, which is the motivation for the united front from below.
* * *
When the Stalinists opened the door for “all” workers’ organizations in their turn on the united front they hoped to find a way to keep the Left Opposition out, contrary to their expectations, they find themselves in the awkward position of being forced to take the defensive under the hammer of the Communist League of America. In other words, as we have pointed out so often before, to close the door to the Left Opposition is to close tho door to contact with the American workers. And likewise to open the door, not for us, but for the American workers, is to open the door for us. Ask Hathaway, Minor and the steering committee of their caucus in the Mooney Conference, or. consider the conference and judge for yourselves.
* * *
Progressive Miners of America
The heaviest weight outside of the organizations under the ideological influence of the Communist Party was the delegation from the Progressive Miners of America. One of the “lightest” forces in the conference was the C.P.L.A., represented by Muste. However, it was Muste this and Muste that. They thought they were using Muste but facts will prove Muste was using them.
* * *
Muste was the Stalinists’ “best bet,” for a front because the club he held, for bargaining was none too big. Sad to say for the Stalinists, every time the delegates from the Progressive Miners were put on committees, they were able to exert, such great pressure, due to the masses they represented, that they more than once upset the well laid plans of Stalinism and were a great factor in helping keep the Mooney Conference on the path of workers’ democracy on the path of the correct united front, in general, helped keep the Stalinists within “civilized” bounds and helped round out a policy in order to build a powerful movement on this start. More power to the Left wing of the Progressive Miners of America.
* * *
Until the afternoon of the third day the conference was, in the main, just one long mass meeting. In fact, the Stalinists intended to call off the third-day session to enable them to carry on two days of mass meetings, to wind up with the big May Day Stadium mass meeting and end up the conference by passing a manifesto bursting with propaganda but void of a concrete program of action. At the end of the first day the mass protest of the delegates promoted the change in plans, caused the Stalinists to retreat, continue with a three-day session. On the second day, they forced the election of a Resolutions Committee, a committee the party “forgot about” while they kept everybody entertained with propaganda speeches but nothing substantial on policy and program. Instead of reporting at the beginning of the conference on policy and program, the delegates of the conference had to fight the Stalinists up to the afternoon of the last session before a report on resolutions and policy was given, and then the half day that was left was to be used by the more than fifteen hundred delegates to discuss the program.
* * *
The United Front
A big sign in the hall said: “Only a united front of the workers will free Tom Mooney.” One could excuse such a slogan from a party that practiced a united front for years but one cannot excuse such a slogan issued by Stalinism. Within it, can be concealed the united front from below. There can be no united front between workers. There can be a united front only of workers’ organizations.
* * *
Scott and Goldman
Scott, representative of the Molders Defense Committee said he wanted to safeguard the conference from communist control. This went over big with the anti-communist element. This position has nothing in common with the anti-Stalinist position of the Left Opposition.
Goldman, a delegate from Chicago, pointed out that the conference was a good start but too narrow, saying that over 75 percent was Left wing workers. Scott, who replied to Goldman’s criticism on this and many other points made a poor job of it. He said on this point that Goldman objects to having a conference with 75 percent Left wingers. Goldman had pointed out that 75 percent of the conference was Left wing in order to show that we have been able to bring the Left wing element together in a united front but that we must now build up and around this Left wing a broad layer of other American workers.
Some members of the committee and most Stalinists cannot distinguish positive from destructive criticism.
* * *
The fact, that after four years of the crisis the American workers organized the largest, most representative united front – not on unemployment; not on social insurance; not on the six hour day and no reduction in pay struggle; not on a fight against wage cuts; but on a question of freeing a framed-up class-war prisoner, the most elementary working class demand possible, proves that the failure to build the movement cannot be attributed to objective conditions, which are in our favor. It proves that there is something rotten in our own ranks.
We expect nothing but betrayals from the reformists and reactionary labor leaders. The key to the situation, therefore, is in the hands of the Communist. Party. But the party is in the hands of Stalinism and this revisionism of the program on basic international questions and tactics that flow from this is the determining factor in this glaring contradiction between favorable conditions and the Communist Party’s present position in the American class struggle.
* * *
Political Forces
Without, a doubt, the two main political forces of the conference were the Stalinists and the Left Opposition. The Stalinists who have been exercising on us for the last several years up to a few months ago by kicking us out of conferences were forced to recognize us officially. The presiding committee was forced to nominate us for the Resolutions Committee. We were elected to the Permanent National Committee. We compelled the adoption of some important points of our policy.
This was not due to any change of heart by the Stalinists. It was due to the fact that the Left Opposition had a mass pressure great enough, in relation to the pressure of the Stalinist forces, to demand recognition. The Left Opposition had delegates from bona fide trade unions, unemployment organizations, defense committees, etc., that could not be ignored without ignoring a decisive section of the conference itself. For example, to ignore the large delegation from the Progressive Miners of America would have to ignore the most important mass organization in the conference.
* * *
The Lovestone right wingers had a hard fight to obtain the right to the floor for even five minutes. Their floor tactics were terrible and their right wing policy was even worse. A clear line of difference on policy could be seen between them and the Left Opposition. The right wing had no pressure of importance relative to the pressure of the organized Stalinist caucus, while the Left Opposition had a pressure and policy that was able to make, drastic inroads into the Stalinist original plans. On the other hand, with our pressure we were able to threw our force with the Stalinists on specific issues where they were in the main correct and thereby keep intact the unity of the conference as well as weaken the anti-communist tendencies of the conference that the Stalinist blunders helped free. This is the correct function in a united front.
* * *
The Resolution
In the past the Stalinists had to be criticised from the right, because their united front from below was an ultra-left deviation. In this conference, where the united front of organisations replaced the old formula, we had to fight them from the left, because they deviated to the right of the Leninist concept. In the main resolution, they had a sentence stating that there would be no attacks on organizations participating in the united front. This is a non-aggression pact, no matter how one tries to explain it away. One must not confuse two different kinds of attacks, slander and criticism of policy. We presented a minority report on the main resolution stating the following: “Each organization entering the united front obligates itself to discipline in action but retains its complete independence and its right of criticism.” Hathaway, speaking for the majority, and the Stalinists, and, having the backing of all right wing elements in the conference, voted us down but we obtained 63 votes – heavy trade union votes – for our amendment. This was the largest minority vote of the conference.
The Left Opposition voted for the main resolution with the above amendment. It was not the best resolution possible but was, in the main, presentable and laid the basis for a working agreement for the united front.
The Lovestone right wingers introduced an amendment on the Scottsboro case. The amendment of Zam’s was a concrete expression of his position at the Chicago city conference a few weeks ago, when he tried to leave the Mooney case high and dry, divorced from every other issue and the class struggle. Zam proposed that the Mooney issue be the only issue of the Congress.
The original petition of the Stalinists was for a Mooney-Scottsboro Committee. In the Resolutions Committee this was amended after a fight, led by the Left Opposition. It was agreed that the Committee would be a Free Tom Mooney Committee and that we agitate for the Scottsboro case and cooperate with the defense. To affiliate with and be part of the Mooney united front it is necessary only to agree with the campaign to free Tom Mooney.
The Left Opposition differed with both the Lovestoneite and Stalinist positions. We were opposed to the Stalinist attempt to turn the Mooney Committee into a Mooney-Scottsboro Committee, but, we were equally opposed to the Lovestone right wing attempt to separate the Mooney case from the Scottsboro case and other class struggle issues. Both the centrists and the Right wing confuse the question of organizational and propaganda relations, as well as the relations between different issues of the class struggle.
The final draft of the resolution had some bad points on this question and some wrong formulations, such as: “The unity of the workers and Negro people.” In the main. however, it was correct, and we found common ground on which to vote with the Stalinists.
* * *
The C.I. May Day Bombshell
After the Resolutions Committee had adopted a very good and correct formula on the united front with the exception of the sentence dealing with “no attacks” the Stalinist steering committee, Amter, etc., discovered, through our information that the Daily Worker that had arrive in the morning of this session carried a manifesto from the C.I. on May Day that again returned to the united front from below. It was a wrong position and a return to the old formula. At least one thing was clear, that the C.I. formula and the formula adopted at the Mooney Congress were two different positions. Which one will the Stalinists try to live up to? This is their contradiction.
We will do all that is possible to help the party find its way to the correct Leninist united front position expressed, in the main, by the resolution of the Mooney Congress and not by the C.I. resolution.
The Left Opposition was on the Resolutions Committee of the Mooney Congress but unfortunately was not on the Resolutions Committee of the C.I.
If the Mooney movement slips back to the old Stalinist formula of the united front from below, the Socialist Party and A.F.L. leaders will be greatly strengthened and rendered a great service by us.
* * *
Hathaway and Borich, speaking in defense of a confused formula on the united front that has elements of both the Mooney Congress formula and the C.I. formula, said, in reference to the Socialist, and A.F.L. leaders: “The leaders will never come into a united front of this kind,” meaning the Chicago Mooney Congress. The leaders never decide the question of joining or boycotting a united front. This question is decided for them by the use of a Leninist policy of the united front by the revolutionists and the mass pressure of the workers upon and within their organization. If the united front policy is not correct and the pressure, consequently, not great, enough then they will refuse. This the Stalinists must still learn, just as they must learn that we never must give up our independence or our right to political criticism in united fronts.
 



The Progressive Miners of America, which took shape in mass struggles against the Operators, their state and the Lewis machine, and which attained a certain stabilization of the union, is now running into a new period of class storms that will determine its life or death, or its crystallization either as a union of class struggle or a union of class collaboration.
The operators, the Peabody Company, the state and the Lewis machine have planned a new drive against the Progressive Miners. The first blows in this new campaign have already been struck. The union was not prepared to meet them and, therefore, they have weakened the union’s position. This does not mean that the position of the Progressive Miners Union is helpless. On the contrary, a systematic campaign and correct left wing policy, the same policy of struggle that was so successful in the birth stage of the union can bring it by the Fall of the year, the period when production will start again on the winter basis, in a powerful position to fight the Operators.
 
Tendencies in P.M.A.
The Peabody Coal Company, the Operators, the State Forces (State, County and City) and Lewis machine, represent the combined force attempting to crush the Progressive Miners of America. The Progressive Miners of America, like all unions of the working class, is composed of different tendencies, groups and factions with different policies. The struggle against the bosses and their agents cannot be separated from the struggle within the vinion, for a correct program. Within the union we have as definite groups: the Right wing element; the Musteites; the Socialists, Right and Left wing; the Stalinists; the Left Opposition. The Right wing is by no means a homogeneous group. A section would like to go back into the fold of the Lewis machine and another’ section would like to remain progressives, but “progressives” practising class collaboration with the small operators against the Peabody Coal Company.
In most of the struggles that have taken place within the union up to the present, to determine its character and role, these seven tendencies in the main divided into two camps, the Right wing element uniting organizationally, but the left wing element remaining unorganized.
The line-up in the main was as follows: The Right wing consist of a section desiring to make amends to Lewis, of the confused class collaboration “progressives,” and the Right wing socialists who work within the Progressive Miners. The Left wing in the main are: the militant, class-conscious progressives, the Left wing Socialists, and the Stalinist and Left Opposition wings of the Communist Party. The Musteites usually straddle the fence between these two camps, always landing in the camp of the Right wing in the final analysis. It is necessary to prove the above statement.
The main thing necessary at this stage is to point out the road ahead and the necessary plans for the summer period; to unite the different political forces within the Left wing minimum program.
 
P.M.A. and Unemployment
The first attack of the Peabody forces in the recent period was the bitter suppression and reign of terror against the State Hunger March. The backbone and bulk of the Hunger March were the coal miners and to smash the Hunger March meant to deal a heavy blow against the coal miner’s. The coal miners receive, at the most 75 cents a head for families, while the workers in Chicago and other cities receive far more. With a majority of Progressive Miners facing the summer
months on strike or unemployed, increased relief means strength to the Progressive Miners in their struggle against the Peabody forces. Governor Horner knew this and acted accordingly. The Right wing, the Musteites and the Right wing Socialists opposed the Hunger March from within, sabatoged it, fought against it, and in some cities the Right wing even allowed members of the Progressive Miners to be deputized to beat down the Hunger Marchers.
The struggle of the Progressive Miners for victory over the Peabody forces cannot be separated from the struggle of the unemployed workers, through mass pressure, for more relief. The Right wing element in the Progressive Miners Union have not only allowed this important weapon to lie idle and rust but have attempted to prevent the Left wing element from utilizing it in the struggle against the Operators. Has the Union officially taken one step in the direction of organizing the unemployed coal miners? No. Strike relief is the nearest they came to it, but that alone misses the mark entirely. The Progressive Miners Union must take up the activity for the unemployed miners inside and outside of the union. The Left wing must lead in this fight.
 
Red Baiting Campaign
Right on the heels of smashing the State Hunger March, the Peabody forces followed up in the southern area by killing two Progressive Miners, arresting scores of others and terrorizing the Progressive Miners in their base of operation just outside of Franklin County. This in turn was followed up in quick order by an attack upon the Left wing forces of the Progressive Miners Union by a charge of Communism and through a red baiting campaign.
The aim of the Peabody forces was to divide the union forces, force the Right wing into retreat, and the left wing, under cover. They wanted the Right wing in the union to make a drive against the Communists and other Left wing elements and thereby, to further weaken the union – in order to facilitate a finishing blow in the Fall of the year. They did not succeed entirely in the last move, that of red baiting. However, the Left wing position was weakened because all those forces, with few exceptions, who were under attack, wasted their time trying to prove that they were not Reds, instead of pointing out the real aim of the bosses “red drive.” The guns cannot be aimed at the Communists as Peabody desires if the union is to live; the guns must be aimed at the Peabody forces and expose the “Red drive” for what it is worth. To be called a Communist when one is only a left winger is an honor. For a Communist to deny being one in the Progressive Miners of America is a first rate mistake.
 
The Situation in Franklin County
We have already dealt in previous articles with the two year contract; the legalistic attitude of the leadership on the frame-up cases; and the factions in the Gillespie conference. More light can be thrown on this question, if we consider the two year contract in relation to the Franklin County strike. The situation in Franklin County was ripe for the strike weeks before the men were pulled out. The leadership held back, would hear nothing of it – until the Monday following the signing of the two year contract and then they were all for it. Did you ever hear of any worse strike strategy, or rather any better class collaboration “strike” strategy, than to sign a contract with a section of the small operators on Saturday and then to pull out the most strategical county in the state the following Monday? Even some of the Musetites in the field could not swallow this “strategy.”
The Musteites play an odd role in the Progressive Miners of America. Most of their return students make good watchdogs against Communism in general. Tom Tippet is conducting classes in Economics and other subjects for the union. His first outline on Economics dealing with wages is as far from Marxism as Marxian Economics is from bourgeois Economics. He will succeed in sowing confusion and will help strengthen the Right wing elements or its “Left” cover within the Progressive Miners Union.
The Stalinist faction and their policies and blunders have been dealt with many times in the columns of the Militant, so we will only take up a couple of important aspects of the situation. The outstanding factor to consider when one speaks of Stalinism as the official representative of Communism in the Illinois coal fields is the fact that the “vanguard” has control of the .majority of the unemployed councils and the progressives have control of the trade union and the strikes throughout the coal fields. This contradiction cannot be explained away with a jumble of words. It flows from the wrong international approach. The same contradiction was seen in Germany on an enlarged scale where the Communist party had “control of the unemployed” and the “social democrats were strong in the trade union field.”
The greatest contradiction of the Left Opposition is the gulf between its trade union policy, which has been proven correct in the struggle of the Progressive Miners of America, and its lack of material forces. Due to this, the main line of march of our trade union policy is often blurred by the tactical shifts along this line and by mistakes of a member or two.
 
Tasks for Next Period
A fight against the Right wing class collaboration policy must be launched all along, up and down the line, in the Progressive Miners of America, if the union is to be strengthened in the coming period if it is to be in a position to fight the Peabody forces. The red baiting campaign in the union must stop and the Communists must have the rights of minority expression as well as members of any other political party. The Left wing forces must formulate a minimum program around which to unite. These steps must be taken at once in every mine town, in every local of the P.M.A., if we are to defeat the Peabody, Lewis, Horner outfit.
The class collaboration in policy of the leaders of the P.M.A. was adopted because they “wanted a breathing spell.” But upon this false foundation they have been losing ground to the Lewis machine in many districts Breathing spells, as well as growth, cannot be had on the basis of class collaboration, if one has the interest of the workers at heart. Growth and consolidation is possible only on the basis of a Left wing policy, of class struggle.
Upon such a foundation the union was born, upon such a foundation the union will grow. Words about minority rights and expression, words about unity of all Left wing forces in the coal industry on a national scale, words about unemployment relief, words about the six hour day, words must be changed int action. Not the kind of action in the immediate past. Action where the Right wing sat in their swivel chairs answering phones, sending the militants to the front line to carry on the work and to be used as a cover for their Right wing poliicies. Individual militants and Left wing class struggle fighters may have the best of intentions, but as such they will only be tools in the hands of the Right wing unless they have behind them and are subordinated to, an organized Left wing.
The Right wing uses the Democratic party as their machine in union elections. The Left wing must organize all their forces for their struggles and their policies.
 



Gillespie, Ill. – The Scale Committee of the Progressive Miners Union of America has met with the operators holding contracts with the union, to renew the contract expiring April 1, and recommend to the membership of the union, to sign a contract for two years. A referendum vote of the union will be held Saturday, the 25th. The Gillespie office has sent to all locals instructions and the contract to be voted upon, but up to this date, Wed., March 23, the majority of the miners have not yet seen the new contract or the amendments to the old contract as proposed by the Scale Committee. Regardless of the changes or lack of changes in the new contract the miners should have more time to study the contract, and to discuss it before the referendum vote is taken.
All indications show that the leadership of the PMA consider the contract they present as the most hey could obtain from the operators at this time. The strategy of the Scale Committee and the present leadership seems to be the desire to obtain a two year contact instead of the one year contract in order to obtain a breathing spell which is to enable them to consolidate and strengthen their union. This intention may be the best but the way the action is being carried out is far from the best for the interest of the miners in the PMA.
 
Shortcomings of Contract
The shortcomings in the contract presented by the scale committee, at least of as much of the new contract as we are reliably informed on, are the following: The contract calls for a two year period instead of a one year period. Such a contract does not favor the miners and a militant union. On the contrary, such a contract will favor the Right wing in the union and the small operators with whom the contract is signed. At this stage of the crisis, and especially since we have the new banking laws that open wide the doors for inflation with possibilities of a wide price change, not downward, but upward, it is not advisable to sign a contract over such a long period, unless a special clause is inserted taking care of such price changes and inflation. The new contract does not provide for this. There is no fundamental difference between the contract presented for referendum and the Lewis contract. Such a contract is presented when the PMA is far stronger than it was when it fought the other (Lewis) contract and had been forced to compromise. This present compromise comes without a struggle – if the referendum is carried, at least so far as the leadership is concerned.
The struggle for the shorter workday is left out entirely, and yet this is a burning problem for the whole working class and especially the miners. It is true that the PMA is confronting great odds and an uphill fight; against the operators, their state force, murder frame-ups, the Lewis machine and the general effects of the crisis, and therefore they will have to be careful in their struggle. The union must now fight for the lives of the Taylorville frame-up victims whom the Peabody Coal Company wants to burn in the electric chair. The PMA must win over Franklin County and all indications are that a powerful strike movement will be upon us within a period of days. Confronted with these conditions the leadership desires a base below them for the fight. All this is true but it is equally as true that a union of the working class will ALWAYS face similar conditions and the united front of the bosses, the state and the labor fakers. The question is: will the two year contract, with no essential difference from the Lewis contract, strengthen or weaken the PMA in the struggle against the operators, the state and the Lewis machine? Our opinion is that the present contract will weaken rather than strengthen the union in the struggle. This is the opinion of the Left wing in the PMA.
 
The Right Wing Wants “Peace”
The unions came into existence through mass pressure and mass struggles and can only grow through such struggles. The growing Right wing in the union want less mass struggles and long contracts and the respect of the ‘’best people’’ in the mining towns. The Right wing want “peace”, but the Left wing knows that you can only have “peace” if you are strong enough to maintain the union and its conditions. It is the Left wing and the progressives who are carrying on the dangerous work in Franklin county, men whom the Stalinists call traitors.
We may ask the question: How much work will the PMA miners obtain this summer? Very little. In fact, a strike struggle for a better contract, rallying the UMWA miners throughout the nation behind this program will cut the ground from underneath the Lewis control and strengthen the PMA. The PMA is far stronger today than it was when first organized and a far greater influence. It has an excellent chances of winning a better contract after such a fight than by compromising with no gains, before a fight. With such a strike struggle carried on during the coming period, on a national scale, the PMA union would be stronger in the fall than it is now. It is very doubtful if the PMA could be smashed in such a short period. Rather, the PMA would gain throughout the country. The miners are asked to sign a contract, not after a defeated strike, when compromise must be necessary, but before a strike, and when the summer slack period is approaching and most of the mines will be shut down. Trade union leaders must know how to compromise, but in America we need little warning along this line except to the hot headed ultra-Lefts. Above all we do not want compromise before a struggle, before the battle and when we have grown stronger.
 



Taylorville, Ill. – The trial of the 22 Kincaid miners, charged with murder, is under way in the Christian County Circuit Court. Its sessions occur with a packed hall of miners from all parts of the Illinois coal fields. The first two up for trial, whom the Peabody coal company intends to burn in the electric chair are Emil Dupire, coal miner, and Mattozzo, chief of police in Kincaid and supporter of the P.M.A.
The trial so far clearly reveals the frame-up evidence given by the Peabody Coal Company and the danger of conviction due to the legalistic position taken by the officials of the P.M.A. conducting the case. All strategical vantage points are in the hands of the Peabody Coal Company. The P.M.A. officials do not seem to realize the significance of this.
John Hogan, Peabody attorney, has been drafted by the state attorney and is leading the prosecution. The jury consists of eleven farmers and one clerk – an ideal reactionary jury that can easily ignore all contradictory evidence and frame-up material. A far greater danger than this is the position of the PMA officials that has put the damper on mass pressure. They are leaving the case in the hands of their attorneys. The bulletin of the Progressive Miner (March 31) speaks of the opening of the case as follows: “The flimsiness of the state’s case has been well shattered in the first stage of the trial.” Yes, to the workers, but we are not deciding the case. Eleven farmers and one clerk and the Peabody Coal Company are deciding the case. The bulletin, in referring to the clear-cut frame-up evidence, says the defendants are “virtually cleared of all charges by the testimony of the prosecution”. These are dangerous statements because the cards are stacked against us. We cannot talk as though miners are trying the case and not farmers and the Peabody Coal Company, and their law and order. Whereever there are Peabody miners the militia or the sheriffs forces are holding down the miners and imported gunmen carry on a reign of terror against the PMA miners, killing, raping, kidnapping, smashing the union’s relief stations, bombing workers’ homes, beating up progressive miners.
 
Evidence Proves Frame-Up
The three main witnesses of the state are Peabody men and the evidence consists of contradictory and frame-up material. But this does not mean we have “practically won” the case. Two doctors testifying for the state contradict each other on the shooting of the mine boss who was killed. One says the bullet came for the rear and the other said the shot was fired from the front. Another Peabody witness says he saw Mattozzo with a sub-machine gun while another says the defendant had a rifle. Further contradictions in the testimony of the Peabody witnesses were brought to the surface. One says that Smith who was in the car with the mine boss, fired at the relief station over his left shoulder while Smith says he fired ahead. The mine boss who was killed, was seated in the back seat of the same car.
It is a clear case of frame-up but this does not prove that Peabody is losing. They had a flimsy case against Mooney and countless other class war prisoners and yet these men were sentenced. The workers must not leave the case in the hands of the courts controlled by the Peabody Coal Company.
We must use all legal means at our disposal but under and around these necessary defense measures a powerful mass movement of the American workers must be organized to light for the release of the frame-up Kincaid miners on trial at Taylorville.
 



The “Bankers Holiday” has passed into history and will be recorded as one of the major moves of the financiers in their struggle to bring the antiquated banking structure up to the level of the present day needs of the American imperialists. For years they have been striving to legalize unlimited branch banking. They have been able, only through a bitter struggle and finally, a compromise, to obtain a partial victory in this field. The slow progress has been due to the dogged resistance carried on by the lesser sections of the exploiters who are at present caught in the middle of the struggle between the proletariat and bourgeoisie, and who, in the final analysis, must trail behind one or the other camp.
The speed with which the state moritoria were called and the quick follow-up by the new national administration, with promises and minor concessions to the lesser exploiters, proved to be of sufficient force to line up the majority of the states to drive through the new law and for the power to be given to those in control of the reorganization of the banking structure. The majority of the industrialists and the urban and rural middle class were taken of their feet and fell in line for the “national emergency”.
 
What Was Aimed At?
Regardless of the fact that the door is now wide open to inflation and indirect wage cuts, the main target aimed at and hit by the imperialists was the reorganization of the banking structure for the purpose of eliminating many more small banks and sectional banking influence over the dominating group; thereby, to organize the machinery so as to enable the bankers to mold a single national banking system out of the present dual system; finally, so as to liquidate the heavy internal debt bearing down upon the American industries.
Such liquidation in this period of attempted capitalist reorganization is called deflation by the capitalists but in no way conflicts, at this stage, with the currency inflation. On the contrary, liquidation of the internal debt proceeds through a two-fold process. On the one hand, bankruptcy, mergers and concentration – liquidation. And on the other hand, at the right moment, and properly “controlled” through a graduated plan – the process of inflation.
Senator Vandenberg, Republican from Michigan, in objecting to the present procedure said: “If the government continues to license banks on the present basis we are embarking upon the most ruthless deflation in the history of this or any other nation ... we are going to needlessly massacre the savings of the American people.” What else is to be expected? That is just what the
Roosevelt administration must do in order to function for the group of imperialists that backed its campaign in the last election. It is a government action to hasten the process of weeding out the small banks. It took the crisis several years to weed out small banks through bankruptcy. The new laws speed up this process The capitalist government “organizes” the anarchy of capitalist production, but it cannot organize capitalism production.
American imperialism must obtain markets, and is doing everything possible on an international scale to obtain them. However, this is only half of the process. At the same time they must reorganize and improve production at home in order to undersell the other capitalists on the world market. the liquidation of the internal debt is a major part of this. And the move the imperialists are making now with the banking structure is the key to this necessary change through a graduated plan of attack upon the lesser exploiters and the working class.
The banking crisis brought another factor to the surface that we have always pointed out. Now the evidence is clearer. We have rejected the theory current in the American Communist movement that the American imperialists were one bloc against the other sections and classes. We know that when it comes to a struggle against the working class or other imperialist nations their unity can be obtained in the fight because the interests of the groups of financiers run parallel. However, we also know that a constant fight between the groups of financiers to gain hegemony of the whole at the expense and elimination of the other sections of the American financiers is a point of elementary understanding to the Marxists, if it is not, to many Stalinists.
To point out to the workers in the election campaign that Hoover and Roosevelt are heads and tails of the same coin is correct, but to stop at this point, as the Stalinists do, is to leave unanswered another important problem. Imperialists support both Hoover and Roosevelt but different groups of American financiers cast their lot with each office boy. It is true that in the main they are united against the industrialist, the middle class and the workers. This is natural. While they have this united front against the other lesser exploiters and the workers, clearly revealed in their program, it is also true that the different groups of financiers have their struggle for domination. And at this point, we find the advantage of one group of financiers’ candidate, Roosevelt, against the other group of financiers’ candidate, Hoover, Roosevelt can talk against the “money interest”, the “Wall Street crowd” and line up the support of the confused workers and the muddle-headed middle class and reformers. That is how the war lords in China “fight’’ imperialism and that is how the capitalist politicians from Roosevelt on down to the socialists fight “Wall Street”.
It looks as though Mitchell is with the “wrong” group of financiers. Now there is a movement on foot to “draft” Pole as Controller. La Salle Street supports Pole against the Wall Street man, Governor Meyer of the Federal Reserve. The truth is that it is not La Salle Street vs. Wall Street. The groups of financiers struggling for domination have their connections all the way down the banking structure.
Working class or capitalist politics must find the key to open the lever that will pull the greatest number of factors for the class interest. The group of imperialists supporting Roosevelt was successful in its first major move along this line. Will it be able to keep it up? At least Hoover may take lessons from Roosevelt. The idea is – that whenever you hand the bankers a billion, or the navy a half billion just hand the worker a glass of beer or any other slop and the misleaders of labor will call it fifty-fifty.
 



Gillespie, Ill. – The April 2 conference called by the Gillespie Trades and Labor Assembly adjourned, adopting a policy of coordinating the work of the Left wing inside the A.F.L. with the work of building new industrial unions from the unorganized, workers. The conference adopted the name of “Progressive Trade Union Educational Committee”. It was attended by 164 delegates, representing 20 organizations, with the Progressive Miners of America having 61 delegates, and the Unemployed Councils 30 delegates, The rest of the delegates were from AFL locals and some independent unions and several TUUL groups. The worker’s political organizations represented with fraternal delegates were the Communist League of America (Opposition), the Young Spartacus League and the Young Peoples Socialist League.
The highlights of the conference were the struggle between the delegates who wanted a new federation of labor and those who wanted an educational committee; by the fact that the Progressive Miners of America were the solid backbone of the conference, the heavy work on the floor for a correct policy carried on by a group of delegates around delegates Fraser and. Steed of the Progressive Miners and the policies of the Left Opposition were vindicated 100 percent; and the action of the TUUL delegates and the Stalinists who had the largest caucus present, but had to trail behind the policies of the Left Opposition and the militant miners. One thing can be said for the Stalinists. With their new turn they are doing far better than before, they are learning to work with other forces, they are learning how to retreat as well as advance but are still very clumsy and antagonized a considerable number of delegates and left a bad taste in the mouths of many delegates when the conference adjourned.
The report of the policy committee brought out the different tendencies at the conference and the main struggle of the day’s proceedings. After reaffirming the policy of the previous conference Weber, for the policy committee read three proposals introduced by delegate Fraser as follows:
 
Policy Committee Proposals

The response to the initiative of the Gillespie Trade and Labor Council, as indicated by this conference representation, shows that a sufficient basis for the creation of a new federation of labor is lacking and therefore this conference definitely rejects this project.
 
Due to the limited and sectional character of this conference we cannot at the present time form permanent organization. Such in organization of the Left and progressive forces on a national scale is a perspective to be aimed at. The three conferences at Gillespie have taken the initiative and prepared the ground for one that will eventually develop upon a broader national scale through cooperation of all Left wing and progressive forces.
 
The conference goes on record as recommending the program of January 29 session to the consideration of the workers who are struggling for the regeneration of the labor movement and its liberation from reactionary policies and leadership. This conference decides upon the continuation as a committee to keep in touch with sympathetic trade union bodies and will be ready to act jointly with them in the preparation of a broader conference on a national scale.

Around point one of these proposals the conference almost split. The “new federationists” were insistent, but finally the motion passed with an amendment by delegate Lore. The amendment said we continue as an organization to carry on work in the trade unions and independent unions. These delegates aimed their amendment to the tail of that organization, but behind this motion the “new federationists” rallied against the combined forces of the other delegates.
After these motions passed the policy committee recommended that the conference endorse the TUUL conference in Detroit in September and send fraternal delegates. They read off the entire agitational call. The Stalinists saw no inconsistency in opposing a new federation along with the Left Opposition and other Left wing delegates, but at the same time asking the conference to endorse the TUUL conference. This gave ammunition to the Right wing elements and those who had just advocated a new federation, and they used it effectively. The spirit of the conference went down a few notches. When delegate Fraser obtained the floor he moved that we cooperate and send fraternal delegates, and pointed out why we should not endorse. The Stalinists compromised and agreed to this and it carried by 107 for and 15 opposed, but only after much harm had already been done.
Next the policy committee asked for 15 fraternal delegates and again the opposition forces made hay. But again, when delegate Fraser could obtain the floor, he moved that we send three delegates. Again the TUUL supporters compromised and this motion also carried by an overwhelming majority.
Later they elected the fraternal delegates to the TUUL conference. Five were nominated and all unanimously elected. The delegates are: Hugo Oehler, Sol Larks, Hank Mayer, J. Crorkin and Hines.
The conference unanimously passed resolutions in favor of the Franklin County strikers; Taylorville frame-up victims and for mass pressure; Mooney; and also elected delegates to attend the Chicago conference; for the Springfield Hunger March and for the release of Minerich and others who were arrested; for the Scottsboro boys and against the danger of Fascism in Gertnany.
Another motion was passed to set up a joint committee of action with the TUUL to carry on work in different areas. This is putting the cart before the horse and making a mechanical caricature out of the motion quoted above. United front action of such bodies must spring out of concrete struggles and not mechanical paper organizations to be established here and there. All through the conference a struggle had to be put up against the new “federationists” on the one hand, and the Stalinists who desired to hurry the process of development; and with their wrong tactics shifted the conference toward a new federation under the arm of TUUL. Between these two forces flirting dangerously with a new federation, the young committee received some hard knocks.
 
The Stalinist Proposal
Another struggle developed over the motion presented by the Right wing socialists who asked for the endorsement and sending of delegates to the “Continental Congress of Workers and Farmers for Economic Reconstruction” to be held in Washington, which is not a united front and has excluded all Left wing and Communist forces. The Congress is a political rallying center, tor reformism against the revolutionists and class conscious workers and is to be used as an anti-Communist rally. Our delegates opposed this and pointed out what is meant, recommending that first a communication be sent asking if all working class organizations are invited, and if not, we do not send delegates. The Left wing socialists and other class conscious workers supported this proposal. The TUUL delegates, the Stalinists and Gerry Allard supported the motion to send two delegates against the above recommendations. The motion to send two delegates was carried and Weber and Allard were elected.
At the beginning of the conference a delegate from Georgia farmers had a proposal to tax the capitalists out of existence. The resolution was read and motion to endorse carried without the Stalinists saying a word.
A New Executive Committee was elected giving the miners the largest delegation. The Left Opposition and Young Spartacus League were given the right to put representation on the Executive. The delegates from the Left Opposition declined, stating that we welcome the attitude of the conference and that there is no political discrimination here and hope this will continue to enable working class political organizations to send fraternal delegates, but if we go on the executive, our members will be elected through the different unions they represent.
The new committee received some hard blows from the “new federationists” and the blunders of Stalinism at the conference and although it crippled the work there are still sufficient signs of strong militant life, that it can grow to be a force if a correct policy is applied.
 



The capitalist press has now picked up the “Self-Help” and “Barter Exchange” movements as remedies to solve the problem of the breakdown of capitalist production. Every new theory and new movement which claims to alleviate the desperate situation within the confines of capitalism is grasped by the press with the eagerness of a drowning man clutching a straw. This is the case with the widespread national movement of barter exchange.
Large sections of the middle class are participating in the movement. Exchange organizations have been set up by business interests in order to put their frozen assets into circulation. Otherwise these small business enterprises will fall into bankruptcy and thence the hands of the local bankers. The small business interests, taking the initiative in this field, hope to keep up a semblance of profit and prevent big business from taking its toll on the wave of the crisis. These movements first obtained a foothold in the West. Now they have been extended, in one form or another, to all parts of the country, drawing in large sections of the urban middle class, farmers and unemployed workers.
Whole layers of the working class have been drawn into the barter exchange movement. These unemployed workers, pressed between unemployment and starvation on the one hand and inadequate and, often, no relief on the other, have turned to the barter and self-help movements in an attempt to cheat hunger and starvation – until better times.
The barter exchange movement finds a working basis for the exchange of manufactured and farm products for the idle labor power of the worker’s. These movements take on varied forms, depending upon the initiative of local industries and organizations. The organizations vary from the business men’s “cooperatives” to the cooperatives of the workers, with hybrids and temporary class collaboration plans in between. The business men’s associations which have drawn in the workers as an auxiliary have by far been the most successful.
Under the guiding hand of the business men’s barter exchange associations, labor power takes on a form of charity.
The exploitation of labor power is still further disguised behind the “brotherhood of men”, “self-help” and “charity”. It becomes a substitute for social and unemployment insurance paid by the capitalists and their state. It “replaces” the class struggle; or, rather, becomes an inverted expression of the class struggle. This kind of charity is only given for a certain amount of labor power. The workers exchange their labor power at a discount for food and supplies. If this can be extended the local charity drive and the agitation for social insurance can be held in reserve – until the class pressure forces action.
These barter exchange organizations usually function of the basis of negotiable credit certificates or script. The smaller associations function on a pure barter base. The whole barter exchange movement, regardless of which way it leans – in the direction of the workers or the capitalists – is the result of the breakdown of commodity production and distribution under capitalism. It is a return to more elementary forms of exchange. This is no sense denotes a step forward. Socialism, not barter exchange, is the solution for the breakdown of capitalism. Barter exchange in a crisis, under the domination of the business interests, is not a step toward socialism. It is a class collaboration move to prevent the free play of the class struggle development of the working class. The barter exchange movement is an attempt to bridge through the crisis until normal exchange, which rests upon the capitalist mode of production, is re-established.
The barter exchange and self-help movement has more than one side for the workers too. Dominated by the business interests, the movement becomes a powerful lever of class collaboration. Where the self-help movement becomes a workers cooperative movement, subordinated to the interest and aims of the class and the party, it can be useful to the workers as an auxiliary movement. It cannot substitute for the class struggle. It cannot replace the struggle of the employed and unemployed for demands against the capitalists and their government, such as immediate relief, social and unemployment insurance, the six hour day and five day week with no reduction in pay; in short, it cannot replace the class struggle.
The workers who raise the slogan of “workers’ control” in relation to the barter exchange and self-help movement are suffering from the worst kind of ultra-Left sickness. Opportunist class collaboration ideas and ultra-Left slogans’ go hand in hand. The slogans of workers’ control are slogans for a period of the class struggle that we have not yet reached in America. When the class struggle and the relation of class forces reaches this stage, to delay issuing these slogans will be suicidal. In the dual power stage, when the working class and its organizations become the kernel and the capitalist class and its governmental and industrial administration becomes the shell, then the time is ripe. In the meantime, a revolutionary, international program with proper tactics in the day-to-day struggles of the workers is the order of the day.
 



The engineers and technicians are gathering a mass of followers to the movement called technocracy. It is heralded as a new theory having revolutionary implications without revolution. Backing up their argument with a mass of indisputable facts which they state in a very capable manner, they explain the historical development of machine production and how the machine is displacing labor. The light they throw upon the marvelous machine development is most revealing and has positive value. But the light they throw upon the anarchy of capitalist production is nil.
Technocracy denotes the attempt of the scientists and technicians to get out of the impasse which the capitalist mode of production has arrived at without the elimination of the capitalist exploiters. Technocracy deals with the evils of the “price system”, and considers the problem of “energy”. Their survey in no way touches or considers the problem as an evil issuing from the field of production. This shifts the issue to the field of distribution.
When a ruling class nears its end, ideological decay and confusion mark the twilight of its decay. Such was the case when the early French materialists drove religion from, pillar to post – until religion reconciled itself with the new exploiters.
Such, also, is the case with the scientists who function under the present bourgeois rule in the stage of its decay. They are floundering around advocating a thousand and .one remedies. One of these widely heralded “solutions” for the “price system”, for capitalism, is Technocracy. The real rulers have nothing in common with this viewpoint.
These technologists have discovered the following: “that in the last 200 years energy – that is power and machines – has multiplied man’s ability to produce goods and do useful work for himself by 75 to 100 fold,” In their Energy Survey of North America they have assembled many worth-while facts of the productivity of labor and its displacement, but they arrive at no conclusions, or at false conclusions.
Howard Scott says that “technology smashes the price system.” Price system means capitalism. They think they will be able to organize capitalism. Dr. N. Rautenstrauch says, “Technocracy is primarily concerned with ... the problem of organizing a civilization to maintain itself on a given continental area.” Of course not one word is said about how to get rid of the exploiters. They will “organize” capitalism in a vacuum.
The truth of the matter is that these technicians see the handwriting of the approaching revolution on the wall and desire to avoid it. Scott says: “Physical wealth is not measured in terms of labor, goods, or money, but in terms of energy. And with the discovery of this truth the bankers, the industrialists, the Marxists, the Fascists, the economists, the soldiers and the police are things of the past.” To measure in terms of energy, according to Scott, will do away with classes and the class struggle, with revolution and with Marxists. Quite a large order!
 
Technocratic “Energy”
The whole structure of Technocracy revolves around the axis of “energy”. Scott says, “Energy is defined as the capacity for doing work. All forces of heat transfer or of work done are said to involve a transfer of energy.” Again: “Now energy appears in many forms but it is possible to measure them in units of work – the erg and the joule, or in units of heat, the calorie.”
The “technocrats” hide behind the word “energy” every form of energy used in the present capitalist system of production. They do not make any distinction between determining factors of energy and contributing or auxiliary units of energy. Second, when they deal with human labor as a form of energy they primarily deal with one phase of the problem and ignore the other and most important phase.
The first phase of the problem of labor (energy) they deal with is its displacement by the machine. Scott says: “In other words a price system demands man-power if it is to succeed, and manpower for production steadily becomes more and more a thing of the past as the kilowatt hour takes its place.” To refer to the displacement of labor or “man-power” and not to tell what effect this has upon that part of labor which is left in production, is to state the problem without stating the determining factor. The development of machines, new inventions and processes carry with them greater exploitation of labor.
Scott says kilowatt hours take the place of man-power. What really happens is that the higher Composition of capital – an increase in constant capital (kilowatt hours, etc., means of production) and a decrease of variable capital (wage-labor in the form of labor) causes greater exploitation of the wage workers, a fall in the rate of profit but a rise in the mass of profit which goes not to society but to the owners of the tools of production.
If the technocracy school would realize that private ownership of the tools of production must be abolished and that social ownership must replace it, they would be a long way toward the proper utilization of the facts they have accumulated. Also this would be the opening of the door out of the blind alley they are now in. Failing this understanding their positive facts are lost or else they are utilized by reaction to mislead the workers.
 
Is Labor’s Importance Decreasing?
Many are already using the “movement” for this purpose. But the technicians and scientists who want to be of service to mankind must see beyond the decay of capitalism into the future social system which is going through its birth stage in the Soviet Union now.
The change from hand-tool production to the machine age is viewed by the school of technocracy as the passing oi man-power (labor) to kilowatt hours of energy units, etc. Where they see the replacement of man-power by machines they conclude that the importance of man-power (labor) in a machine society diminishes. The truth is that the importance of labor in the relation of profits and exploitation increases with machine development.
Let us restate the problem froiu a Marxist point of view and see what light it throws upon the school of technocracy. The foundation of the use-value (products or commodities) of every society is labor and nature. The determining factor in society is not nature but labor. The relation of labor to production and to the ownership of the means of production determines its status in that society, no matter how productive labor is.
All value, wealth of use-values in society, no matter what its form may be – buildings, machines, trains, roads, electric power, clothes, and other necessities – can be reduced, not to energy in the abstract, but to labor and natural properties, no matter if they were made by hand-tool production or machine production under capitalism. The social relationship of labor is the determining factor and the form of “energy” of LABOR is the decisive factor in the energy of’ any and every society. This determining “factor” is what the Technocracy school ignores.
In other words, if we were to find the basis of the equation of all use values of society we must reduce the use-values to the amount “of socially necessary labor time embodied within them.” (Energy?). Constant capital (machines, buildings, raw material, power, etc.) can be reduced to congealed labor time. The other part, necessary for capitalist production and the vital part – variable capital (wage labor) – can be transformed into labor, living labor, in the process of production. All forms of energy, “measured by the kilowatt hour can be reduced to so many hours of socially necessary labor time. The equation of Dr. Rautenstrauch and Peral-Reed deals with an entirely different phase of the problem and does not touch the basic factors of the present day economic problems. The problem their equation does not touch is the problem that must be solved if we are to have an orderly and planned society. Many technicians desire this but do not know how it is to be attained.
 
The Key to the Problem
Let us consider the “energy of technocracy” in the field of capitalist production. So many yards of linen in value equal so many pounds of wheat not because we have some arbitrary “price system” but because each can be reduced to so many hours of labor embodied within the commodities. The only way to measure all forms of energy which are the result of man’s labor is to reduce them to socially necessary labor time embodied in them. This labor time is the measure of value and the key to the understanding of the problem the technicians have unearthed but have not explained properly nor solved.
To regard “energy” in the abstract and leave out of consideration the meas ure of its value, labor time, is to leave the ground of concrete reality and lose the key to an understanding of the class problems an the contradictions of the capitalist mode of production. To find a way out of the capitalist contradictions, it is necessary first to state the problem correctly. This Marx and the Marxists did long ago. The displacement of man power by the machine, which is a progressive development under capitalism, was analyzed by Marx long ago and its consequences predicted. The school of technocracy has just now discovered the fact but has not yet drawn the conclusions which flow from them. What a difference between the dialectic materialist method and the bourgeois methods! And how superior it proves itself to be in analyzing and pointing the way to the solution.
Kilowatt hours, capital, commodities, or any other form of use-values can be reduced to congealed labor – to “dead labor”. Under capitalism we have a system where “dead labor” – capital – controls and subjects living labor – the labor of the workers, in the process of production. Thereby capital controls the lives of the wage earners.
Only when the control of the capitalists over the means of production is broken can the workers be liberated. For this a revolution is required. Technocracy cannot solve the problem in a vacuum. It cannot eliminate the class struggle. There is no substitute for the proletarian revolution and the expropriation of the expropriators. For that reason “technocracy” remains an imposing deception.
 



The United Workers Party, an offshoot of the disintegrated Proletarian Party Opposition has at last given birth to au eight-point program. Within the program there are many correct sentences and ideas but considered as a whole at is a miserable failure at an attempt to formulate a program. Where Marxism ideas are presented they are negated by other ideas within the very same paragraph. To the readers of the Militant it will be sufficient to give the essence of the “program” with a short comment to show its fallacy.

The U.W.P. takes the stand that: “The crisis is permanent”. “We are living in a period of permanent crisis; capitalism throughout the world is collapsing.” “– no factors are operating to help capitalism overcome its present crisis.” This would be a hopeless situation for capitalism and we know there are no absolutely hopeless situations for the exploiters. The program fails to take into consideration the relation between the present decay stage of capitalism and the ebbs and flows within this period. The program lumps these two relations together which results in confusion and contradictions.
 
The program correctly tells us that: “The only revolutionary class is the proletariat.” The program says the U.W.P. will not “make concessions to the agrarian and petit-bourgeois class” but “we will cooperate with any group or organization for the purpose of sharpening and deepening the class struggle.” If they mean concessions from the standpoint of principles we can agree but concessions to allies (Negro share croppers, etc., etc.) in our united effort to overthrow American imperialism, under the leadership of the workers and their party which retains its organizational independence in such united action, is essential. A program that does not distinguish between these two different kinds of concessions means that its writers have learned little from the Russian revolution and what has followed as well as what went before.
 
The section dealing with industry has some correct points but repeats in different words the formula dealing with the crisis: “that no factors are operating to help capitalism overcome its present crisis”.
 
The section dealing with unions leaves out most of the important factors of present day relations between the existing unions and the task of building new industrial unions. On unions, they say the following: “In the period of ascendancy of capitalism these organizations could succeed in obtaining results; but in the period of decline, no concessions can possibly be gotten.” A pamphlet could be written explaining the fallacy of this position and the harm it can do to the class if accepted. Capitalism will grant concessions to unions as the pressure of the working class upon its increases.
 
The section dealing with unemployment errs mainly in omission, because, after all is said and done, nothing vital for the class has been said. No program, no tactics and no line of march for the class. The U.W.P. has been very active in the day-to-day work and for immediate relief but its program cannot be considered Communist. The needs of the class on the one hand and the limited “program” of the U.W.P. as applied in the Workers’ Councils on the other hand, condemns these Communists in advance.
 
In speaking of the farmers the program says: “Although the farmers may at times become rebellious, due to the aggravated condition brought about by the agrarian crisis, their outlook and objective are always reactionary.” Again the U.W.P. does not understand how objective conditions force other classes to march parallel to the line of march of the proletariat toward the overthrow of capitalism. It is necessary to utilize this “reactionary” force of poor and middle farmers as allies in the struggle. To dismiss them as reactionary is false.
 
This political party says the following about revolutionists participating in parliaments: “In this period of permanent crisis in America the tempo of collapse of capitalism does not permit the working class to waste time or energy in parliamentary participation.” This is false in general and equally false in the present period. The masses are moving to the Left but the overwhelming bulk is not yet, disillusioned with reform, and particularly its parliamentary form. It would be well for the U.W.P. workers to read Lenin’s Infantile Sickness.
 
On the question of the International, which is the determining factor and the central point of every program the U.W.P. flounders and falls into the swamp of national reformism.

The position of the USSR and the Third International are such that any Right wing socialist could endorse it in substance. They conclude this section with the following words:
“The U.W.P. appreciates the progress made by the Russian Revolution, and the subsequent industrial development, but it remains critical of the Third International thrown lopsided by these special conditions. We look upon the working class movement as being international in substance and national in form. We are committed to the policy of forming the national movement to a position which will conform with what the international movement should be.”
They will leave the Third International and its factions to themselves and yet they are Communist “internationalists.” They appreciate the progress of the industrial development in the Soviet Union but will leave it to itself – until a revolution in another advanced country comes to its aid. Will they construct a national “international” movement? They use the concepts of the Communist Manifesto not for the purpose of helping correct the International and take themselves a more active part in the struggle within it; but in order to evade and avoid the whole struggle raging in the Communist International due to the Stalinist straight-jacket and revisionist program. They claim to be the party of the working class, the Marxian vanguard, and excuse their backwardness by turning upside down a phrase in the Manifesto. This phrase explains how the working class movement is, at first, national in form, though international in substance – a condition the vanguard must help overcome – and not use to hide, its weakness and impotence. The “international” position of the U.W.P. is national reformism.
We advise the members of the U.W.P. to study the struggle in the Communist International and discuss this with the members of the Communist League of America (Opposition) which is a faction of the Communist Party.
 



The banking crisis has within it the further consolidation of the financial capitalists over American economy. It was a condition that could not be avoided in the process of reorganizing the American structure for a more favorable position in the intensified competition for world markets. More than one factor entered into the process that threw the country into the banking crisis. But the quick and decisive action of the imperialists, against the other sections of the exploiters and the working class, enabled them to turn an unfavorable situation into a successful battle.
The rural middle class had its “Farmers Holiday” movement in order to fight against the falling world price level that was increasing their debts, reducing their sales and causing ruin. The bankers came along and by declaring a “Bankers Holiday” turned an unfavorable situation into a lever for further consolidation over the other sections.
There is no question that the American imperialists are “handicapped” on the world market by the most antiquated and cumbersome banking apparatus in the world of imperialist nations. The Federal Reserve System and the moves toward the further development of branch banking are steps forward for the American imperialists in this respect. But if the American imperialists are to take their “rightful” place under the sun of world exploitation they are entirely inadequate. The banking crisis in this sense represents a crisis in the stage of reorganization rather than a stage immediately following the period of overproduction and liquidation. Roosevelt’s “New Deal” was started off with a bang in the interests of the American imperialists. This was facilitate by the fact that the immediate surface interests of a large section of the middle class run parallel with the interest of the big bankers, thereby enabling Roosevelt to serve the “people”.
The middle class wants inflation to eliminate the debtors’ burden with “cheap money”, Roosevelt first got their support by letting them think he would open the gates for unlimited local scrip. Then he closed the gates to local scrip by concentrating the issuing of two billions in currency through “rigid” control from above – where they hope to control the process of inflation, thereby eliminating the lower sections of the exploiters from the benefits. In addition, the leading financiers will come out much stronger by the process of squeezing out the small banks and consolidating the banking structure and its capital in the hands of a smaller group at the top.
One thing is certain. American imperialism must liquidate the bulk to win in the international struggle for the dominating position and of its heavy internal debt if it is [to] make the Dollar the basic international medium of exchange. The capitalists had to find some form of juggling the contradiction between the gold standard internationally and the need of liquidation of the internal debt nationally. The present move of the bankers is an attempt to reconcile this ever-pressing contradiction.
With this, goes the problem of attempts to drive in an indirect wage cut by inflation and rising commodity prices. The liquidation of the internal debt helps certain sections of the other exploiters besides the imperialists who are in the final analysis responsible for the tightening up of the American productive force to enable them to compete more effectively on the world market and reduced costs at home, and to squeeze out the excess baggage of the lesser exploiters and “debt” upon the American Industrial structure.
While they are busy with the internal end of this problem they have been forced off the gold standard, even though they deny it as Japan denies it has a war on China. This enabled England to take a blow of the American imperialists that was very effective for the Pound. But the war-time powers of the President and the measures which followed, the embargo on gold and the return of gold to the central banks and the process of consolidations – all this is enabling America to prepare a stronger internal base – not only for further onslaughts against the American workers but also against the other imperialists, especially England and France.
 



Reports from Cuba, no matter from what political source, indicate that the revolution has passed beyond the stage of a simple political revolution and has entered the first stage of a social revolution. The ruling cliques and exploiting class are in confusion. The crisis and economic conditions had reached a breaking point. The American imperialists, facing the coming Pan American conference, pressed upon all sides by the new measures adopted to surmount the mounting world contradictions, was forced to delay open armed intervention. In place America uses a new form of intervention, a method of bottling up the island with the Atlantic fleet and secretly’ aiding counter-revolution within, and at the same time endeavoring to further worsen the economic and political situation to either force a surrender or hasten the downfall of the present petty-bourgeois revolutionary government, headed by Grau San Martin.
 
Communist Activity in Cuba
The New York Times of September the 20th, reports: “Communist seizure of mills approaching Havana with no government curb.” “Workers hold 15 mills.” “Communist leaders have been very active since Senor Machado’s fall.” “Cuba is now at the crossroad and must go right or left.” “The Cuban labor trouble began with the spontaneous seizure of sugar mills by syndicalist unions and is now taking the form of an organized Communist movement that is sweeping the interior of the island from end to end and is daily approaching closer to Havana. Other papers report Soviets are being set up.
The revolution in Cuba is the most important political event of the day. It overshadows the NRA in importance in spite of the profound effect the Blue Eagle will have on the lives of the American people and the class relations. The NRA in all its magnitude is a stopgap and capitalist attempt to stem the tide – while the revolution in Cuba is a wave of the social tide breaking through the world structure of American imperialism. This means that the Cuban revolution must be studied in detail, especially by the American revolutionists, because it foreshadows and confronts America with all that the capitalist defenders said was impossible. That is, the first steps toward a social revolution on American soil, in one of America’s most important colonies.
 
At Gates of U.S. Imperialism
Most significant is the fact that while American hegemony is spreading to a greater degree over the earth and desperate steps are being taken internally and internationally to hold the dominating position in the downward curve of decay capitalism – America finds that she is confronted with the menace of Soviets at the gates of her 48 states. Her world struggle since 1917 to prevent the spread of the October revolution can be revealed by the events in Cuba and its implications for America as a futile struggle in spite of Stalinism and its aid to capitalism as a leader of proletarian defeats.
The Cuban revolution comes at a most difficult period in world politics. The Cuban revolution as the first stage of a social revolution takes place on American soil, on the heels of the victory of Fascism in Germany and when the world proletariat has just passed through the most disastrous defeat, and in a period when reaction flows from it. It is logical to face world wide repercussions from the victorious October Revolution. And it is not a surprise, yet seemingly a contradiction, to be confronted with the Cuban situation after the German event.
 
Trotsky’s Prediction
It was almost ten years ago that comrade Trotsky startled many when he pointed out that the economic center of the world was shifting from Europe to America. Since then the forces making up the International Left Opposition and Its American section have pointed out that with the shifts in world relations goes increased class conflicts and revolutions. In this case Cuba, even at this stage, is a curtain raiser, informing the world that America will have its share of the red menace that haunts the capitalist world – the proletarian revolution. The NRA stop-gap, and the special struggles America is conducting a gigantic scale with Europe, Latin America and Japan (on three different fronts), all indicate that conditions and class relations within the United States are going to shift rapidly forward to struggles that will take on a revolutionary scope.
The Cuban revolution, under proper guidance and cooperation from the American Communists, could be the spark to start a more rapid shift of the American workers to the Left. Will that be its direction? This question will be answered within the next few months or sooner. However, at the very least, if we consider the worse variant – that reaction triumphs and American imperialism gains its objectives (as well as the fact that one must take into consideration the position of Stalinism) – nevertheless, the importance of Soviets on American soil, in Cuba, must not be underestimated.
 
Marxian Communist Party Vital
A significant fact is revealed when one studies the economic and social forces of Cuba. The objective conditions in Cuba are in favor of the task of carrying the revolution beyond the present stage. The spontaneous action of the workers in strike struggle and united front
developed to its highest stage – Soviets. A major shortcoming is the fact that we have a Stalinist Communist Party in Cuba and not a Marxian Communist Party. Without a leadership, without a program there can be no successful revolution regardless of the revolutionary struggles of the masses. Worse yet, we do not have a Marxian Communist Party in the United States. It is our task to hurry and build one. The revolutionary struggle in Cuba shows the importance and the speed required.
 
Must Abrogate Platt Amendment
The Cuban people must abrogate the Platt Amendment. The present petty-bourgeois government cannot carry out this task nor will it be able to stand the pressure of the class struggle between the national capitalists and the American imperialists against the workers and peasants. The workers must fight for a free and democratic constituent assembly. The workers must demand that the election be called while the revolution is still on the upgrade. This can only be accomplished if the organs of Soviets are functioning to protect workers’ democracy, to beat down the head of counter-revolution, to further develop the revolution, and to thereby confine the Constituent Assembly to its proper place.
In the United States united front mass meetings must be called throughout the country. The fact that the Stalinists with their huge apparatus have not started this shows how “seriously” they take the Cuban situation. The A.F. of L. unions must be drawn into this protest. Financial aid must be forwarded to Cuba. Petty bourgeois and anti-imperialist forces must be organized behind Cuba’s struggle against American imperialism. The workers and liberal forces in every Latin America country must bring pressure upon their governments to protest and demand that the United States withdraw the ships and Marines from Cuban waters. Cuba must have the right of self-determination. Such a move in all of the Latin American countries, connected with the struggle of the American workers against American imperialism, will have powerful pressure. It will also make a distinction between words and deeds of many so-called anti-imperialist forces in Latin America and expose the puppet governments to a greater degree before the eyes of the workers and peasants.
The argument that the Communists of Cuba cannot establish a Soviet Government at this stage and therefore must be satisfied with more modest demands has no place in the plans of the revolutionist and the Left Opposition. No doubt Soviets are very difficult to establish. But once the fires of the social revolution, are started in this decay stage of capitalism it can sweep beyond Cuba, providing there is a Communist party, and a leadership with a program. It is up to the American workers to come to the aid of the struggles of the Latin American workers just as it was the duty of the European workers to come to the aid of the Russian workers after the October days. The Cuban revolution must be used as a lever against American imperialism.
 



Does intervention exist in Cuba? The capitalist press says no. We say it does. It began with the establishment of the revolutionary junta of five. The whole Atlantic fleet was sent to Cuban waters. The air fleet and marines were mobilized. Cuba was bottled up. A new form of intervention took place. “Armed” intervention had not been established? Cuba’s independence has not been violated! As soon as the new government was established pressure from American imperialism increased from day to day, until the petty bourgeois element in the lead had slowly yielded and helped check the pressure of the rank and file and the workers from below. Nevertheless, the new regime which is compromising with American imperialism is sitting on a dynamite keg and the proper spark can blow up this regime causing repercussions which will be felt by the most backward strata of the American workers.
Why is America so careful in her dealing with her colony, Cuba? Cuba is at present the determining factor which will decide to a great degree the outcome of the impending Pan-American Conference to be held at Montevideo. This conference will be the culmination of a bitter struggle now raging among the imperialists to decide who will obtain a more favorable position in the trade relations with the South America countries. England, Germany and Japan are still making inroads in America’s private backyard. The Americans hope to overcome this between now and the date of the conference.
One false move in Cuba, which will increase Latin America’s hatred for the iron heel of the North will play into the hands of the other imperialists. American hopes to avoid this, which accounts for the new form of intervention the Roosevelt government is conducting in Cuba.
As soon as the London Conference was over, as soon as America had tied a few more ropes around Europe in order to put her on rations, America turned her attention to the South American struggle and the coming conference. Reports from investigators Roosevelt sent south at the very beginning of his administration indicated that Cuba was a most critical spot. This sore spot had to be removed as part of the preparations for the Pan-American Conference.
The objective conditions for a political explosion in Cuba were mature. All that was needed was a “hands off policy” from the iron heel of the North. America did more than that. It helped remove Machado and place in power a more suitable puppet but events and conditions got out of control. Within a month history passed beyond this American set-up. The Cuban situation is characteristic of the quicksand upon which American Imperialism has built its world structure. Attempts to solve one contradiction pave the way for a new and bigger contradiction.
The proletarian revolution cast its shadow across Cuba, an outpost of American imperialism. America’s backyard has a revolutionary situation. Workers seize sugar plantations, American imperialism is denounced, complete independence is demanded. The Red scare becomes the headliner overnight in the rabid American press. But the economic and political implications run deeper than the diplomatic and yellow press maneuvers. It runs deeper than America’s attempt to patch up things for the Pan-American Conference.
America went to the London conference to smash the attempted united front of Europe. America’s positive role at Europe’s conference was to deliver a few destructive blows. America’s role at the Pan-American conference is different. This is America’s set-up. It is England’s time to deliver a few destructive blows.
Below the surface of this imperialist struggle for markets and the preparation for war runs the more fundamental struggle of the imperialists and the proletariat. The American working class has an urgent and tremendous task to aid the Latin American workers and peasants. The overthrow of American Imperialism is our task and the workers and peasants of Latin America are our closest allies. Their fight against American Imperialism in Cuba is our fight.
 



When President Roosevelt was granted the power to reduce the gold content of the dollar by one half and to inflate currency the inter-relation of politics and economics was clearly seen by the stimulation this act gave to the increase of the prices of commodities. Neither of these measures have been carried out, nevertheless, a state cannot adopt such a far reaching political measure, knowing the experience of post-war Europe, without expecting immediate effects upon the economic system and upon prices.
The commodities that the workers buy have increased greatly in price and average over 30 percent in many cities. Many economists deny this and inform us that inflation amounts to only about 1 percent. One of the many tricks they use is the method of taking an average of about 300 commodities, the majority of which the workers do not even buy once a year. In this manner the capitalist spokesman try to cover up the increase in prices of the daily consumed commodities the workers use.
Again the question of currency inflation is coming to the fore. This time directly in relation to the NRA. General Johnson correctly informs the public that unless the machinery for credit is organized as fast as the codes are being signed the NRA will not function properly. This means increased credit inflation now, to be followed by currency inflation later. Within the last few weeks the Federal Reserve Board has been increasing its purchases of government bonds This is also a form of credit inflation.
The apologists of capitalism are systematically propagandizing the general public to the effect that there is no inflation. This is true only in the sense that the technical financial machinery of inflation has not been put into motion on a broad scale. The cost of living, however, has gone up rapidly and consistently, and this is what the worker means by inflation, because this is how inflation is expressed in his every-day life. All lies that have an element of truth, or a half truth unexplained constitute the best kind of capitalist propaganda. Such is the case with the question of inflation. When the capitalist economists inform us that there has been no inflation, meaning outright currency inflation, they are correct. But the real problem only begins where these writers leave off.
Currency inflation is only one form of inflation and not the best as experience has proven. Currency inflation will only be resorted to if the other forms and other methods applied fail to bring the desired results. Then we may be forced with the problem of actual devaluation of the dollar.
Credit inflation measures were started under the Hoover administration and have been increased since. The effects, however, were washed out by the decline in world prices. Nevertheless, the policy of the Hoover and later the Roosevelt government, through the different farm relief organizations, through the R.F.C. and N.R.A., as well as the banking and currency acts, taken together all constitute measures in this direction.
The currency policy of the government is now following up its farm relief and R.F.C., policy by having the Federal Reserve increase its purchases of government securities in the open market. Since this leads to the replacing of Federal Reserve notes, backed by a minimum of 40 percent gold, by notes, backed by what is called sound collateral, this leads to a form of inflation. The general result is that since the Roosevelt government took office, there have been over a hundred million dollars of the new Federal Reserve Bank notes issued, but this has been more than counterbalanced by the heavy decrease in the old Federal Reserve notes outstanding. The further expenditure of public funds under the recovery plan will stimulate the inflation of credit, started under the Hoover administration.
On the foreign exchange markets the dollar has declined 30 percent. When Roosevelt issued his statement to the London conference instructing the American delegation not to participate in plans for currency stabilization, the policy of “controlled inflation” took another jump upward. The immediate effects of the fall of the nation’s currency on the foreign exchanges usually does not effect the domestic prices to a great degree. However, in this case it did move prices upward on the home market. On the other hand, the fact that America is the world’s creditor nation has a tendency to force the dollar toward par. But further measures against this tendency have been taken by the government.
Nevertheless, the government measures that is: the conferring of power to inflate currency, the going off the gold standard, the embargo on gold, the power to reduce the gold content of the dollar by 50 percent, the public works projects, the credit inflation and the fall of the dollar on the foreign exchange by 30 percent, all this has had the effect of causing prices to rise rapidly. Senator Thomas, who sponsored the Farm Adjustment Act amendment, said in behalf of his proposed inflationary measure: “If the kind of inflation we are having brings back the 1926 price level, then perhaps we may not need to resort to physical inflation of currency”.Thus Senator Thomas informs us that inflation existed prior to the measures of the Roosevelt government. He is correct and today prices have been increased.
The Frazier Jelke and Company, dealing with the effects of inflation on stock market prices listing some stocks from March the third to June the nineteenth, finds that in dollars industrial stock rose 78 percent; rails 80 percent and utilities 65 percent. This is the price advance in terms of dollars. From the standpoint of the theoretical advance in terms of gold the rise in price has been: industrial 45 percent; rails 47 percent; and utilities 34 percent.
Hughes, of the Consolidated Press calculated that the advance due to inflation is between 41 and 46 percent. Inflation changes and price rise in the cost of living differ from the stock prices. The transfer of wealth from currency to commodities and stocks is the logical process of inflation plus the fear of currency inflation.
America’s gigantic economic system, its creditor position, and its tremendous gold supply gives this group of imperialists a strong position despite the path of inflation in which, it is now traveling. Nevertheless, even these bulwarks are no guarantees against the coming storms.
 



(Concluded in this issue)
Political Blocs (Extra-Parliamentarian)
The united front of working class organizations and a political bloc of two organizations against other organizations are two entirely different things. The same elements enter into both but the relationship is entirely different. It is one thing to call a united front of all organizations and find one or more refusing to join. It is another thing to form a political bloc between two organizations as a united front.
The difference between a united front and political blocs as FORMS of united action cannot be settled within the frame work of the discussion on the question of the united front tactic. The differences between two forms can only he understood properly when the theoretical and political questions underlying the question of the united front are considered. It is often possible for organizations of opposite theoretical positions to momentarily pose tactical questions in the same light, as far as surface indications reveal. Such “similarity “ is not sufficient grounds for a political bloc. Such a “united front “ would only result in blundering and confusing the basic theoretical and more fundamental differences between these organizations. Such is the question and relation of the Right, Centre and Left Opposition.
The question of a revolutionary bloc, such as Communists and colonial revolutionists is a two fold question of program and limitations, and the frame work of the united action.
 
The Marxian Concept of the United Front
The purpose of the united front is, (1) to bring to bear the greatest amount of working class pressure possible against the capitalist system, and, (2) to gain our class objective and immediate class interest, (3) to train and educate the masses and their organizations in action, (4) to expose in action all misleaders, agents of the capitalists, and opportunists, and (5) to win the rank and file to class struggle and revolution under the leadership of the Communist Party. This leadership cannot be guaranteed In advance, it must be won in action. The united front must at no time result In a compromise on principles.
The united front is (1) a temporary agreement, (2) between working class organizations, (3) on immediate demands, (4) in action, (5) where each organization retains its organizational independence, (6) refrains from slander and personal attacks, (7) but maintains the right of minority expression and political criticism, (8) no exclusion of working class organisations, (9) and where continued effort must be made to bring into the united front those organizations that refuse to participate.
The organization with a Marxian program has nothing to lose and everything to gain by united action of the working class. Marxism will stand all tests in theory and practice.
 



The NRA slave codes of the capitalist class and its effects upon the American working class have been explained in the columns of the Militant and by the Left Opposition ever since the Gillespie Trade Union Conference prior to the act becoming a law. In the meantime, we have been hammering away on the question of trade union policy in the different industries. A correct analysis of the NRA must first be presented in order to present a correct program of struggle against the new capitalist offensive. Within the ranks of the other forces of the labor movement confusion still reigns. The socialists are still fighting within their organization over the question of an analysis of the NRA. Other groups say little or anything except that they are against the NRA. The Stalinists are also opposed to the NRA but have not answered the burning question of how to fight the NRA In every union where they have fought the capitalist and reformers codes, the Stalinists have trailed behind them, not only in demands presented but also in many cases on the demands adopted as a law.
The capitalists projected the NRA in an attempt to solve some of the difficulties confronting them However, the steps taken in this direction have created other contradictions. The most important of these new contradictions thrown to the surface is the one dealing with the trade unions. When the act became a law, it carried with it the outlawing of strikes as soon as the codes become finally adopted. In the meantime, an increasing number of strikes took place. These were not only a continuation of the wave of strikes just prior to the NRA as an effect of the upturn in production and increase in prices but also as a struggle for the right to organize and to bring pressure to obtain better conditions as the codes were being considered.
This wave of new strikes at the time the codes were being considered threatened to upset the NRA, especially the Penna. mines struggle. A special emergency measure was adopted. The establishment of the NRA Adjustment Board, an arbitration board to consider all strikes. The NRA outlawed strikes after the codes were adopted. The new measure outlawed strikes when the codes were being considered.
This means the workers face a new condition, a war measure condition in the trade union field. Trade union struggles of yesterday are now entirely changed – the new contradiction the capitalists themselves have created. Most of the trade union strikes of the past were listed as industrial and economic struggles and only the outstanding strikes took on a political nature of a high degree. Under the NRA EVERY STRIKE BECOMES A POLITICAL STRIKE AT THE VERY START. A strike against the capitalists is a strike against the STATE.
This brings to the surface as the most important working class question and opposition to the NRA – the workers right to strike, the right to organize. The capitalist intend to smother them in class collaboration, in arbitration and by outlawing them. The class struggle cannot be stopped this way. It can only be warped, providing the Communists are not equal to the task.
In other words, the central point of the workers struggle against the NRA revolves around the Communist answer to the trade union question. All strikes against the capitalists now are political strikes against the capitalist state.
Around the fight against the capitalists, the capitalist government and the capitalist labor agent’s NRA slave code, the workers fight for the right to organize, to strike and to live, must be woven the struggle for the other demands of the class at this stage. The stagger plan must be fought by the struggle for the six hour day the five day week with increase in pay. The capitalists relief substitutes must be fought by the struggle for unemployed and social insurance. The question of long term credits to the Soviet union and recognition of the Soviet Union as against the capitalist maneuvers on this question must be brought to the fore. The struggle of the youth to obtain a social solution and recognition for the youth denied a chance to make a living by the “abolition” of child labor.
The trade union question of the working class has now become the central point of the workers struggle against the NRA and the outlawing of strikes. Violators of the codes can be fined and imprisoned. This means strikers. This means trade unionists.
 



Uncle Sam is vitally concerned with the sick textile industry and has shown this concern by first approving the textile code. Now the other sections of the industry are submitting codes. In the meantime wide, discontent and strike struggles are taking place throughout the industry. At the same time thousands of illusioned workers are joining the A.F.L., controlled by Associated and the United Textile Workers. These workers are promised almost anything under the Industrial Recovery Act. An equal number of seasoned strikers will have nothing to do with the U.T.W., that is discredited from one end of the industry to the other.
On the other hand, the National Textile Workers Union is facing the new situation in the midst of the T.U.U.L. confusion, which reflects itself in the hopeless policy of the N.T.W.U. Many workers refuse to join the N.T.W.U. This is the reward of the third period blunders in particular and the Stalinist revisionism in general.
In Salem, Mass., the N.T.W.U. organizers were forced to organize an independent union. In Paterson the N.T.W.U. are forced to organize the warpers they have influence over, into an independent union because the warpers refuse to join the N.T.W.U. and the discredited U.T.W. Why are the Stalinists with the "revolutionary" N.T.W.U. forced to organize the workers into independent unions? It is an attempt of the Stalinists to meet the new situation and change their old wrong policy while they straddle the fence and wait for the Cleveland Muste-Stalinist conference to "answer" the burning question of trade union tactics. While the Stalinists wait for the Cleveland conference the labor skates are reaping the harvest.
The Stalinists do not even have sense enough to call for a Left wing in the Associated, which cannot be classified as a 100 percent A.F.L. union.
The A.F L. leaders of the Associated are calling for a 30 hour week, $36 a week and a two loom system for the silk code. The N.T.W.U. is calling for a 40 hour maximum, a 30 hour minimum; a $25 weekly wage, social insurance and a $1,000 yearly guarantee. In fighting the capitalist's silk code, as is the case with other codes, the Stalinists of the N.T.W.U. allow the A.F.L. leaders to present more radical demands. The Stalinists of the T.U.U.L. have been trailing behind the A.F.L. leaders in every industry on the question of demands. Ultra-Leftists must be criticized for exaggerated demands but social reformers, following in the wake of the promises of the Roosevelt reform must be exposed with different tactics. We must "compromise" with the reformers on their exaggerated demands and point out the facts. We expose the labor scabs in action. We prove to the workers that the labor "leaders" are giving lip service while the Communists fight for the interests of the class. We must not allow the reformers and A.F.L., labor fakers to lead in working class demands. The Stalinists not only trail behind the social reformers demand for the 30 hour week; they trail behind the Roosevelt blanket code calling for 35 hours a week. The slogan for the six hour day the five day week, with increase in pay is a realistic demand at this stage of the American class struggle.
The Associated is calling a general strike of the silk workers in Paterson when the hearing takes place on the silk code in Washington. The Left wing must put life into the paper talk and phrases about a strike; otherwise the A.F.L., leaders will have a free hand in helping the capitalist and their government in putting over another slave code. Of course, the Stalinists have not yet stopped playing with their paper organizations and have not yet sent their forces Into the A.F.L., where the relation of forces have demanded this tactic. It is up to the other class conscious workers and the Left Opposition to carry on this work.
If organized labor has sufficient forces and if the Left wing can influence strikes called when the codes are being considered, a powerful weapon will be at hand to force concessions from the capitalists, their government and their labor agents.
A Left wing must be built in the Associated and a minority must be organized in the N.T.W.U. The two must coordinate, their work against the A.F.L. misleaders on the one hand, and the Stalinist blunders on the other hand. Where the U.T.W. has numerous workers we must organize a Left wing. We must fight for one union in the industry. Out of the struggles, the independent unions that will spring up, out of the Left wing of the U.T.W. and the N.T.W.U. a new and powerful union can be built. This is the most likely variant, but it is not the only possible variant. Much will depend upon the policy and action of the Left wing forces NOW. The Stalinists are already failing, to measure up to the task.
 



The World Economic Conference, just concluded at London, met at the most critical period of the world crisis. The victory of Fascism in Germany and Japanese aggression hung heavy over the conference. Between these realities and American Imperialism, the conference was unable to end satisfactorily for the leading European powers. In this situation, 1933 represents an accentuated 1913, and therefore, many countries left the conference with fear of tomorrow.
Conclusions drawn from the London Economic Conference indicate that the United States was not only able to hold its own position, it was also able to leave the gathering in a stronger position. Imperialist powers and capitalist nations do not enter peace conferences and economic conferences with any illusions about their ability to solve the “objectives” listed for public consumption. This is especially true of American Imperialism under the Roosevelt government.
The real objective of the economic conference that met at London was the imperialist struggle for points of vantage, at the expense of the other powers in the preparation for more intense economic and military wars. Peace conferences are cloaks for greater economic and military wars.
The high sounding phrases and humanitarian cloak was pierced by the reality of the economic conflicts and imperialist antagonisms at the very opening of the London Conference. Prime Minister MacDonald, in behalf of Europe, and especially in behalf of England’s hegemony over Europe raised the forbidden question of war debts. This move revealed an attempt of a European united front against American imperialism which came to London with the intention and plan to further the process of putting Europe on rations.
The powerful pressure of American Imperialism and the tremendous contradictions in Europe since Hitler took power smashed this attempted united front. This first attempt was repeated on several occasions but to no avail. The The next attempt to drive American Imperialism from her strong position was the European effort to peg up the dollar and obtain the temporary stabilization of international exchange. England was part of this bloc, half concealed and half open, nevertheless, the bloc and plan was shattered, especially after Roosevelt’s statement on this question. Next the die-hards under the leadership of France organized the Gold Bloc. This move, in the long run played into the hands of American Imperialism because it widened the gap between the French and British interests and thereby gave America a better position in this three cornered fight.
It is true that Germany played no outstanding role at the conference but the rise of Fascism to power in Germany caused a shake-up and a realignment. It contributed to the success of America against Europe.
American Imperialism went to London well armed for the battle against Europe, as well as Japan. Some of the weapons in the hands of the American representatives were pounded out in the first days of the Roosevelt administration. This move was cloaked as part of a national policy but was pointed out at that time in its true international relations in the columns of the Militant. The Banking laws and farm relief amendment, which were important international weapons as well as internal weapons were used very effectively at the conference.
America went off the gold standard, repudiated the gold clause, gave the President power to inflate currency as well as other forms of inflation and to reduce the content of the dollar by one-half. If the American representatives did not hold this threat over the London conference another story would have been written. These weapons were very effective in helping the American representatives in shattering the united front of the European powers against America. The mere threat to use some of them resulted in excellent results at London as well as within the country. The internal policy of the Roosevelt administration is an integral part of this international struggle. It is two sides of the same problem.
Economic collaboration and organized production is as hopeless as non-aggression pacts (regardless of what Litvinoff says). No one but liberals and half-wits expected such from London. America desired more from the London conference, but America obtained more than the other powers. The London conference can be summed up as a prelude to a more intense onslaught on Europe, a greater drive by America to put Europe on rations, a prelude to the imperialist world war – in which America hopes she can duplicate her role of 1914– 1918.
The Paris Soir paper summed up the World Economic Conference in the following words: “If we allow the depreciation of overseas currency to continue, their rivalry will be more than ever irresistible and our reserves will be wasted. It is only a question of time until European industires will be controlled by the United States.”
 



(Continued from last issue)
The Frame Work of the United Front
In the consideration of the united front one must not only know the Leninist concept. One must, above all, apply this to objective conditions, and the frame work of the working class and its organizations.
Local, sectional, national and international united front action are complicated in their application. Defensive and offensive struggles call for different modes of working class motion, just as periods of reaction, reform and revolution do. The immediate objective must at no time be isolated and separated from the direction of the objective the Marxian is heading for.
 
The Reformist Refusal or Acceptance of the United Front
The proper application of the united front tactic is a winning one for the revolutionist regardless of the acceptance or refusal of the reformist leaders. The degree of tho gain will be altered by the position taken by the misleaders. However, In turn, the position of the misleaders in refusing or accepting does not rest within their own hands. Their refusal or acceptance in the last analysis rests in the hands of the pressure of their rank and file. Insufficient pressure will enable the fakers to refuse and strong pressure will compel the misleaders to accept or stand exposed. This does not mean we revert to united front from below. We increase the PRESSURE from below, upon the organization to force them into the united front.
If the leadership is able to prevent the organization from joining the united front we expose such a leadership, not through slander but through political criticism. If the pressure is sufficient to force the leaders into the united front and "if" their program is not to the interest of the working class and their action opposed to working class interest than we EXPOSE THEM IN ACTION as part of the united front. A Marxist can expose an opportunist and reformist if they refuse action. It is far better and a more thorough job of exposure if it is done in action.
Workers do not have illusions only about certain misleaders in whom they still have faith. They also have many illusions about capitalism. In action, around the united front, the twofold process of disillusionment in misleaders and in the capitalist system can be developed. Only Marxian revolutionists can stand this acid test.
 
Calling the United Front
The calling of the united front is not the simple task of sending a letter to all working class organizations. Many Right wing secretaries will throw the communication in the basket and the organization will in no way have knowledge of the projected united front. After it is decided to call a united front and before the provisional committee (whatever may be its composition) sends out the call those taking the initiative should organize their own forces to bring pressure from below on all other organizations and especially in the organizations that have labor fakers at the head. The rank and file of those taking the initiative must know about the call and its objective. They must set to work preparing the ground work for the call so when it is sent to all the working class organizations there is sufficient pressure from below to force as many organiaztions as possible into united working class action. Continued effort must be made to bring those organizations in the united front that at first refuse. Political exposure of those organizations must be carried on.
 
United Fronts That Exclude Communists or Have Wrong Program
There are many types of reformers who endeavor to carry on united front action between reformist organizations and exclude the Communists in order to keep the conference and action respectable. The relation of the Communist to this policy of exclusion should be that of breaking into the conference. This refers to united front action on immediate demands. We will consider all factors involved more than once before breaking into a parliamentary united front action of reformists.
The second question of importance in such a united front called bv reformists is the question of what kind of a draft program they have presented. We must enter to oppose their class collaboration policy with a policy of class struggle. If we pass the first line trench and are seated but do not succeed in shaping the immediate demands into a program of action and class struggle we should not serve on the Executive Committee elected to carry out the reformist, abstract anti-working class, opportunist program of the united front.
The third important relationship to consider is the relationship of onr entrance into a united front that is dominated by forces that adopt a fundamentally wrong program of action such as the Amsterdam Congress of the Stalinists or the Washington Continental Congress of the reformists. Under such a circumstance we expose from within the conference if we are allowed into the conference and expose a correct program against theirs. But we do not enter the Executive Committee elected.
 
The Form of the United Front
The united front is not only a question of local, national or international unity, and is not a question of unity between organizations or political tendencies to constitute a Left wing in a trade union fight, etc. It is also a question of organizational development to a higher stage.
The organizational development of the united front can take on a varied number of forms. Temporary agreements between organizations on one or several demands or a bloc in struggle that covers a whole series of demands and actions, or a federation as a crystalized higher form of the united front which deals with one phase of the class struggle, etc., or the Soviet, which is the highest form of the united front action of the working class. The Soviet as an organization in itself passes through a whole series of stages of development.
 
Plans and Propaganda
Delegates do not come to united front conference to hear propaganda speeches. The leaders as well as the delegates who take the floor must be instructed to save their propagahda speeches to use on those workers outside of the united front who have not yet been won over to our action.
Delegates must confine their arguments, and those in charge of the conference must set the keynote on the question of program and how to carry out the program adopted. What to do and how to do it is the job of the convention, not propaganda speeches. The delegates should not have to be propagandized.
Immediate Demands and Ultimate Demands
United fronts are not passive agreements. United fronts can be only temporary alliances of different organizations in action upon immediate demands. Communists cannot form a permanent body with reformists to fight war or overthrow capitalism. Such can be a merger of different organizations and political tendencies into one political organization. One does form a united front on concrete issues relating to war and the overthrow of capitalism as temporary agreements in action.
On the other hand, the Marxists does not enter the united front forgetting the ultimate demands. The revolutionists always has in mind the relation of the immediate demand to the ultimate demand. The proper connection of the two, distinguishes the revolutionist from the reformist.
(To be continued)
 



The NRA has blown life into the United Mine Workers Union and has given Lewis and Company a new lease on life. After a score of years of the most brazen betrayals and sell-outs, John L. Lewis is appointed Labor’s representative on the NRA. If this were the only act at our disposal to determine what the Roosevelt Government thinks of labor it would be sufficient for condemnation. However, the present government of the imperialists have a long record for the few months they are in power; a record of clever reform, and sugar coated measures for greater subjection and exploitation.
Workers throughout the mine area are flocking to the folds of the U.M.W.A. Not that they have any faith in Lewis and Company, but because they think that they will get a new deal under the NRA, through the conservative union. The sell-out in western Penn. by Lewis a few weeks ago and the revolt against Lewis and Company brought out in bold relief what the actual situation is. Nevertheless, the absence of a Left wing in the U.M.W.A., and the capitulationist Right wing, class collaboration policies of the Progressive Miners of America, all favor the Lewis stranglehold upon the miners together with the help of the government.
 
Lewis and Class Collaboration
Lewis, speaking before the code hearing said: “The Recovery Act means a rebirth – not the bringing into life again of the forces of former years which we have found impossible. It is now a recognized fact by the most disinterested and authoritative opinion, both within and without the industry, that it cannot save itself without involving the cooperation and supervision of the Federal Government.” Lewis recognizes that the coal industry is a sick industry even if he did not recognize this as part of the decay of capitalism. He also recognizes that some form of nationalization is necessary to pull the coal industry out of the rut. The NRA, as a first step in this direction, will start this process and if more drastic government steps are necessary they will be taken to insure the operators profits.
Lewis says: – “We knew from long experience in the industry that it could only be stabilized and restored to a normal condition through a code which would be national in its scope and its provisions.” But Lewis never thought it was necessary to have a national miners policy and national strikes. If Lewis thinks it is good for the operators and the government to have a national policy then why does he not think that such a weapon would also be good in the hands of the miners against the operators. The separate agreements, one after the other; the strikes on district scales, while across the line the other miners worked year after year, all indicate who Lewis is talking about when he thinks a national policy will be good.
According to Lewis, capital and labor benefit as follows: “The employer is the greatest beneficiary of the Recovery Act. On the other hand, what do the workers either by hand or brain, expect from the Recovery Act. Nothing beyond the right to organize and cooperate with the employer, and to receive what they have always been denied – a fair participation in the output of industry”. In fact the workers won’t even get these crumbs Lewis speaks of.
Lewis and Company is discredited throughout the industry, however the NRA class collaboration plan will give these labor agents a new lease on life. A Left wing must be built in the UMWA where they are such forces in order to give direction to the revolt of the disillusioned workers in the very near future. Proper tactics will be able to guide such a struggle to a higher level than the recent western Penn. experience.
 
P.M.A. Capitulation and Stalinist Blunders
The Progressive Miners of America lost their most favorable opportunity and now the fruit of the Right wing policy has resulted in lost ground. Their capitulationist policy has not even enabled them to get in on the NRA bandwagon. The Hight wing, or at least a big section of it, is ready to go over to the folds of the UMWA. The Left wing must intensify its work toward the realization of its policy. If the Progressive Miners of America had called a national conference prior to the NRA becoming a law as advocated by the Left wing and has conducted a Left wing policy, a different story would be written now. However the wrong policies of the Right wing of the PMA, and the whole series of Stalinists blunders for years in the trade union field means that we have to retrace our steps to obtain a running start for the coming struggles which are sure to develop in the sick and decayed coal industry. The reorganization of this industry through the NRA will cause increased class antagonisms between the operators and miners as well as between the large and small operators.
The National Miners Union could have saved the day some time ago if the Stalinists had a correct trade union policy, understood the united front and used a little common horse sense. Now they are pushed into a more difficult corner. Due to the Stalinist’s wrong policies and the lost ground, our task is to retrace our steps through the wing of the UMWA and the PMWA Then the Communists can once again take the lead in the coming struggles. To continue to play with the paper National Miners Union is to waste valuable time and retard the movement of the class.
 



(Continued from last issue)
Behind Closed Doors
United front plans for common action must be conducted in the open. The workers must fight against any plan to conduct negotiations behind closed doors. No leaders of the working class would ask for such a privilege, only misleaders or ignorant “leaders” would do such. The revolutionary Marxist has nothing to hide from the working class. They conduct their negotiations before the whole working class.
 
The Capitalists and Their Office Boys
The task of overthrowing the capitalist system is a great one. The job of defeating the capitalist agents within our ranks is part of this task. If the revolutionary Marxists are not superior to the capitalist agents within our ranks then we are not yet capable of overthrowing the system that has sent these agents into our ranks. The tactic of the united front is a necessary step when preliminary battles between these two camps are fought. It prepares the ground for united action of the class for the overthrow of the capitalist system.
 
Sitting at the Same Table with Betrayers
The united front action of the working class is not a moral question. It is a question of bringing about the greatest class pressure possible in order to obtain our objective. Misleaders will be exposed in action. You can talk about misleaders year in and year out and they will retain their followers, but once you get them in different united front atcions they can be exposed – providing the Marxists know what to do.
That misleaders, betrayers, and fakers can be elected or self appointed from their organizations to the united front only proves how capable these fakers are in fooling their workers and how important it is for us to put these fakers to the test of action so the rank and file can see their true worth.
The proper application of the united front is the most effective means of exposing misleaders. It is no crime to sit down at the same table with misleaders. It is a crime if you do not know what to give and take in the united front when you do sit down with them.
 
Parliamentary and Extra-Parliamentary Activity
When we speak of the united front we refer to activity in the extra-parliamentary field and not in the field of parliamentary activity. Participation in parliamentary activity by revolutionists is one of the most delicate and complicated problems. The general rule, in parliamentary activity, is to oppose united front activity. The exceptions are few and far between. Besides this, one must remember that parliamentary activity, as a whole, falls into the category of auxiliary class activity and even this within the framework of the question of when to participate and boycott.
 
The Question of Unity and Principle Differences
Many non-Marxian, but sincere workers are for the united front because they believe we can all get together and become one party fighting the capitalist class. In other words, they propose to do away with all the different political groups and factions and the fight within the political tendencies of the working class. These workers are “half right” and “half wrong”. They are correct insofar as the united front tactic brings together different working class organizations for common action against the capitalists. They are wrong, insofar as they think, this tactic will enable the working class to merge all organizations into one big organization. Principle differences are not solved by giving up principles and getting together into one hodge-podge big organization. We would not trade one small organization of active Marxists for the merging of all other organizations into one big hodge-podge. Principle differences are settled in struggle and in action and through the united front. These methods enable the organization and leadership with a correct program to gain the rank and file and expose those organizations that are based upon a wrong program and have misleaders at their head. The united front action puts all organizations to a test and by this test in action the majority of the working class are transformed into one gigantic organization, and the masses are won over to that organization which has a correct program.
If there were no principle difference between organizations there would be no need of a united front. The need would be to iron out the secondary differences and get together into one organization. United front action is the compliment of the existence of organizations with principle differences.
(To be continued)
 



The initial stage of the “new relations” of capital and labor under the Blue Eagle has given rise to new hopes and illusions on the part of all shades of reformists. This is due to the fact that, in working out the slave codes for the different industries, the trap was baited with “concessions” to the workers. This enabled the capitalist to put through their plan with a minimum of “labor strife”. Many of the old working class problems have been presented in a new light by the N.R.A. One of these problems is the question of nationalization of the industries. Therefore, it is essential to understand this question and to explain the relation of nationalization to reaction, reform and revolution.
Complete nationalization of industry cannot exist under capitalism, but nationalization of different industries in different forms is an essential part of capitalist development. In the period of decay capitalism, the question of nationalization is often a life and death question of capitalism. This is also true in times of war. Either class can use the slogan of nationalization of the industries. The applica- [line of text missing] reaction, reform or revolution, depending on conditions and class relations and on how the slogan will materialize in life. Fascist reaction, reformist social democracy, laborism or revolutionary communism – each of these, at certain stages of the class struggle, require a program of nationalization. The slogan must apply to that requirement.
 
A Slogan of Reform
To begin with, one can say that under capitalism the use of the slogan of nationalization, by itself, is a slogan of reformism and nothing else. Even if one adds to this slogan the demand for worker’s participation in the nationalization, it is still confined within the realm of reformism. Take for example, the NRA. It represents the first steps toward partial nationalization of industry. It is the embryo. The capitalists of the coal and railroad industries are divided on the question. Some are urging nationalization, with compensation, in order to be relieved of a bad investment. If the NRA does not bring the desired results, through the organization of a form of cartels and the elimination of the small producers, steps toward nationalization of the sick industries will be taken by a section of the capitalists and reformers. They will enact “temporary emergency measures” which will become “permanent” until the industries again pay dividends.
To issue the slogan of nationalization of the industries, such as the “Plumb Plan”, etc., in relation to the NRA, would be to render service to reformism as well as to reaction. Does this mean that we close the door to the use of the slogan of nationalization? As an isolated, separate, propaganda slogan, yes. But not if it is properly coordinated with other slogans and actions suitable for the objective conditions.
The NRA brings this question to the fore. But present conditions require that we place the other slogans and actions first and the slogan of nationalization as secondary, and as an auxiliary slogan to the other.
 
The Working Class Approach
Since the capitalists and the workers can both use the slogan of nationalization one must answer the question of how it will be possible to distinguish the class content of the one from the other. The coordinating slogans must deal with the question of workers’ control. This is the working class approach to the question. The working class action must be in the direction of working class control. Slogans serving this aim must be applied.
It is time to follow up the agitation and action in the trade union field with propaganda for workers’ control of production, open bookkeeping in the capitalist industries and nationalization without compensation. The main emphasis must be placed on propaganda and action dealing with the question of workers’ control of industries.
The most important action today, toward this end, deals with the trade union question. This has been pointed out in the Militant week in and week out. Without a strong Left wing in the trade unions, armed with a correct policy, the revolutionary Communist cannot even consider the question of nationalization and workers’ control in any concrete sense.
The working class content of the slogan of nationalization is distinguished from the enemy class content on the question of propaganda and action toward workers’ control.
The question of workers’ control includes the question of nationalization, but the nationalization does not of itself include or imply workers’ control. It is up to the workers to decide this question. To grab the problem at the wrong end will play into the hands of the reformists. The revolutionists must guard against loose talk on the question of nationalization.
The best way to insure the proper application of the slogan of nationalization and workers’ control is to speed up the work and activity of the present stage which deals with our trade union policy and trade union work. Once the revolutionary Communist is entrenched in the trade unions this slogan will become a living issue in this stage of American capitalism.
 



The sharpening world economic crisis has already passed over to a semi-open conflict between the imperialist powers, first in South America and then in Asia, and has now drawn into this orbit the fate of the Soviet Union, through the German situation, the Manchurian developments and the internal economic effects flowing from the contradictions. In such a trying period the defense of the Soviet Union must be of first consideration for every Communist. The Communist party has rightly considered it its duty to lead the struggle for the defense of the Soviet Union. But the leaders have left unanswered the question of how to defend the Soviet Union.
Since Stalinism has gained control of the C.I., and the Soviet Union the slogan of the Defense of the Soviet Union has been thrown around fast and furious. Day in and day out, in America, the slogan, “Defend the Soviet Union” rings in our ears. One would think, as if by magic, this slogan will throw a spell over the world and create an iron ring around the Soviet Union. But one only needs to remember: “We” can build socialism in one country “if” we can prevent intervention, and then we can understand why this slogan is used in such large doses. On the false basis of the theory of socialism in one country sprouted the misuse of the slogan, “Defend the Soviet Union.”
 
Propose of Slogans
Slogans are not abstractions above the ebbs and flows of the class struggle. To issue slogans for the establishing of Soviets after the revolution has turned its back or to issue slogans for the Soviet to seize power before the vanguard and the class are prepared, is to make a mockery of revolutionary slogans. Centrism and the Right wing have used this slogan year in and year out – because there is danger of intervention. In this same period the Soviet officials, including Stalin, have informed us that world Capitalism and the Soviet Union can exist peacefully side by side. The contradictory position of the C.I. and the Soviet officials flows logically from the wrong theory of socialism in one country.
Capitalism will never cease its struggle against the Soviet Union. The form of the struggle changes from time to time. In periods of economic war between the two systems, the constant use of the slogan converts it into so many hollow words, transforming sections of the C.I., from fighting units for the overthrow of their own capitalists, to auxiliaries to prevent intervention against the Soviet Union. In times when economic war is being transformed into open military war against the Soviet Union, the slogan, “Defend the Soviet Union” has meaning. Even then it will have to be concretized. Centrism has converted this slogan into a meaningless phrase.
To defend the Soviet Union one must know HOW to defend our fatherland. We all agree it cannot be accomplished the “socialist” way. The “socialists” issue the slogan, “Hands off the Soviet Union” and then the Second International’s representatives in the capitalist governments render full aid to the imperialists in their struggles against the Soviets.
 
Right & Centre Misuse Slogan
We must also realize, on the other hand, the Right and Centre wing of Communism in using the slogan, “Defend the Soviet Union”, and then turning around and advocating, opportunist or adventurist policies in China, in Spain, in Germany and the rest of the world are in words, but not in action, defending the Soviet Union.
Marxism is not distinguished from opportunism merely by abstract slogans. Slogans must have revolutionary content and be issued to fit the concrete situation. How could the Chinese workers and peasants defend the Soviet Union in 1926–27? How could the E.C. of the C.I. defend the Soviet Union in the Chinese Revolution? How could the world proletariat defend the Soviet Union in the Chinese Revolution? Not by repeating in prayer-like fashion the slogan, “Defend the Soviet Union”. The only way the Communists could defend the Soviet Union and all that goes with it was by pounding out and executing a Marxian policy in the Chinese revolution. The Right-Centre bloc failed in this task and persecuted and expelled the Left Opposition for advocating the only policy that could materially defend the Soviet Union and the World Revolution.
 
Scare Headlines on Manchuria
For over a half year the Daily Worker has presented scare headlines on the Manchurian situation with countless columns of news but not one Marxian analysis of its relation to the world situation. In the last two months the Japanese army has been advancing toward the borders of the Soviet Union. The danger from the side of Japanese imperialism has grown in the last two months. But the way the Daily Worker has handled this problem, the Communist followers’ consciousness has been dulled rather than sharpened.
An analysis of the process of Japanese consolidation in Manchuria, a necessary base for an attack on the Soviet Union: the relations of the East to the European allies and the events in Germany would keep the world proletariat informed at each step, enabling us to take the proper steps to defend the Soviet Union.
The defense of the Soviet Union cannot be satisfied by the slogan of: “Defend the Soviet Union,” To defend the Soviet Union one must concretize slogans for each. situation. For this purpose, one must approach the problem, not from the position of building socialism in one country, but from the position of the world revolution, from the standpoint of the Permanent Revolution, which also makes necessary the industrialization of the Soviet Union as rapidly as possible. A Chinese revolution, a Manchurian invasion, a Spanish revolution and a struggle for power with the Fascists in Germany calls for different methods, forms and slogans in order to defend the Soviet Union.
 
Civil War in Germany
When Civil War threatens Germany, when the C.I. policies in Germany need a complete overhauling when a Fascist victory in Germany will mean a direct threat of death hanging over the Soviet Union – the world-wide use of the slogan, “Defend the Soviet Union”, without a word or analysis, without pointing out the road to struggle is the best way how not to defend the Soviet Union, how to make a joke out of the slogan.
The Communist League of America, the Left Opposition stands in the forefront in the struggle for the defense of the Soviet Union by standing in the forefront of the international class battles, analyzing, pointing out and leading the way in the struggle for a correct Marxian line, within the Soviet Union and throughout the world.
 



For years the American imperialists have been fighting their British competitors, struggling to obtain Dollar supremacy over the Pound, and now the capitalists of the United States can boast that they have accomplished this task. Step by step, since the world war, the Dollar has fought the Pound in every corner of the globe, taking advantage of the decay of the British Empire in order to gain world domination. The Pound ruled when capitalism was expanding, and was able to draw the best of the capitalist profits and plunder toward London, but America has this dollar supremacy in the decay of capitalism, and with the post war reparation tangle, the present deepening crisis, the American capitalists have only been able to reap a whirlwind of entangling world political problems that their Washington office boys are not capable of untangling,
The tremendous productive forces the over abundance of capital and of means of production laid the base for the present Dollar domination. This enables the American imperialists to stand on the top of the heap of the exploiting capitalist nations. But it is not an expanding and growing world economic structure, that is pouring tribute into the Wall Street. The tribute paid is the tribute of dying “victims” to a master who will give them a little longer lease on life. This forces the American capitalists to face problems unparalleled hitherto in the world of capitalism. Problems that will cut short the fruits of the victory of Dollar domination.
In an attempt to extract itself from the crisis, American imperialism has been forced to give more immediate attention to problems in South America, Asia and Europe than to internal developments. The capitalists, however, have not neglected the problems within the country. On the contrary, they have handled them remarkably well in the interest of the financiers. Every measure of importance taken has been by and for and of the financiers at the expense of the workers, the farmers, the middle class, and the small industrialist. The financiers the monopolist and the big industrialists are being cared for satisfactorily. The class nature of the drastic measures taken by the government within the country stand out with distinct prominence but the increasing international problems have required even more drastic steps.
In Germany the class struggle is at a higher level and threatening revolution or imperialist war needs measures equal to the task of insuring the position of the American capitalist. When the American workers will begin to press harder upon the exploiting classes, when the revolutionary movement here will surge upward, the more drastic measures, as well as demagogic steps, will be taken internally. In this case it is up to the Communists to be equal the task.
Several months ago when England was forced off the gold standard, the American Dollar won a signal victory in replacing the Pound. New York supplanted London as the gold center. But the present reparations “settlement” throws light upon the manner in which New York replaced London in the period of decay of capitalism. England has no choice in retreating from the gold standard. This was a move to reorganize the British economic structure. Now England is trying to make a come-back. America is trying somewhat different steps. But the purpose of each is the same – to reorganize in order to be in a position to defeat the other imperialist in the struggle for the redivision of the world. By economic war as long as possible – and by imperialist war when necessary. The lowering of wages, and the reduction of the standard of living in America are necessary capitalist steps in this direction. Our class tasks lie in the opposite direction.
After America obtained Dollar domination, other capitalist nations led by France made drastic attacks on the dollar, hoping to dislodge it from the key position. They were successful for a time in badly shaking the American financial structure. It can now be said that the first victory over the Pound has been followed up by a second victory over the other imperialists in retaining the dominating position after the attacks. The question confronting American capitalism now is – can the American imperialists follow this up and transform the events into their favor? The American capitalists are not yet sufficiently reorganized to give a positive answer to this question. They are busy with measures to strengthen their position to enable them to carry through the next step. It will not be the other imperialists who will prevent the fulfillment; it can only be the world imperialist under Communist leadership.
If the developing German civil war or an imperialist war does not alter the course, the American capitalists have a favorable chance. At home the financiers have forced the other exploiters to follow their lead. The measures prior to the Two Billion Credit Pool were preliminary steps. The Credit Pool had its positive side for the bankers as well as its negative side for the other classes. The Glass $1,000,000,000 inflation bill is another step to peg up the Dollar in an attempt to enable it to hold its dominating position. The inflation bill will force through another indirect wage cut upon the American workers and enable the bosses to garner a huge profit even though the rate of profit has fallen.
It is only a temporary measure but such measures are necessary in these trying days. Any measure the capitalists take today will only intensify the contradictions tomorrow. But they cannot wait. The life of dying capitalism is at stake and measures must be taken today.
The capitalist remedy for deflation is inflation, yet neither can touch the core of the problem. The financiers are pressing hard for the Branch Banking Law. And since they started the public campaign many months ago for Branch Banking they have gained considerable headway. This measure will be a worthwhile breathing spell for them if they are able to push it through.
The dollar stands, but the crisis deepens. The financiers have been able to deal some blows through their imperialist agents but the main test is still ahead. The moratorium, the reparations and the German situation holds much in store for the fate of Dollar supremacy.
 



The resolution of the eighth session of the Central Council of the R.I.L.U. dealing with the T.U.U.L. (June, Labor Unity) informs us that we “have not yet learned to work among the masses”. We have “isolated ourselves.” And it adds: “However, the lagging be. hind in organization and leadership of mass unemployment is still too great.”
The reason the American Centrists “have not yet learned to work among the masses”, “are isolated”, are “lagging behind”, is because they have attempted to carry out the “third period” policy. The resolution dismisses its own mistakes with the above and then reaffirms the tactic of the united front “from below” and the theory of “social Fascism.”
 
Another New Turn
The resolution presents a “new turn” on working in the A.F. of L., and in the reorganization of the T.U.U.L. on the factory basis it is essential for us to investigate this new turn to see if it is a step forward or a mere side stepping and an attempt to veil the third period wreckage without drawing any consequences.
At the beginning of the crisis, Centrism informed us that reformism was declining and that the A.F. of L. was on its last lap. This new situation called for the building of a new trade union center, using as a basis the Left wing of the A.F. of L., and what other outside contacts we had. At that time, the party said,
“A revolutionary upsurge in America is evident by the growing unemployment demonstrations, etc.”

“A revolutionary upsurge grips the working masses, opens the road to the Communist party for their organization and for leading these masses to struggle.” (Theses of the 7th Convention of the C.P., page 9)
After three years of a deepening crisis, the party discards its formula of “revolutionary upsurge” and moves to the Right in the election campaign and trade union activity. The resolution says,
“Recent experience has already shown the need for carrying on work not only in those industries where there are no parallel revolutionary unions but also in those A.F. of L. unions which are parallel to the T.U.U.L. unions”.
According to the Centrist, “Recent experience has already shown the need for carrying on work” in reactionary unions. Only recent experience? Lenin’s theses and all the experience that went with it and followed it are of no value Only recent experiences. The formulation should be: “The mistakes flowing from the ‘third period’ tactics as recent experiences already have proved, point to the need of carrying on work in reactionary unions.”
Centrism now speaks of working in reactionary unions but its organizational tactics continue to block the door to that. Sooner or later they will again ask why they don’t have any success with this Leninist tactic of working in reactionary unions? And again they will inform us: the line was correct but it was not carried out. If Centrism had carried out the Leninist concept of work in reactionary unions and the United Front three years ago we would now be carrying on the class struggle at a much higher level.
 
The Factory Basis
The new turn calls for the “reorganization of the T.U.U.L. unions on the factory basis.” Let us consider the “factory basis” in the light of the trade union program. The Communist League of America says the organization of the unorganized into new industrial unions is the central industrial task of the Communists in America. In order to carry out this task we must coordinate it with the supplementary activity of working in reactionary unions regardless of any momentary domination of one or the other phase of the work. Such is our line of march. Does the resolution of the Sixth Session dealing with America point out this line of march? No. Instead, we have as the main task the reorganization on the factory basis. Presented as it is, at this stage of “isolation”, of “lagging behind’’, etc., a reorganization which is not properly linked with the agitation for the building of new industrial unions, results in scattering our forces rather than in uniting them.
The tactics of Centrism since the “third period” have played into the hands of the reformists and syndicalists and now instead of facing the issue of new industrial unions as Communists, the Stalinists try to sidestep it.
The organization of the unorganized into industrial unions can be accomplished only by Communist leadership in this stage of capitalism. American imperialism cannot be defeated unless the Communist party and the class have suitable organizations as weapons to destroy capitalism. The American Soviets will be the determining organs for the Communists. The building of industrial unions will pave the way for the American dictatorship of the proletariat through the Soviets.
In organizing industrial unions, the mine, mill or factory makes up the basic unit and the chain throughout the industry constitutes the industrial union. The logical development of the industrial union has this structure. The Stalinists now emphasize the factory unit exclusively without regarding the problem of the industrial union as a whole. If we do not organize the decisive section of the industrial union as a whole, we will not defeat the bosses.
 
In Preparation for the Offensive
In the present downward curve of the standard of living and wages, separate, heroic factory or mill lights, here and there are able to prevent wage cuts and even increase wages, but this kind of isolated activity will not be able to transform the downward curve into a workers’ offensive. Only powerful industrial unions under Communist leadership will be able to smash into the capitalist ranks.
The agitation and activity for the organization of the unorganized into industrial unions includes the agitation for the mine, mill or factory unit. To talk of reorganizing on the factory basis and forget the elementary agitation for industrial unions is to put the cart before the horse. The organization of the industrial unions will be realized by building upward with the factory as a basis.
Regardless of what blunders Centrism has committed, its hope to find a way out by the mechanical desire of reorganizing on the factory basis will not solve the problem if it leaves untouched the colossal errors of the past. The Communists can only win by organizing the unorganized on the basis of industrial unions (which includes the “factory basis”) Not the organization of industrial unions by syndicalists or socialists but by Communists.
The Communist must agitate primarily for the organization of the unorganized into industrial unions. The Communists must explain the difference between the craft unions, and the industrial unions. The socialists and the syndicalists are not capable of explaining industrial unionism from a Marxian standpoint. Only the Communists can give a Marxian explanation for industrial unions and their role in reaction, in revolution and under the Dictatorship of the Proletariat. This is the task of the Communists today.
 



The government has just released the 1930 census figures of the gainfully employed. These figures list workers, owners, bankers and managers. Like all statistics of the capitalist, they must be analyzed before they are of value for the working class. These figures present a decline in the number of foreign-born workers. The native white and Negro workers show an increase, but this can be accounted for by the natural population increase and not the influx of workers into industry. There are 7,411,127 foreign-born “employed”, 5,503,535 Negro and about a half a million Spanish-Americans. The census lists all who are able to work as gainfully employed regardless of the six million workers unemployed at the time the census was taken.
 
Labor Shifts
These figures show a shift of labor power from the division of production to the division of distribution. Farming, lumbering, fishing and mining show a decline of labor power employed at production while those occupations listed under distribution show an increase. Manufacturing and transportation show a total gain due to population increase but basic occupation divisions of this total show a marked decline. The light industries such as: dressmaking, tailors, millinery, upholstery, leather, tobacco, food, etc., show a decline in labor power. In heavy industry: iron, steel, metal, molding machine, boiler-making, lumber, and railroad transportation show a decline. These figures present the effects of the contradictions capitalism is moving in, with increased production and a permanent army of unemployed, with a lower standard of living, and increased capital and wealth in the hands of fewer capitalist.
More light will be thrown on these figures when we divide them into classes. The following is a list of the non-workers gainfully employed taken from the census:



Non-Workers Gainfully Employed




Finance, bankers, brokers, etc.


     221,504




Industry, owners


     245,008




Transportation


     138,707




Wholesale, owners


       83,525




Domestic, owners


     258,340




Retail, owners


  1,703,522




Farmers owners and tenants


  6,012,012




Professional, credit agents, etc.


  3,541,562




Government employees


     600,513




Managers, officials, inspectors, real estate agents, etc.


  1,179,760




Foreman, overseers, etc.


      595,029 




 


14,750,504









Gainfully employed Total


48,829,929




Non-workers


 14,750,407 




 


34,079,522



The fifteen million non-workers gainfully employed make up the exploiting class and their office boys. Over fourteen million of these make up the “great” American middle class The ideology as well as the line of march of this class is as varied as the rainbow and is constantly changing colors.
For example, the retail merchants in struggle against the chain stores react than the managers or the chain stores who carry on the business for the owners. The personnel of the industrialist see things somewhat different than the personnel of the financier. The tenant farmers do not view matters like the farm owners. The poor farmer, middle farmer and rich farmer have their differences. Some of the petty bourgeois want to turn the wheels of industry backward. Others trail behind the industrialist, others behind the financier, and some behind the workers, but all of them think they are capable as a class of leading the workers.
The more one considers the middle class, pressed between the capitalist and the workers, the more one can realize the vacillations and different layers at juxtaposition to each other. The vanguard of the workers must be able to utilize this division within the enemy. In America the parliamentary structure gives the middle class great advantages in the general administration of city, county, and state politics but the whole structure is well organized to leave the determining forces of the government in the hands of the dominating imperialist group.
Middle Class in U.S.
The middle class within the American structure is able to press heavily upon the developing working class. It takes organizational forms in many ways, from farmer-labor parties to Anti-Imperialist Leagues; from craft job control to anti-political action; from a struggle to reduce the cost of living to the fight to obtain a glass of beer under the leadership of Green and Walker.
The Communist can only utilize the petty bourgeoisie against the bourgeoisie, if this class is considered in its manifold divisions and sections and not as a homogeneous mass. In the class struggle the middle class must always be considered as fellow travelers. Individuals of this class, who leave their class, who throw overboard their ideology, who learn Marxism, are an entirely different problem for us. The petty bourgeoisie as a class cannot lead and can only be of value if they follow the proletariat in the struggle against capitalism. The main danger of the working class is to trail behind the middle class. Our key to this problem is the program, policies and tactics of the Communist party. Centrism has failed in this task. Today, Stalinism is not winning individuals from this class on the basis of Marxism; Stalinism is incorporating petty bourgeois policies which cause this class to flock to the banner of “revolution”. The Militant from week to week elaborates on these non-Marxism policies of Centrism.
Under Stalinism the workers are not brought to the movement on the basis of Marxism; they are won on the basis of opportunism, adventurism, and petty bourgeois ideas. Under such a regime these woikcrs do not and cannot shake off completely their bourgeois ideology. Under a Marxian leadership the “green” worker is assimilated in the Bolshevik current. Stalinism warps the new recruits.
Our task is to win the working class and with this class pressure to force layers of the petty bourgeoisie to support our position. Only in this sense do we want the middle class as a class ally. With increased class struggles and increased class pressure, under Communist leadership, having a Marxian policy, layers of the middle class are forced to support our position. As the struggle increases, new layers of workers brought into action will force up new layers of allies. Only on this basis can allies be of value to us.
 
Regain Proletarian Base First
An ebb or defeat in the line of march of our. class will cause sections of our allies to withdraw and often turn on us. We cannot regain these allies by compromise, as Stalinism does in all parts of the world. We can only regain these allies by regaining our own class position first. Necessary steps must be taken, reorganisation or retreat, to consolidating our own class forces at a level suitable for the task, enabling us to maintain our position and to strike out in new class battles for new positions.
The Communist League of America cannot ignore the large middle class in America as a valuable ally or bitter enemy. The best way not to ignore this class is to learn from the blunders of Stalinism, replace it with a Marxian line and give our full energy to our own class, the working class. The Communist must point out the road for the working class. The greater the numbers of workers we move into action against capitalism the broader is our class base and the greater will be the layers of allies forced to move in our line of march. Without this class base, the class guarantee is lacking, and the allies will lead the workers to defeat. Such is the logic of Stalinism in Germany in 1923, in China in 1927; and such is the road their line of march is leading to in America. The Communist worker must fight against the Stalin stranglehold for Marxism, for the Marxian policies of the Left Opposition.
 



The elections are over and the politicians can again talk openly about what the bankers have been discussing privately. The war debt question has pushed Itself to the fore and has taken some of the columns devoted to the beer question. Hoover and Roosevelt are discussing this issue. The democrats and republicans arc trying to iron out some of the difficulties to enable Congress to present a working basis in order that the capitalists may have a suitable Christmas present this year.
The question of the American loans is one of the most important knots the capitalists have to unravel. Its Importance is due to the fact that the war debts is one side of the question of markets. And markets is a life and death question for the capitalists of the United States. The extension pf long and short term credits to other capitalist nations out of the vast accumulation of the American capitalists has its many-sided difficulties in this decay stage.
The history of the American loans to the allies, Americas entrance into the war and the continuation of heavy borrowing by Europe after the war, expressed by the struggle over Reparations, has been given first attention by the American capitalists, even though the middle-class congressmen would have us believe otherwise.
Since the Lausanne Conference, reparations from Germany, for the allies, is a thing of the past; so the allies want to consider the debts in the same light. But Uncle Sam is not so foolish. According to the latest figures the American capitalists and their government loaned $7,077,000,000 to Europe during the war, and $3,261,000,000 after the war, making a total of 10 billion dollars. In principle and interest the borrowers agree to pay 22 billion dollars and have paid $2,628,000,000 before the Hoover Moratorium. Now the low world price level has doubled the debt when considered in the light of payment in kind.
When the last world war broke out the loans to these European nations meant, considering the relationship of forces – European War plus American loans produced rich new markets for the American capitalists. The Americans were able to take over markets in all parts of the world. Loans to rival imperialists in Europe enabled the United States capitalists to invade the long protected European markets. Factories hummed and profits rolled in while the reformers and the labor leaders behind the workers to American imperialist plans.
The decision of America to enter the war on the side of the “allies” like all other problems, for the determining reason, sifted down to the question of economic interest. The bankers’ judgement has proven fruitful but the objective conditions of decay capitalism has reduced and contradicted the measures for further world domination.
As soon as the war was over Great Britain and the other allies took immediate steps to get out of the clutches of the American dollar. The British Government withdrew orders for American commodities at war time prices. The cancellation of these orders would shatter the structure and hopes of the American imperialism. Hoover who was the United States Food Administrator at the time wrote President Wilson:
“Our manufacturers have provided the particular types of manufacture required by each of these governments and have enormous stocks of these material on hand ready for delivery.”
“If there should be no remedy to the situation we shall have a debacle in the American markets, and with the advance of several hundred million dollars now outstanding from the banks to the pork-products industry we shall not only be precipitated into a financial crisis but shall betray the American farmers who have engaged in these ends. The surplus is so large that there can be no absorption of it in the United States, and it, being perishable, will go to waste.”
The American capitalist were caught in a structure of their own making. They could not withdraw without losing their key position. They were forced to wade deeper into international problems. From this flows the post war loans. To protect and extend American markets.
As soon as the Dollar “solved?’ one contradiction a new one, more menacing grew out of the “solution”. Additional loans preserved her markets and held off the day of reckoning. By 1923 the extension of the October revolution had outgrown other dangers and a series of measures from the Dawes plan down to the present have been taken – to save tottering capitalism, to hold in check rival Imperialism and to insure markets for America. Expensive markets, but nevertheless markets.
American loans to Europe had its positive political side in the past but the quantity of the loans has reached such proportions, particularly with Germany, that a quantity change has taken place and further loans on the same basis shakes the structure of American economy.
The contradictions have grown. In the past the allies paid what Uncle Sam extended in loans. The American loans through the Dawes Plan and the Young Plan kept ahead of the reparation payment .on the one hand and the repayment of loans by the allies on the other hand. In addition to this between 1923 and 1928 American exports to Europe have increased by $281,000,000 but American loans in the same period increased in value by $490,000,000. American accumulation of capital is the concrete expression of Marx’s abstraction in Das Capital.
During the war America loaned to the allies commodities in the form of munitions, textiles, cereal and tobacco. In return, the American capitalists obtained expanded markets, larger profits and interest. After the war, American loans were necessary to retain these markets, and prop up decay capitalism. The capitalists desire payment of the debts but Europe cannot pay in gold and America does not want too many of her commodities. They must find a way out They talk about capacity to pay and inability to pay but under it all revolves the question of the redivision of the world markets. Hearst and other jingo mongers suggest the allies pay with colonies, but the bankers know a better way.
United States is the creditor nation of the capitalist chain. And Europe represents the greatest market of the American capitalists. Today the war debts stands in between European markets and American export of commodities and capital. The task of the American capitalists is to turn the revision of war debts into a lever to open up some American markets. It is a difficult task but not an impossible one.
The reparation “settlement” has left England and the other “allies” with no war indemnities. But Uncle Sam calls for payment. They are at the mercy of the United States, providing the American capitalists do not make any false moves.
The policy of Hoover and Roosevelt in essence is the same. Both are against cancellation. Both leave the door open for further consideration. Roosevelt does not want a Debt Commission, but both are for separate dealing with the creditors, and that is the vital point of agreement. The present line up, with the allies caught in between the Reparation settlement and America’s demand for “payment” opens the door for a possible “European United Front” against the United States. This is a desire, but contradictions in Europe will not allow it to become a fact, providing American capitalism uses ordinary intelligence.
In dealing separately, the United States is taking advantage of the differences between these other nations, as well as using it as a blow against the most difficult conditions. The notes to England and France are entirely different, leaving room for “talk” with England and demanding payment from France. It was France, with her gold supply that led the attack on the American dollar and Wall Street will not forget this, and would like to relieve her of part of this weapon against the Dollar supremacy. It was England which mapped out a program at Ottawa which when carried into effect will reduce the exports of American capitalism to the British Empire by at least 200 million dollars. America is ready to “talk” about war debts providing she can use this to her advantage against France and to get to the problem of markets and the stone wall of the Ottawa conference results.
The American capitalist press and leading organized capitalist bodies know what the War Debt talk is all about. The Chamber of Commerce report, says among many things, that,
“The best interests of the United States requires that modification should be conditioned upon definite provisions for such treatment of our trade by the debtor nations as will assure access of American goods to its markets on fair competitive terms.”
The New York Times in an editorial on War Debts on November 26th informs Congress that, “Realization of the interdependence of the world is wanted in Congress today.” It starts the editorial with the above sentence and makes the following conclusion: “If, by our attitude toward Great Britain and France, the hope of Germany to progress is destroyed, what barrier will remain against the spread of Communism.” In the decay of capitalism American must not only protect herself and her markets but sue cannot put this above the capitalist interest to prevent the spread of the October revolution.
It looks as through the American capitalists and their government are in an impasse. Gold and commodities in payment according to the world price level is out of the question. There is another way which will enable the American imperialists to gain an advantage point in the present world struggles.
The Moratorium was an important preliminary step for the realizing of the line up of the imperialists for the coming war. Now the American imperialists are making haste to gain an advantage point in the present world struggle through further use of the War Debts as a club over the heads of her allies. The allies of course are trying to turn the loans into a club over America’s head.
The discussion over the war debts, is taking on the plan, no matter what form they cloak the barter for cancellation or reduction of loans in, of America’s struggle as the leading imperialist to extend her domination over greater sections. The U.S. aim is:

for trade concessions,
for secret agreements for the United States in the re-alignment of world forces in preparation for the approaching war,
and the struggle to rebuild a world financial structure with Dollar supremacy,
and to prop up decay capitalism.

The question has been posed in bold relief by the world crisis and the imperialists are struggling to answer it in their own way, to their own liking. But they are not the only ones concerned with the problems or are they the only ones who are “sitting in the game”.
The proletariat and their party the Communist party, threaten to upset the whole structure. With the Marxian theory of the permanent revolution the revolutionists can alter the whole course.
 



While the police of Washington were terrorizing the National Hunger Marchers who had come to the opening session of Congress to demand immediate relief and unemployment insurance, Hoover delivered his message to Congress. The message called for greater support for the bankers and a greater struggle against the workers. The highlights of the Hoover message called for: reorganization of the banking system for the bankers; greater centralization of the governmental apparatus in the interest of the imperialists. An 11 percent wage cut for the Federal employees; a cut for the Veteran Fund; reduction of government building and expense; and a sales tax to shift a greater share of the tax burden to the workers and the middle class. Hoover may not be the next president but Hoover is making haste to serve the imperialists and beat down the workers further before he turns the job over to Roosevelt and the Democrats.
Hoover dealt primarily with the internal difficulties of the capitalists. In the main he kept in the background the equally vital international questions confronting American imperialism. This is primarily due to the fact that if Wall Street can keep Congress busy with the internal problems (that must be answered), Wall Street will see to it that the president and the cabinet take care of the international problems.
The international problems can be handled to the best interest of the imperialists if the facts are kept in the files and archives. Further, the American state structure has a carry-over from the past stage that is cumbersome and must be eliminated if the state is to function with speed for the imperialists. There is still too much middle class weight of the old school. The new flunkies must be lined up to support imperialism and, in the mean time, the “reorganization of the government through the grouping and consolidating of more than fifty executives and independent agencies” must be put through.
Smith’s proposal for New York bears the same stamp. The imperialist must centralize the government for economy but then also use the economy argument as a smoke screen to extend its grip over the whole state at the expense of the other sections of the exploiters.
After this is accomplished they will be able to take up the international questions as free and above board as they do the internal measures for the bankers and against the workers.
The major international questions confronting the imperialists that the government departments are handling are: war debts, the economic conference, the disarmament conference, the position ol the dollar and a relations with the USSR. The question of the USSR falls into three subdivisions: to obtain markets; the possibility of a change in the form of the economic war being waged against the Soviet Union; and prevention of the extension of the October revolution. Around the other questions, this question of the October revolution and the relation to the other imperialists, such as England, France, Japan and Germany are interwoven. America must find a way to gain a position of advantage in the coming struggle for the redivision of the earth.
Congress and the House are busy with their “Beer Bill”. The Hunger Marchers answered this democratic bunk with the slogan of “bread before beer”.
The approach of the president and congress to the most vital problem of unemployment and the crisis has but one aim: to strengthen the position of the bankers and further to beat down the disorganized and badly directed energy of the working class.
The attempt to balance the budget is forcing drastic inroads into the working class and the middle class. The series of proposals from wage cuts, the cut in veteran’s relief, less public building, to the sales tax are all aimed at the classes below the leading capitalists in America.
The demand for the reorganizing of the banking system and the advocating of the branch system is the most fundamental and far-reaching reform in the interest of the imperialists to be taken internally. Once they obtain this, and everything points in this direction, it will strengthen their position not only against the other classes within the country but will give them a. stronger home base of operation against the contending imperialists of other nations.
After all, Congress has just opened and is getting down to business. There will be lots of steam and talk about helping the workers and farmers – and a demand for beer, but under it all they will be ironing out the problems, not of the workers, who have no representatives, who cannot carry out their program through the capitalist state, but the problems of the capitalists in general and the imperialists in particular whom they represent.
The editorial comment of the New York Times on the Hoover message again gives Congress a warning. It ends the editorial with the following words, “The country will be lucky if Congress takes to heart and does as well in action as Mr. Hoover has done in recommendations.” As usual, this is a warning for Congress to carry out the imperialists’ needs.
 



For years the American worker has been the most highly exploited and political backward class in the advanced capitalist nations. Now this class is confronted with permanent mass unemployment. One reaction of the working class to the crisis has been the motion in opposite directions of this physical and mental condition of speed-up and backwardness. The speed-up has been intensified while the political consciousness of the class is being awakened and is moving into class channels.
The condition of mass unemployment and the lowering of the standard of living of the American workers has set in motion class forces, that if properly directed by the party, can become the force, which will be able to move the class far along the road toward the solution. This is true, in so far as the revolutionists direct this class force by a correct program of action.
Once more history is proving the correctness of a Marxian analysis and, its class program for the problem. The analysis of the Left Opposition is being confirmed, but due to the revisionists, the Stalinists, it is being confirmed in a negative way.
When the process of capitalist accumulation reaches its advanced stage! when accumulation is counterposed by overpopulation and mass unemployment; when the productive forces reach a point where the relative decrease of the number of industrial workers is transformed into an absolute decrease, expressed by increased production and by a decrease in labor power; when “Accumulation of wealth at one pole, is therefore, at the same time accumulation of misery, agony of toil, slavery, ignorance, brutality, mental degradation, at the opposite pole” – then the period of proletarian revolutions has been entered and unless the capitalists take drastic steps, or are faced with a proletariat without a Marxian leadership – the favorable objective conditions will be developed and transformed into revolutionary uprisings of the proletariat against the capitalists.
One of the most fundamental economic problems confronting the American capitalists, which they recognize, but which the party under Stalinist leadership does not recognize – is the adjustment of this surplus labor power to the tremendous productive forces which constantly calls for less labor power per unit.
There is no solution of this problem for the capitalist class, because it is only a surface indication and an expression in the decay stage of capitalism of the contradiction between socialized production and capitalist appropriation. However if our class through the inability of its vanguard does not take advantage of the favorable class relationship, the capitalist class will, by this means, not only steal a march on us, but will also strengthen their position against the coming class battles.
Either of the immediate temporary “solutions” of the problem of the reorganization of labor power to productive forces, the capitalist road or the proletarian road, is negative for the capitalist class from the standpoint of economics, but negative to an entirely different degree. However, from a political standpoint, the capitalists victory far less harmful, if we allow the capitalist to decide bow to recognize which means to allow them to “solve” the problem confronting them. The capitalist’s aim in obtaining the lever of the problem is to find the capitalist way out of permanent mass unemployment, and to slow up the tempo of class consciousness development of the American workers and to further reduce the standard of living to enable them to obtain a breathing spell from the contradiction of the accumulation and the falling rate of profit, by the reduction of the necessary labor through speed-up and lower wages.
The aim of the working class must be to utilize this contradiction to widen the gap between these economic contradictions of the capitalist mode of production, accelerate the process of class consciousness and force a reorganization of labor power to productive power – by the reduction of hours with NO REDUCTION OF PAY. Only class pressure properly organized and directed by the Communist party can accomplish this task.
Up to the present our constant am consistent criticism and activity against the Stalinist course in the unemployment field and their failure to mobilize a struggle, or at least to prepare the ground for it, around the slogan of the six-hour-day and five-day-week and no reduction In pay, has, as we have pointed out more than once in the columns of the Militant, resulted in allowing the capitalists to proceed with this gigantic problem unhampered, without a warning to the class, without a directive to the class as though we were automatons to be handled and remolded to the capitalist’s desires.
The capitalists and their government have been steadily, and without too much bragging, working on this problem. They have floundered, they have made mistakes, but beinj? left alone by the vanguard of the proletariat, they were able to at least takes some steps “in the right direction” toward strengthening their class position against the inevitable coming head-on struggles.
Long before last summer when Hoover called a conference of business leaders, financiers, industrialists, labor fakers, etc., to consider the “reduction of hours” and means of “speeding up business reocvery”, the most capable technicians and capitalist leaders had worked out preliminary steps to release some of the pressure of permanent mass unemployment, not through unemployment insurance or immediate relief, but through more fundamental class steps for their own class interest, because as yet, the class was not resisting in an effective manner the onslaughts. Wage cuts were being sanctioned by “labor”. “Labor” also was opposed to the dole. “Labor” objected to “government charity”. “Labor” wanted work.
The shorter work day propaganda of the bosses is a means of reducing the standard of living of the workers, is a means of furthering the wage cut drive by the “Stagger Plan” against the workers. The blind and ignorant Stalinists saw the capitalist side of this class problem, confused it with our side and dismissed it as reactionary, as “social” Fascist”, etc., not once realizing that every problem has its working class side “also”. This should be ABC, but like all simple problems Stalinism makes them complicated and all complicated problems Stalinism tries to simplify, which has resulted in simplifyng matters for the capitalise enemies. The Stalinists forgot or ignored the struggle for the shorter work day and bitterly fought the slogan of, “The six hour day, the five day week, and no reduction in pay.”
Up to the present, the capitalists have not made much progress with their side of this problem. Nevertheless, what little progress they have made is far greater progress than we have made with our side of the same problem, because the most powerful organized political force of our class, the party, controlled by the Stalinists, has put a damper on even the thought about this problem.
Some of the preliminary steps taken now, after three years of the crisis, by the capitalist class, is the establishment of the “legal” apparatus to “solve” this problem. They have established a national organization, with Walter Teagle, of the Standard Oil, who is now devoting his full time to this “emergency” for (I suppose) a “dollar” a year, just like he devoted his time to the “emergency” of the last world war. They know what emergencies are and act accordingly. The committee functions throughout the country, covering every avenue of activity using labor power.
“The entire country has been divided into sections. In each locality a chairman has been appointed who in turn enlists the heads of the large business and industries. All the firms n the same line are grouped together and a vice group or chairman as appointed who in turn enlists the heads of large business and industries. General meetings are held throughout the country, as well as group meetings, and representatives visit individual firms to explain the advantages of the plan.” “Moreover, much literature is distributed and plans are worked out for adopting the scheme to special cases.” (New York Times, Oct. 30)
Teagle says, “more than 3000 firms, mostly in the manufacturing and industrial field have already adopted similar plans and it is estimated that if they had not done so 3,500,000 more workers would have been added to the list of unemployed,” One can read almost daily accounts of the “practical plan” and its results in the “share the work movement.”
It must be remembered that this is the capitalist’s side of the problem and is the opposite in content if not in form of the workers side of the question of the reduction of hours. The capitalist method brings with it lower wages and greater speed-up. The workers side, through the class struggle drives in the opposite direction. The class pressure will determine to what degree it can drive the movement in the opposite direction. The role of. the party will determine much of this. Stalinism has already answered. We Communist workers should answer them by removing such leaders and replacing them with Marxists. By recalling the Left Opposition to the party.
Speaking of “Job sharing”, Teagle says, “The help of the ablest business executives is required. We are trying to mobilize these men for an attack on what I consider the principle obstacle to the return of prosperity: unemployment.” One should not confuse the terminology Teagle uses with the real essence of the problem. The minority exploiters must always cloak their “attack” against the workers in class collaboration drapes when the class relations are so favorable for them.
The Left Opposition will continue its propaganda in this field and coordinate it with the other pressing immediate demands for the struggle against unemployment and point out that the solution of the problem is found in the revolutionary overthrow of capitalism. As Stalinism “grows” in America so grow the mistakes of Stalinism.
 



The railroad workers have taken a 10% cut and once more the folly of the bosses is paid for by the workers. Already the effect upon other Industries has been felt; wage cuts are the order of the day in all parts of the country. The railroads through their committee informed the workers that the only way out of the Impasse was a wage cut, and properly so – from their standpoint, if it is the path of least resistance. And up to the present, with the labor flunkies of capitalism, their contentions have proven correct and will be proven wrong only when the railroad workers take things in their own hands; when the policy of class struggle replaces the policy of class collaboration.
The lack of planned railroad construction, the increased competition from other means of transportation and the turbulence of the present crisis has driven the railroads in a tight corner. This cannot be denied. However, its admittance merely proves our general contention: that the anarchy of capitalist production must be replaced by socialist planned economy which is only possible by establishing a workers’ dictatorship in the United States. On the other hand, even if we confined ourselves to the figures presented by the railroad magnates we can show that they do not stand upon economic foundation but rather upon the foundation of the force of the capitalist dictatorship and its liars and fakers.
Mr. Willard, in the Chicago conference, said that despite the reduction of operating expenses many roads face bankruptcy because they cannot meet the fixed charges of 1931. He says the fixed charges for 1931 are 695 million dollars, but only 784 million dollars is available, which only leaves 89 million total net income. Because of this, the interest on the founded debt alone was 495 million. This is just some more statistical fakery. To whom does the interest go if it does not go to the capitalist class, no matter what section it is. Is not this 49 million, to say nothing of the 784 million, obtained, part of the capitalist surplus robbed from the railroad workers? And further, how do they figure this? In relation to the variable capital? No, of course not, they figure their profits in relation to the total watered stock. It is true that in times of crisis much water is squeezed out but this is only partially the case with the big roads.
So long as the workers are not organized properly, are not under class struggle ideology and have the type of railroad leaders they do, the capitalist will find easy pickings. We know the capitalist can sell below value and still make profit and we know the capitalist class in their offensive against us, in the crisis, hate been striking at strategical points: the steel workers, the railroad workers, the increase of the number of political prisoners and of deportations. These moves and particularly the railroad workers’ wage cut are of vital importance for the living standard of the whole class. The capitalists of America are tightening up on the home base in order to prepare for greater onslaughts on the world market against rival imperialists, in the struggle for the redivision of the earth. Are we going to stand by idly while this tremendous international conflict is in the making. No, all signs point to an increase of class battles in the United States.
 



(Continued from last issue)
Revolutions and civil wars are always followed by “counter-revolution” (reaction, terror, etc. against the exploited) unless the workers are able to carry the civil war over to the point where they seize power for themselves. During the struggle, concessions are necessary to gain the support of the exploited for the exploiters’ war. But once the former exploiter is defeated, the new exploiter makes haste to bring about a new alignment with the former enemy, under the hegemony of the new exploiter, against the exploited. The results of the civil war only confirmed this truth again.
The legal forms of capitalist rule were not sufficient for the needs of the plantation owners of the south. Lynch law was added – a necessary measure used against the whole exploited class whenever the formal legal means do not suffice to keep them in check. Lynch law exists for the Negro every minute of the day and night. But it is not the elimination of the lynch law that will free the Negro. Rather lynch law, as such, can only be done away with by the overthrow of capitalism. In the struggle to overthrow capitalism a necessary part is the constant struggle against lynch law and all forms of discrimination (discriminating law prohibiting admittance to, public and private buildings, schools universities, parks, etc.; restrictions regarding jury service and civil service; disfranchisment; prohibition of inter-marriage; lease system, chain gangs, etc., and admittance to working class organizations, trade unions etc.)
The Negro in America – bourgeoisie, petit-bourgeoisie, farmer and worker – stands as an oppressed racial minority, a national minority. Of course they are a minority of the nation; and in this sense, a mechanical one, they are a national minority. But in the political sense it is not so. A national minority are a people not only with racial differences, but a people with special differences of language, custom and religion, or with a separate national character or national interests. Politically speaking, national minorities always have the integral element of racial minority (race or branch of race). But a racial minority, in the hodge-podge of capitalist society, does not necessarily signify national minority. On the other hand, racial oppression does not always mean the oppression of a national minority. This oppression may be inflicted on a national majority, as in the case of China and India. One could give countless examples of this kind in the past history. America, the outstanding representative of Capitalism, is the best example to show the differences between a racial minority and a national minority. America is now a nation and its people take pride in their nationality, regardless of the descent, especially those Americans of the second and third generation of foreign descent. In the United States we find many racial groups making up the nation as “Americans”. The Swedes, English, Spanish or French born in America, who may still have the “pure Blood” of their race, can be considered as a racial minority (races of Europe) of the population of the United States. In this way they are catalogued mechanically as part of a national group. But, in spite of this, they cannot be considered as a national minority in the political sense.
The Negro was brought from Africa, from a system of Barbarism where nations as political states were only in, the process of formation. He was hurried through the process and now is part of Capitalism. He brought with him racial characteristics, as well as traditions and modes of the past. However, his life in America has overbalanced that which was brought from the past, has modified it, has changed it. Capitalist America as forced him to adopt the language and religion and modes of the country and of the economic system as the DETERMINING FACTORS of this part of his make-up. The more complicated economic structure here in America has swallowed up the past. And, although it cannot be eliminated and expresses itself in the new make-up, it is not the determining factor of the American Negro.
As an oppressed racial minority it is one question, and the question is the race form of the class struggle. As an oppressed national minority it is another question. The attempt to construe the Negro question this way can only result, not in nationalism for the Negro, but in national reformism for the “Marxist”. The idea of Self determination for national minorities (which include races or racial groups) is a compromise and concession; it is a transitional measure, a weapon against capitalism, providing it is used at the proper time, where, no other road out is possible. This is not the situation in America with the American Negro, as the Stalinites contend.
Objective conditions are still on the move for the Negro, and particularly since the world war. The shortage of labor in the War period, the stoppage of the immigration flow, and the development of capitalism at a faster pace in the South – all this moved the Negro into the stream of class struggle. The racial expression of the oppression of the Negro is no reason for a revolutionist to see the form (racial oppression) and enlarge this out of its true relation to the content of the class struggle.
The decisive section of the Negroes, in relation to the problem considered, is no longer the one which is “half slaves-half serfs”, it is not petty bourgeois Negro. The decisive section in the class struggle, in the North as well as the South – in America as a whole, which is the proper way to look at the problem – is the Negro proletariat. His weight as a proletarian, if it is the decisive part (and even Stalinism does not deny this in words), will make up for his weakness in the “South” where Stalinism says the slogan of Self Determination is necessary.
The complicated race form of the class struggle for the Negro lays the main burden upon the Negro proletariat in relation to the rest of the Negroes, but not in relation to the white proletariat. The main burden of the relation of the Negro to the white proletariat rests upon the shoulders of the latter. The white worker must be ready to meet the Negro more than half way. He must go to the point – no matter how far – for the victory of the workers over capitalism. The Negro worker is necessary part of this problem for the victory not of the white workers but of the WORKERS regardless of their race.
(Continued in next issue)
 



The “militant” socialists have forced their attention upon the American movement by issuing a Militant Program of the Socialist Party of America. The noise the Militants created in heralding their opposition to the party fathers prompted O’Neal to give them a spanking, issued as a criticism in the New Leader. But like all bureaucrats and upholders of the crimes of the Second International, O’Neal splashed a lot of words, set up a few straw men and evaded the whole issue. No doubt this kind of criticism will spur the “militants” to new conquests. In this advance of the “militants”, it is well to point out what their present step means and to lay bare some of the contradictions.
The deepening crisis has caused this stir and forces the more enlightened members of the S.P. to seriously question the crimes of the Second International. For the rank and file of the “militants” it is a step forward, but for those “leaders” who were formerly supporting the Communists it is a big step backward. At least, one will have to give these “leaders” credit for one thing. They have set themselves a big task. They intend to reform the Second International. Already sections of the more advanced workers in their rank and file are to the left of the “militant” program and are seriously questioning it.
The program is written in the fashion of a crafty lawyer who puts out a feeler, insinuating much, condemning considerably, but accusing no one in particular. The program points out some of the crimes of the Second International, not in America so much, but in Europe: but there is no hint as to who their American bed-fellows are. They seem to be afraid of stepping on somebody’s toes. Like good politicians of the capitalist orders these “militants” leaders have left the door open for proper adjustments with the fathers at a later date.
The “militant Program” accuses the Second International of crimes beyond class “redemption” and in the same breath advocates reforming this prop of Capitalism. Such a position is even more tragic than the position of the liberal who admits all the evils of capitalism and then sets out to cure it.
The reformers of the Second International speak of class struggle saying, “The moment this Marxian concept is abandoned, not only in theory but in practice as well, at that moment Socialism loses its significance.” We are told this in 1932 by the “militant socialists”, but this universal, open abandonment of the class struggle by Second International was heralded unashamed to the workers of the world in 1914 and ever since then, and it is from then on that “Socialism” has lost “its significance”. No group of “Lefts” can blow life into what is already dead. If the “militant socialists” blow anything into the American party we can be sure it will not be Marxism. They can blow into the Socialist Party some radical phrases, and make it more presentable for conditions of crisis. In this stage of increasing class struggle, capitalism must bring into life the American variety of social democracy, so ably presented by the German “comrades”. If a few sincere but non-Marxian worker “leaders” allow themselves to be utilized together with the conscious fakers so much the better for the development of reformism in America, for the capitalists. The Second International served its master well to Europe. Why not give it a chance in America, even if it needs a little doctoring up for presentation? American capitalism had better make haste while there is time and construct some kind of a storm cellar for the coming class battles. Will the rank and file “militants” of the Socialist Party help in this process, or will they take the next step toward the Communist movement?
The program says, “It is a fundamental principle of Marxism that Socialism cannot be achieved as a result of a series of reforms within the framework of the Capitalist State.” When the fathers of the party read this they became frightened, but as soon as they read the next sentence all their fear was quieted, for in its own peculiar way, in the language of the politicians, it lays the basis for the understanding of words and deeds. The next sentence of the program says, “Emancipation of the workers can begin only when the workers capture political power and constitute themselves the ruling class.” Just another way of saying, we will shoot the capitalist to death with paper ballots. The question of what to do with the capitalist state (smash it) and what kind of a state will replace it, is left for people to guess as they please. This is no accident on the part of the “militant” socialist leaders. These reformers of the reformers in America say the dictatorship of the proletariat is alright in Russia. But in America – that’s a different question. Years ago the intense class struggle in Europe forced the “left” Socialist to accept the dictatorship in Russia as a reality but in the next breath they said it was not for their country. And now, years later, the developing class struggle in America forces the “lefts” to say the same. Already we find some of the rank and fliers objecting to these clever formulations, this lip service to revolution and action for reformism. They demand another step.
The program says, “At the same time, we set ourselves firmly against dictatorship in this country as long as democratic means of transition to a socialist society are still available.” We will vote the capitalists out of power, and these defeated capitalists will give us the key to every mine, mill and factory; and the next day they will report to work in overalls. So say the “militants”, who are going to use the democratic means of transition to socialism. What a mess. Shapiro, Coleman, Sinclair and Blanchard and their like. What kind of a game do you call this? They may be able to convince some followers that they “don’t know any better” but we know them from before.
Every one remembers the last part of the Communist Manifesto and the last sentence. It is well to know the last words of the “militant socialist” program : “We must create and promote a spirit of intelligent hopefulness. Such an opportunity as is at hand for all of us to hasten the emancipation of the working class of America may not come again for generations. We call for action. Let us close ranks and go forward to Socialism in our time.” This gem of reform ignorance has two mistakes: ordinary and extraordinary. These reformers tell their followers that if they don’t get busy and help them reform the reformers at once we may not have another chance for generations. We can settle this problem by informing the “militant Socialists” that they will not reform the Second International in this generation and in the next generation there will be no need because the Second International will only be a terrible memory for the victorious world proletariat.
 



The bosses have tried every imaginable remedy for the crisis. To no avail. Now they hope to find a lever to raise their profits by lowering taxes. The campaign to lower taxes has swept the bourgeois world like wildfire. Through every avenue at their command the capitalists and the landlords are clamoring for economy in government. They want “cheap government” and the support of the working class to force a curtailment of expenses.
Chicago and the other leading cities are bankrupt, the national government is running in red at the rate of seven million a day. Congress is struggling to make a two and a half billion income meet a four and two-thirds billion expense for 1932. The capitalists say the government bureaucracy is excessive and the increase of the cost of government has kept far ahead of the increase of wealth. However a comparison of value produced in America with other industrial countries and the taxe paid will show that the British, German and other capitalists pay far in excess the taxes the American capitalists pay.
The cost of the American government, city, state and national, amounts to twelve billion a year and the total indebtedness of the government is thirty billion with the Federal government holding sixteen billion of this debt. All sections of the capitalists are hit by the deepening crisis and each section is trying to shift the burden to the other sections and all are trying to shift the burden to the workers. As far as the crisis is concerned, the capitalists are constantly shifting the burden (unemployment, wage-cuts) to the workers but their attempt to shift the tax burden to the workers will not succeed. Each section of capitalist robbers in attempting to shift the tax burden to the other sections of their class is endeavoring to line up the workers on their side.
The recent attempt to put through the sales tax in the form presented to the House of Representatives was an attempt to shift the tax burden to the petty bourgeoisie. The small capitalist was able to rally sufficient forces to throw the bill back and now they are fighting to see who will pay the increased taxes. The different sections of capitalism are well represented in the lobby and behind the politicians’ closed doors. The curtailment of production and the falling off of the capitalist incomes has reduced the income tax, forcing the bosses’ office boys in Washington to find another way out.
The first year of the crisis showed a fair return from income tax but the present year tells another story. In 1930 the forty-five million gainfully employed (workers and capitalists, etc.) listed 2,411,000 million liable to income tax. This small number paid two-thirds of the 1930 Federal government expenses. When the profits were rolling in the capitalists paying the tax bill did not object so loudly, but now we hear a different tale. In this struggle to hold up profits each section of the capitalists wants the other section to pay the tax, yet each section wants to dictate to the political office boys what to do. The financiers desire to push the burden on the shoulders of the industrialists and the industrialists would like to place the taxes on the landlords, who all hope to shift it to the small capitalist.
All the .capitalists would like to shift it to the workers but are unsuccessful in this task, at least they desire to rally the workers behind them in an attempt to correct their office boys’ “excess spending”. When the capitalist robbers fight each other they want us to help them. We workers would be more than foolish to help one section of the capitalist robbers against another section on the question of war, taxes or any other struggle. The capitalist robbers as a whole rob the workers and the robbers’ division of the spoils is not our problem. Rather, our problem is to expropriate the expropriators.
Many workers will say, “I do pay taxes and will enter the campaign to reduce the cost these political crooks are piling upon our shoulders.” We did not say that workers do not pay taxes. We say the workers have no interest in helping the bosses cheapen their government. What the workers pay as taxes is only a small part of the funds collected for taxes. It is not the task of the workers and our party to fight for “cheaper government”. The tax question enters in our problems, in the class struggle, as an auxiliary problem on which we will speak later. For the sake of argument, suppose all the taxes were shifted to the workers, on our cost of living. The capitalist economists tell us that taxes amount to ten per cent of the cost of living? What if we would help the bosses reduces this to five per cent of the cost of living. The fall of the cost of living by five per cent would be a signal for the bosses to reduce wages from ten per cent upwards. Wages always fall faster than the cost of living and always rise Blower that the cost of living and wages only rise, no matter how the cost of living goes up, providing our class fights for more real wages.
It is futile to point our main class guns at the point of consumption, at the cost of living, etc. Our main struggle must be at the point of production. The tax question enters into the struggle as an auxiliary problem. However, no enemy is defeated by concentrating forces in auxiliary struggles. We participate in elections but do not advocate parliamentary action like the Second International. It is only an auxiliary for our class struggle. The tax question under special consideration must also be on our agenda depending upon conditions. Inflation, price rise and taxes are used by the bosses at certain times to reduce the standard of living by indirect wage cuts.
We must be prepared for such moves, but the present campaign to reduce expenses of government is aimed at something far more important for the capitalist class. Even when we have inflation, rise in prices or tax shifting in sections we do not aim our class guns at the point of consumption to remedy this problem. We strike at the more vital points in the capitalist defense.
We workers are robbed as producers, robbed of the surplus labor, of the surplus value which the capitalist divide among themselves as profits, rent, interest and to pay their office boys’ (government) and for the gangster racketeers who rob the robbers.
One aim of the present tax campaign is to reduce the bureaucracy. The imperialists need a more “efficient apparatus”. There are too many small office boys repeating like parrots the fable that “we” must keep out of Asia and Europe and stay in our own back yard. American imperialism has no choice. It must move out into deeper waters or go under.
The crisis has forced the American imperialists to retrench in order to produce cheaper commodities to enable her to defeat the competitors on the world market. For the last three years an intense retrenchment through discharge and speed up of the remaining workers has been the result. Now the third year finds the capitalist class endeavoring to cut down in other fields. Their office boys are due for a cut too. The campaign against the workers will not decrease by this move. On the contrary, the campaign against the workers takes on new forms and more intense forms. The cheapening of the government is only another way of saying – cut the workers wages. Contracts for City, State, and Government jobs ride roughshod over the “union wages and union hours.” The workers must help cheapen the government! Join the campaign and take a wage cut? The Federal employees just had a cut.
The Socialists are out for a cheap government and in Milwaukee they have proven their ability. They have proven to the capitalist they can be a cheaper office boy than those of the undisguised capitalist parties. The capitalists are cheapening their government and increasing the means of suppression of the working class. Are we to help the capitalists make a cheap government to suppress the workers? Smash strikes by a cheap government? Deport the foreign born at less cost? Legally lynch the Negro in a more economical way. Give the workers and Communists, bullets instead of bread, it is all “cheaper”. Such is the campaign for cheap government. Would a sane worker take part in such a game?
Each year the government spends over a billion dollars to pay interest and retire debts from the last war and each year they spend about a billion dollars to prepare for the next war. A billion for the last war and a billion for the coming war each year. Do they mean cheaper government in this sense? Of course not. The capitalists have no intention of reducing military expenses. They tell us government expenses must come down but we know the capitalists system is built upon waste. The capitalist mode of production is so organized that billions of dollars worth of the necessities of life are destroyed each year while millions go without necessities.
Capitalism in America has a tremendous surplus means of production and consumable articles and when pressed in war of struggle can turn over in taxes to their government ten times the amount they are turning over now and still make big profits. It is not a question of scarcity of material wealth the capitalists speak of, it is a question of reorganizing and preparing the minds of the workers to the song that they cannot add another penny to taxes. Why do they want the workers to think they cannot add to taxes? Why do they say taxes must be reduced or they will go bankrupt when some European capitalist are paying ten times as much? Because millions are starving and millions are moving for struggle for immediate relief and unemployment insurance.
 



(Continued from last issue)
But the solution cannot be brought closer by artificial slogans, such as the slogan of Self Determination. We must minimize the desires of the Negro Petty-Bourgeoisie and enlarge the form of the proletarian interest of the Negro who is, like the white worker, choked with bourgeois ideology. National minorities must be won as allies to the proletariat, if they are oppressed minorities. But in winning them as allies we do not approach the workers of this nationality or race as such. This would be national opportunism. We approach these workers as workers. We know the bourgeois element of the national minorities under Czarism were no better and often worse than the dominating bourgeoisie against the workers. Likewise the Negro bourgeois elements have already proven they can outstrip their white masters. We want allies, but not on the basis of concessions and compromises on principles. But the Negro proletarian is no Negro ally – he is a worker. The cropper and dirt farmer are allies and must be won as such. But in this relation the Negro industrial and agriculture worker is decisive.
A compromise on principle means that the “allies” have captured the proletariat. The program of the Communists (Marxists) is the only one possible for the American Negro for social, political and economic equality and freedom. The road is the road of class struggle, not that of “preparation stages” – self determination, democratic dictatorship of the Proletariat and Peasantry, four class party, workers and peasant parties, peoples revolution, etc. – which give the petty-bourgeois Negroes organizational and political control. Preparation stages in struggles are necessary, but not compromises on principle, passed off as preparation stages.
We must consider slogans and tactics for the race form of the class struggle. This is essential in order to defeat the bosses’ policy of divide and rule. Slogans and tactics against the legal and extra-legal discrimination and lynch laws are the order of the day. A will to fight the battles of the Negro masses, as the party has already demonstrated, is a big step forward. Let us not step backward into the swamp of national reformism.
The Negro of America was not snatched from a State or Nation in Africa with national aspirations and ideologies. Neither has America given the Negro as a Negro the material base for nationalism as such. The class struggle of the Negro is not cloaked in a national form (complicated with the national bourgeois influence) that calls for the slogan of self determination at special stages and under special conditions in the struggle. It is cloaked in the race form. The American Negro bourgeoisie elements are no ally of ours. The problem is complicated enough without adding the national complex to it, which in this case can only result in national reformism.
The racial form of social conflicts has taken the national form where the racial group obtained an economic unit. This has been the case in the past. Blood ties, gens and clans in the process of development from primitive Communism through the stages to an exploiter’s society, naturally crystallized as such. But the American Negro presents no such picture. His is a different and far more difficult problem.
The Socialist tells us in substance, that the workers must not seize power in backward countries. We must let the bourgeois revolution take its course develop its industries (nationalism), and then we will win it over. Stalinism tells us that we must move the American Negro into the feeling of national consciousness through the slogan of Self Determination. Of course Stalinism will say, “No, not national consciousness”. But we will answer: The slogan of Self Determination for a racial group that does not have a material base for such has even less logic than the socialist position. At least, these non-Marxists speak of a material base for bourgeois power, in one form or the other, in backward sections.
When the proletariat takes power, the Negro worker will take his place as an equal with the white worker. Where the Negroes are the majority (parts of South, etc.), this majority will dominate the Soviets.
The Negro worker and farmer, being even more suppressed and exploited than his white brother requires special consideration from the revolutionary party, even though, economically, he is a worker or dirt farmer. This double exploitation and class suppression is carried out through the race form of the class struggle, which does not include the national form in the political sense. Stalinism says, because the Negro constitutes a doubly exploited racial minority, and regardless of the argument on nationalism, it is proper to present the slogan of Self Determination for oppressed racial minorities as well as national minorities.
Let us consider it in this light for a moment, in spite of the arguments already presented. Adding to what has been said about the slogan of self determination, we must say that it can only be realized, so far as the American Negro is concerned, after the overthrow of capitalism in the South, which means the overthrow of American imperialism as such. Is this transition step needed then? The victory of the proletariat includes within it the solution of the double exploitation of the Negro masses. As for the Negro bourgeoisie, the Negro and white workers will take care of them just as they will take care of the white exploiters. The Soviets of the South will solve this problem, even though special efforts will have to be leveled against reactionary ideological carryovers. But the main struggle against the reactionary ideology is not a problem of the Negroes, but of the whites.
But how about the slogan as a means of winning the Negro masses today for the proletarian revolution? Yes, the slogan will win over many petty-bourgeois elements on the basis of national reformism. But we don’t want the Negro petty-bourgeoisie as allies on that basis. The Negro worker, industrial and agricultural, is not even in this problem, because we do not use a slogan of self determination for workers. We win them as workers, even though different racial and sectional (youth and women, etc.) tactics are necessary.

The above is a discussion article. The views expressed are those of the author. Others will follow on the same subject. – Ed.
 



On November 8, millions of American workers will go to the polls to vote for the next president of the United States. Millions of these workers will cast their votes for the parties of reaction. Millions of other workers, the most exploited and subjected will not go to the polls. These millions who stay away from the polls are the disfranchized American Workers In normal periods, the bulk of the Negro masses of the south are denied this bourgeois “liberty” by legal and “illegal” means of brutal suppression. Millions of foreign-born workers, who have not yet obtained their papers, because of the special discrimination, are prevented from voting, yet these millions are numbered among those who do the most useful and basic work under the capitalist system.
 
Workers’ Vote Cut Down
The laws dealing with election right are so complicated and exclusive, with poll tax in some states and other qualifications that the unskilled and semi-skilled millions of workers are automatically eliminated.
In addition to this, the crisis and mass unemployment have broken up the homes of additional millions, who will not be qualified to vote. The Communist Party will also be unable to get on the ballot in many important states, including some important industrial states. All this this summed up, plus the stealing and counting out of Communist votes will not enable us to have an accurate picture of the motion and direction of the working class unless these factors are taken into consideration.
On the other hand, a more accurate trend of the other classes can be registered by the November 8 election. The bankers are putting their eggs in more than one basket. Hoover and Roosevelt have the backing of the imperialist who want to play safe, knowing a shift to the left will be registered in the coming election.
The big capitalists of America have their sectional interests within their class but this interest is in no way menaced by the election of Roosevelt instead of Hoover, in case the working class and the middle class protest vote is sufficient to dislodge the latter.
 
Position of Middle Class
The middle class has shown the greatest confusion in the pre-election days. Most of the middle class have shifted their support from Hoover to the “left.” Many of the middle class are of the opinion that Roosevelt is to the Left of Hoover and will vote according. This also applies to a big layer of the working class. The Jingo, Hearst, with his middle class outfit, are in the Roosevelt bandwagon.
Other layers of the middle class are rallying behind the Socialist candidate, Norman Thomas, and a layer, led by the intellectuals has endorsed Foster and Ford, the Communist Candidates. The majority of the middle class will divide their vote between Roosevelt and Norman Thomas.
The agrarian division of the middle class – the reformers par excellence of the past – is up in arms with pitchforks against Hoover and the monopolists, with their “holiday” movement and farmers’ strike. The farmer has shifted to the Left in the present crisis and the Roosevelt forces are counting heavily on polling a goodly share of this discontent. Roosevelt has been busy with the stunt of straddling as many classes as possible, promising everything in words that will be so many after-dinner jokes of the bankers the day after the election if they replace Hoover with Roosevelt as their new office boy.
As for the workers, everyone knows that layers of the class will vote for the parties of reform and reaction, and mainly the parties of reaction. The important question to consider is just to what degree these layers have shifted to the Left? What has caused them to stop on the way side? What has repelled them from a further Leftward shift and how can we dislodge this “resting place” between reaction and revolution – Reform.
The important question for us to solve is what the new relationship of classes as reflected by the vote? Just how far has the shift to the Left developed? How successful have the parties of reform and reaction been? How successfully have our policies accelerated this process? Or, how negatively have the wrong Stalinist policies and program repelled this Leftward shift? All these questions are fundamental ones. Not a Stalinist “victory” of counting the “gains” mechanically compared to the last election without taking into consideration the shift in class forces and new relationship and ideological changes.
 
Socialist Advances
The inability of the Stalinists to understand the tactic of the united front not only in their present activity but in all fields of activity has cut from under us a broad base of workers who will vote the socialist ticket this year instead of the Communist ticket. An outstanding example of this is the Illinois coal field where the party was a power in the past. Now the socialist party is running wild through here. This is the reaction to the Stalinist policies.
We at least know one thing, that the election will not solve the accumulating contradictions piling up upon the ruling class and their henchmen. The workers must be told to vote Communist. The workers must be told that our class solution is through the proletarian revolution.
 







The National Committee of the Communist League of America (Opposition), by direction of the National Conference, appointed a commission to assemble material on the Negro question in America and to open a discussion In the League. The following article by comrade Oehler, a member of the commission, is a contribution to the discussion and presents his personal views. – Ed.





Part 1

Part 2

Part 3
 



The middle bourgeoisie is pressed between the two great contending classes of today, the capitalist and working classes. It is finding its position more precarious us the contradictions between socialized production and capitalist appropriation increase. The deepening crisis is causing them to move, and at present they are running around in circles. American capitalism is concentrating and centralizing the industrial and financial structure to a “higher” level. This squeezes the middle-class to a greater degree between the embryo battle formations of the capitalists and the workers.
One phase of the middle-class reaction to this development is expressed through the Hearst program. The Hearst papers advocate 15 points as their program for America. It clearly reflects the contradictions of the middle class and at the same time shows that the imperialist offensive pulls in its wake this chain of papers for its own ends. The few sugar-coated measures turn out to be walls which the reformers hope to erect between the Communist forces and the working class. The burden, in preventing the building of these walls, rests upon the Communist Party by means of a correct Marxian struggle for immediate demands as against a reformist policy.
 
Wants Cheap, Efficient Government
Four of the fifteen measures are advocated for the purpose of obtaining a more centralized, cheap, efficient Government. They call for proportional representation in the United States Senate which would give the middle class and small industrialist a better hand at fighting the monopolies and trusts. They advocate the abolition of the electoral college. They want to end the lame duck sessions so that the new president and congress can sit right after elections. They want the modification of the Volstead Act. These measures would centralize, cheapen and make more efficient the Government apparatus. Where on the one hand, the demand for proportional representation in Congress is intended to satisfy the big capitalists, the modification of the Volstead Act, on the other hand, is designed for the workers in order to catch their votes. The A.F. of L. bureaucracy and a large section of the workers are swept behind the middle class attempt to stem the tide by these measures.
 
The Middle Class Demands
One plank, “Honest friendship with all nations – entangling alliances with none,” is the worn-out attempt to pull the results of the productive forces of American capitalism back into the national boundaries. This plank is hopelessly reactionary and utopian. It can only stir up the nationalism of the exploiting rulers, playing upon the “patriotism” of the working class and middle class youth, and paying the way for a nationalism that develops into dangerous proportion as the crises deepens – dangerous against the working class.
The middle class is not so dumb that they do not see the effects of the crises and trend of imperialism against the workers. And, knowing that an aroused and class-conscious working class may tip over the boat and spill all the profits, they move certain measures as reforms. These reforms have the purpose of creating, instead of a class-conscious proletariat, a contented and docile, American working class. They propose such things as a thirteen month calendar, with all holidays falling on Saturday, and a five day week. But if all holidays fall on Saturday it will cut from under the five day week. The middle class needs a docile class in order to reap profits in all their avenues of exploitation. They want a Secretary of Education, and Federal control of education. All in all, reforms from the top in order to head off the pressure of the workers from below. Far sighted middle class politicians see the writing on the wall that the blind Stalinites cannot see. The slogan for the Six Hour day and the Five Day week with no reduction of pay – a class slogan of first magnitude for immediate demands, that can be turned against the capitalist class and cement together a large section of our own class – has been snatched up and exploited by the middle class reformers because the Stalinites don’t understand the differences between a revolutionary struggle for immediate demands and a reformist utilization of them.
 
Jingoism Breaks Through
Three of the measures are outright jingoist planks, natural sequences of Hearst’s past Mexican campaign and his present Japanese campaign. Hearst wants the French and English West Indies as part payments of debts. He wants the Nicaragua Canal to be started at once for commerce and defense. He wants the army, navy and aviation under a Secretary of National Defense. An unbroken bridge spans Pacifism, Jingoism and Imperialism. Each serves its purpose in a different way, but all for the same end.
 
A Dangerous Stalinist Slogan
In the workers ranks also opportunism makes strange bed-fellows. The Social Democratic leaders played their role in this evolution in 1914. In America where pacifism wants the United States to boycott Japan for her present acts in China, the Stalinists want us to expel the Japanese representatives in America. It is true the Stalinites have not travelled the road as far as the Social Democrats did in the last war, but it was just such a way that led the Social Democrats on the path to social-patriotism – by seeing the worst imperialist, not at home, but across the border. The Marxists fight against all imperialists but FIRST and at all times against, “their own”. It is our special and political task to unmask the treacherous and despicable role of American Imperialism in the Far East, in the League of Nations, in the disarmament conference and at home.
One measure of the Hearst program calls for a five billion federal loan for public works. This measure, as well as others, has enabled him to corral large numbers of workers. Hearst is against the Bankers dole in the form of the two billion dollar credit pool, and he is against a dole (social insurance) for the workers; but he wants a dole of five billion that would be divided among the exploiters with a goodly share going to the middle class and a few crumbs for the workers.
 
Anti-Working Class Program
The three remaining planks we have not yet spoken of are so clearly anti-working class measures that even the blind could recognize them. Hearst wants a federal tax and excise tax to replace the income tax. True, workers must keep their eyes on the point of production and not devote too much time to beating down the cost of living. They must keep their eyes on the relation of forces between the classes. But the capitalist class can use the lever of taxes and prices and currency manipulations to further worsen the workers’ conditions. And at this stage, the sales tax, just like inflation, will take its toll among the workers.
Hearst wants selective immigration and deportation of “undesirable” aliens, etc. Yes, Hearst is longing for the “good old past”, for the docile American born worker, who was satisfied with a “full dinner pail”. The Hearst program only shows some of the many contradictions of the middle class. In resisting the encroachments of the big capitalists they make a gesture toward the workers. In fear of the militancy of the working class, they support the most reactionary measures. Between these two great classes, the workers and the capitalists, the middle class is fighting for its life.
The stronger the pressure from either side the greater the contradiction in their camp. The Hearst program is aiming both ways, but ends, – as all centre forces must end – by helping the strongest forces in the struggle; and since capitalism and imperialism is at present on the offensive, the independent middle class action, in its own special way, works against the proletariat.
 







The National Committee of the Communist League of America (Opposition), by direction of the National Conference, appointed a commission to assemble material on the Negro question in America and to open a discussion In the League. The following article by comrade Oehler, a member of the commission, is a contribution to the discussion and presents his personal views. – Ed.





In modern Europe, where capitalism has long ago had its decisive battles with feudalism, there still linger remnants of the past, feudal carry-overs complicating the solution of the proletariat’s problems. This complication does not confront the workers of America, but in its place we have a variety of more conflicting inheritances. One of these was the carry-over of chattel slavery, a more backward system which gained supremacy over attempted feudalist inroads in new America by its economic advantages in the south for large scale agriculture production. The race form of chattel slavery in America gave impetus to this development.
The period when economic systems were gaining a foothold in new America cannot be separated from the class struggles in Europe at that time. The discovery of America which gave the feudal kingdoms greater land rights only accelerated the internal contradictions between the feudal land property relations and the developing bourgeois property relations. The commercial system of Europe was on the upgrade and the race for America reflected this. The discovery of America accelerated bourgeois development in Europe and logically expressed its growth in the colonies.
In Europe, feudalism ruled by the monopoly of land through the feudal estates and the Catholic church and by hindering the developing handicraft system, keeping it part of the feudal hand-tool production. Free land in America played havoc with feudal relations, not just because there was free land, but primarily because with this free land developed the bourgeois property relations. Bourgeois relations are made difficult by free land, but the presence of large tracts of usable free land in a new country smashes all feudal attempts at stability when capitalism moves in at the same time.
 
The Problem of Labor Power
Labor power and its control was the burning problem of the rulers of the colonies, not only its scarcity but also its control once obtained. Wage workers would soon disappear as free farmers, hunters and trappers. The white slaves and indentured slaves from Europe enabled the merchant and commercial classes to retain a sufficient supply of cheap labor power, but this could only be kept up by a constant influx from Europe. The land to the west was an escape for this labor supply. At the same time, however, this resulted in developing bourgeois agriculture relations in the northern part of the colonies.
In Europe, where capitalism was already at work appropriating those who had escaped feudalism through the handicraft system or by free peasant farming, and turning them into an army of propertyless wage slaves, there was no further escape. Either work as wage slaves, starve to death, or be killed or Imprisoned as beggars and thieves – these were the alternatives. In America the escape to the west was still open. But this “escape” laid the basis for the further development and strengthening of bourgeois domination in America.
In the south conditions were different. The kinds of crops and the climatic conditions called for a different form. The crops demanded large scale agriculture production, and, capitalist agriculture relations were yet in their infancy. Feudalism could answer this request but, it could not furnish Serfs tied to the land and accustomed to the hot climate, when livelihood could be obtained by hunting and fishing, and trapping and free land for farming. The only suitable alternative, that rising bourgeois relations could tolerate was chattel slavery; bringing in large scale agriculture production, labor power bound in slavery, suitable for the climate. It was proven that the Indian could not serve this purpose. The white man from Europe had too easy an escape, even if it were possible to brand him as a chattel slave. The Negro race answered the need. Indentured slavery was the closest form to chattel slavery possible for the white man of Europe. It sufficed for the recruitment of a supply of labor in the north, but was not suitable for cotton and tobacco production in the south.
The traffic in Negro slaves was just as profitable as the traffic in indentured slaves. The chattel slave was more profitable for the south under the conditions. But in the latter period of Slavery in America the bourgeois relation had far outstripped the other forces and had shown that the wage slave was by far the most profitable for the master class. The conflict of these two antagonistic systems reached its climax in the Civil War. The forceful expropriation of the chattel masters’ property in the form of the slaves put an end to the most dangerous internal enemy of the bourgeois system. However, this did not remove all the obstacles and give a free hand for capitalist penetration. The carry-over was as heavy as a mountain, hindering all speedy solutions.
The expropriation of the chattel masters of their property in the slaves, opened up new avenues for capitalist development and new markets for penetration. The dictatorship which the capitalists set up in the south after the Civil War soon reduced the chattel masters to submission to the new rulers of America. In fact, the dictatorship was becoming a boomerang. The former slave was taking his liberty seriously in an increasing degree. The exploiters of the wage slaves were not long in learning they had a hundred times more in common with the former chattel masters than with the former slaves. The freedom taken by the slaves had to be checked; the dictatorship against the chattel masters was modified when their resistance was broken, when they came to terms – the terms of the northern capitalists. From them on the capitalist supremacy took on a form of democracy for the white rulers of the south, and a new form of dictatorship against the Negro masses who were driven into worse slavery than before.
 
The New Role of the Negro
The freeing of the Negro from chattel slavery opened the door to a tremendous supply of cheap labor for the American capitalist. In fact the supply was too great for developing capitalism to absorb. However, it remained in reserve, ever ready to be used as expansion would warrant. Although capitalist development in America was fairly fast, the influx of European wage slaves, already trained, kept in check the rapid transformation of former chattel slaves into wage slaves. The slaves’ “freedom” turned out to be a bourgeois joke. The former slave found himself, free from his former master’s obligation to feed, clothe and shelter him, and keep him well as property, but not free from the economic exploitation and political domination of the capitalists and plantation owners. Left “free”, without economic means for a livelihood (land and tools), the Negro was free to starve to death, to submit to his former master in worse economic subjection than before, or to become a wage slave, providing he could find an employer. The “free” Negro, without land or tools, had only one road to travel as a class and race – to submit to the new forms of exploitation, since conditions were not ripe for a successful revolution to free themselves from their white masters and obtain the land and tools of production for themselves. As a race they adjusted themselves to the new condition – unassimilated as wage slave; not held as chattel slaves; reflecting the old and looking at the new, but representing neither. They started the process by eking out an existence on the land and as servants of the white rulers; part slave, part serf and part wage slave.
At the time of the transformation only the Marxists realized the historic significance of the “freeing” of the chattel slaves. The history of American labor cannot be written properly unless this current is traced back and properly connected with the development of the white and negro proletariat and their allies in the coming revolution.
Westward expansion, internal northern American development and colonial expansion could tolerate concessions to the white rulers of the south in return for their political support as plantation owners. Rule the Negroes in your own state as you like so long as you support your political hegemony, said the northern capitalist; and besides you can make more profits by your support than by resistance. And just as the freedom of the American revolution amounted to so many words and pieces of paper for the workers and farmers, so much did the freedom of the Civil War amount to for the Negro masses.
(To be continued)
 



After a decade of existence as an expelled group from the Communist party, the Proletarian party is now proceeding through a period of internal struggle and split. The element that made up the P.P. pivoted around a section of the socialist party of Michigan as part of the Left wing majority expelled by the Socialist Executive Committee minority. And now the P.P. is repeating the process on a smaller scale with the Keracher minority controlling the apparatus, expelling the majority. All the Bureaucrat methods of the socialists or Stalinites are used by Keracher and Co.
This party, after a decade of existence as a sect devoting its time to theory – theory that now proves to the majority of its own members to be void of living Marxism, can only exist as a counterpart to bookshelf “activity”. The deep world crisis closed in from all sides on this placid condition causing internal motion that broke through the isolation. The first convention in Detroit was a replica of the Stalinist methods of proceeding over the disputed questions: on the analysis of the crisis, the trade union question, immediate demands, unemployment, etc. The revolt from this position of “theory” reacted to its opposite of “mass work,” in a hope of breathing new life into the P.P. The P.P. Opposition comes from a party of inactivity. While we were a minority expelled by the bureaucrats who did not allow our position to reach the party. The P.P. Opposition now constitute the majority of this party. This explains to an extent the reason they swing to “mass activity” and their accusations that the Left Opposition are too “theoretical and too much concerned with the Russian issue” but this does not justify or give them a Marxian base for their action – quite the contrary.
The split in the P.P. is national with the Left, through expulsions and withdrawals, holding the majority over six units and contacts throughout the country. The base of the Left is in the head quarters city and here it faces the great est internal contradictions as well as the greatest possibilities. They have an open forum two blocks from the P.P headquarters with a weekly attendance of over 200 while the P.P. has declined radically. Before the P.P. Opposition could organize itself nationally, Cleveland and New York had moved into the official Communist party. The Chicago P.P. Opposition can say this shows weakness on their part and dismiss it at that but facts prove it only reflects the weakness of the national center of the P.P. Opposition and disintegration will claim the rest unless drastic steps are taken at once to correct their international perspective.
Since the party fastly chopped off part of Cleveland and New York we should ask, where do we catalog the P.P. Opposition among the Communist currents? It cannot be cataloged with the Left Opposition, the Ultra Left nor the Right wing currents this they themselves admit. Neither can facts characterize them as an independent current of Communism, nor as the Marxian group in America. The P.P. Opposition itself is the best denial of this. The P.P. has tactical differences but no theoretical differences with the C.I. and always abstractly endorses the C.I. and all its policies. This shows, generally speaking, that they are a sectarian grouplet of the official Communist parry and concretely speaking a right-center sectarian grouplet supporting Stalinism. Stalin’s socialism in one country has its counterpart in the P.P.’s National Communism.
On the one hand, the expulsion of the Left Opposition from the C.I. was the most detrimental to the world revolution and the Soviet Union, on the other hand we can say the struggle within the P.P. and its majority under the influence of the P.P. Opposition is healthy and a step forward for American Communism. Now adrift, the P.P. Opposition has the key to the problem and will determine if they proceed forward or backward. Where are they today and what are they heading for?
The P.P. Opposition is not a homogeneous grouplet by any means. The action of Cleveland and New York already throws light upon the process of contradictions they brought out of the party with them and have not yet outgrown – or contradictions that may kill them as a grouplet, depending upon what their most advanced force does in the next several weeks. To join Centrism was no step forward, it was only a jump from the tail to the body, unless they go into the party with the intention of correcting the revisionist position. Another section of the grouplet under Bereiter’s influence have accepted the Grossman theory as the latest in Marxism. The Scandinavian grouplet and some American elements that dropped out of the P.P. before and others that were expelled make up some healthy element that would be an asset to the American Communist movement. To go forward the P.P. Opposition must answer the question of an International program, a question still unanswered in their group. It may be much nicer for some to have their own “play house” and play the game according to their own rules than to be a faction of the Communist International as the Left Opposition and take all the dirt and slander that goes with it. However, there is no choice for a Marxian, we do not make history out of the whole cloth, neither do we make a party out of the whole cloth that will carry through the successful proletarian revolution in the United States, but in order to build a party to accomplish our task in America we must have above all – a correct international program to be rounded out with revolutionary strategy and tactics for the peculiarities of America.
 



In recent weeks the world has been enriched by two “theoretical works” of Stalin. There are two articles of the “Master” published in the Russian party press, dealing with questions of party history. One of them, which has appeared in the foreign official Communist press, deals with Lenin’s attitude towards the pre-war Social Democratic Party of Germany and is a polemic against the article of Slutzky, a young Marxist historian. We have no room here to go into the material content of this polemic at the present moment, if only for the simple reason that we do not know the work of Slutzky. Here we call attention to two things. With unexcellable grossness and brutality, Stalin launches into poor Slutzky who dared, on the basis of documents, to consider possible an overestimation on Lenin’s part of the S.P.G. Centrists (Kautskyans). This thought of Slutzky’s is called by Stalin, who demagogically reduces the polemic to this question: Was Lenin a Bolshevik? Yes or no? Is there to be any doubt about Lenin’s Bolshevism? The Bolshevism of Lenin is an “axiom” for Stalin, a dogma, just as the sanctity of some Mary is a dogma for the church. There is nothing to doubt about this, nothing is to be looked into concerning it, nothing is to be discussed: it must simply be believed.
It is clear that such a way of putting a question, for people whose every second word is “dialectics”, is stupid and vulgar. Lenin was not a Bolshevik from his first days, while he still lay in his cradle. He developed himself in the course of all his revolutionary activity to the position of a Bolshevik, lie was not “infallible”, like Stalin and other priests and holy men, Cut made mistakes, acknowledged his mistakes openly in order to rectify them. It is curious that Stalin, wherever he speaks of the “infallibility”, of the absolute “dogmatic” Bolshevism of Lenin, adds in parentheses “(the Bolsheviks)”. This creates the appearance as though all the Bolsheviks were always at one with Lenin in all questions – we shall show below that this is wrong – and as though every Bolshevik just because he was a Bolshevik, because it lies in the very essence of Bolshevik was – a Lenin. And just as little as one may entertain doubts about Lenin’s Bolshevism or discuss the question, so is one prohibited to doubt the Bolshevism of the “only” Bolsheviks, the Stalinists, or even discuss it, least of all concerning the Bolshevism of Stalin – the Lenin on a higher level – who conceals his hollowness behind a canonized, “embalmed” Lenin. Out with it! this doubting! These hypocritical, mendacious, priestly, Jesuitical morals, which hit Marxism-Leninism in the face with a blackjack, are a phenomenon worthy of the degenerated Comintern, which every Communist will spurn.
“Scoundrelly”, “trivial”, “degenerated” in the words of Stalin, are both the article and its author, Slutzky, because the article is supposed to be “semi-Trotskyist” and its author a disciple of Trotsky. And with this we come to the reason why Stalin’s article was written. Surely not out of scientific eagerness to secure historical truth, “I believe that rotten liberalism, which at the present moment enjoys a certain vogue among a section of the Bolsheviks (the editorial board which also gets its share, together with Slutzky), has pushed them along this path Some Bolsheviks are of the opinion that Trotskyism is a faction of Communism, a mistaken one, it is true, committing no few blunders, even anti-Sovietist for that matter, but nevertheless a faction of Communism. Thence a certain liberalism towards the Trotskyists and those thinking like them.” There’s the nigger in the woodpile. “Trotskyism” is gaining an influence in Russia among the party members. Stalin is becoming frightened. He fears the “Trotskyist” truth. He is therefore giving the signal to the G.P.U. by articles and commands for a new reinforced annihilation campaign against the Left Opposition.
The second Stalin article is concerned with party history of the February revolution and the arrival of Lenin in Petrograd, and with Yaroslavsky. This period is exceptionally painful for Stalin himself and it is highly important that all the party comrades learn the “historical truth” about this affair.
Who would have believed it? And yet it is a fact! The Soviet journals accuse Yaroslavsky openly of having favored the smuggling of Trotsky’s conceptions on the history of the Bolshevik party at the beginning of the February revolution into the books on party history of which he is in charge.
As everybody knows now (after the revelations of comrade Trotsky) the Bolshevik party at the beginning of the February revolution (before the arrival of Lenin) conducted, under the leadership of Stalin and Kamenev, a policy of confidence in the provisional government and supported a bloc with Tseretelli in the Soviets. Arriving in Petrograd, Lenin wrote his “April theses” which gave the party a completely different orientation, an orientation towards the winning of the revolutionary masses with a view towards the assumption of power by armed insurrection. For Lenin it was a question of “forgetting the reminiscences of the past”, not to be bound by the old formula, outstripped by events, of the “democratic dictatorship of the workers and peasants”, but to steer a course resolutely towards the dictatorship of the proletariat. That is what Trotsky called the re-armament of the party. This historical fact is undeniable and all the eye-witnesses of the February revolution, who left memoirs of the early moments of the revolution, establish the vulgar opportunism and social patriotism of the party under the leadership of Stalin-Kamenev. Of all these memoirs, those of Schlapnikov, who was in the leading center of the party from the very first days of the revolution in Petrograd, are the most convincing and authoritative. The memoirs of Schlapnikov constitute an invaluable document for any conscientious historian who wants to present a true picture of the role of the party in this period of February 27 up to April 3, 1917 (old style), that is, up to the arrival of Lenin in Petrograd.
That is just what the young Marxian historians, Slutzky and Volossevitch, did in their historical works. They based themselves upon the evidence of Schlapnikov and spoke of a “re-armament of the party” in April 1917. Another Marxian historian spoke of it right in the party history which appears under the exalted supervision of Yaroslavsky. This is where Yaroslavsky’s sins begin. How did he let it pass? Has he not succumbed ‘himself to Trotskyism? The whole Soviet press, from the Izvestia to the Krasnaia Gazetta is aroused by this scandal. Yaroslavsky is openly attacked and the demand is made that in the “next edition of the Party history, sections calumniating the party be expunged.” [1] Stalin himself published his article in the Bolshevik in which he “reconstructs” the historical truth after his own manner.
The all-powerful apparatus of Stalin fears nothing so much as the historical truth. That is why it will lightly obey any commands of the Master and “expunge” all onerous sections from the history. But like all other historical falsifications, this one too will not succeed in concealing the mistakes and the crimes of the “organizer of defeats”.

Note by ETOL
1. In the printed version this reads “expanded”, which doesn’t make sense in this context.
 



The confusion existing in the ranks of the Communist movement on the Agrarian question cannot be settled until we trace it to the source and at the same time present the determining factors of American agriculture. The agrarian question in America cannot be separated from the establishment of the Third International, after the successful Russian revolution and the establishment of the Soviet Power. Up to that time, the Second International had a bundle of confused ideas on the agrarian and colonial questions on the problem of the relationship between town and country. In fact, the Second International revised Marxism on this question, leaving the peasantry and colonies as open stamping grounds for imperialist robbery.
Marx and Engels present a clear analysis of this question in their writings and Lenin and Trotsky (Trotsky, Our Revolution, 1905) brought this question down to practical working class politics in the 1905 period, so successfully carried out in the 1917 revolution by the Marxists. Through the Third International this material and these lessons have become the property of the whole class throughout the world, expressed by their vanguard. However, since the establishment of the Stalin regime and the gradual crowding to the background of the Marxian ideas, we have witnessed a revival of revisionism on this question. This time, from a different angle than that of the Second International.
This revisionism takes on two different forms, one in the colonial countries, and another in the advanced countries. In turn, the problem as a whole flows from the theory of socialism in one country. In the colonial countries, Stalinism poses the question of the 1905 revolution and not that of October 1917 and comes to the conclusion of the “democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry.” Its concrete expressions have been manifold, with outstanding points of revision such as: the four-class-party in China, Workers and Peasants blocks, Peasant International etc. In the advanced capitalist countries and particularly in America its opposite expression is manifested. The problem of the farmers and the agrarian crisis is not understood and Centrism, in refusing to pose this question by showing the proper relation of town and country, has left the door wide open for blunders. They have left unanswered the whole question of: What kind of a revolution? What will it look like? (Lenin and Trotsky answered this for Russia). We cannot be satisfied with merely saying: Soviets and dictatorship of the proletariat. What will the Soviets be like, when we take power, in comparison to the Soviets established by the first workers’ class rule and in a backward country with the majority of peasants? In place of these answers we have revisionism for the advanced countries expressing itself as: The “peoples’ revolution”, Workers and Farmers parties and the Workers and Farmers Government; Self determination for the American Negro and the Anti-Imperialist League, etc.
One question we must settle and that will throw considerable light upon the problem for the advanced capitalist countries is the question of American agricultural conditions today. Once we lay down a Marxian analysis on this question we can more readily come to a proper understanding of the question. The problem for colonial countries will not be taken up here. We will confine ourself to advanced America.
 
Agrarian Development under Capitalism
A proper elevation of the problem calls for an understanding of its historical development and relation. Under pre-capitalist conditions agriculture and manufacturing were established as a unity with manufacturing subordinated to agriculture (manufacturing used in the obsolete sense – hand-tool production), “Domestic handicraft and manufacturing labor, as side issues to agriculture, which forms the basis, is the prerequisite of that mode of production upon which natural economy rests, in European antiquity and in Middle Ages as well as in the Indian commune of the present day, in which the traditional organization has not yet been destroyed. The capitalist mode of production completely dissolves this connection”. (Marx: Capital, Vol. 3, page 913) The capitalist mode of production destroys this unity of agriculture and manufacturing and by the concentration of the means of production and their transformation into capital they are able to expropriate the direct producers and change them into wage workers. These wage workers are first concentrated in the developing cities and later, with the development of capitalism, reach out and invade the countryside as agricultural workers almost to the degree that capitalist production subordinate agriculture and molds it to its own liking. “The advent of capital as an independent and leading power in agriculture does not take place generally all at once, but gradually and separately in various lines of production. It seizes first not agriculture proper, but such lines of production as cattle raising, especially sheep raising, whose principle product, wool, offers a steady surplus of the market price over the price of production during rising industry, and this is not balanced until later. This was the case in England during the 16th Century.” Marx: Capital, Vol. 3, page 931) In the first stage of production, its forces work destructively against the pre-capitalist condition of the unity of agriculture and manufacturing. But once it has smashed this relationship, it starts the process of unifying capitalist industry and capitalist agriculture on a new plane. Developed capitalism lays the base for the transformation of agriculture into a modern industry. In the negative sense this is already accomplished in advanced America, but in the positive sense it is not, and will not be until after the seizure of power by the proletariat and the establishment of the socialist mode of production.
 
The Agrarian Crisis
What is the relationship between agriculture and industry in America and what is the meaning of the agrarian crisis? The agrarian crisis seems to be a permanent feature of American capitalism, and logically so, because it is by the phenomena of the concentration of capital (and land capital is no exception) that American capitalism is further transforming American agriculture to its own liking. The centralization carries with it a greater diversification of the division of social labor, with different sections specializing in different foodstuffs, even through diversified uses of the soil, in order to rotate crops for the greatest exploitation of the capital invested.
“It is the nature of the capitalist mode of production to reduce the agricultural population continually as compared to the non-agricultural, because in industry, (strictly speaking) the increase of the constant capital compared to the variable capital goes hand in hand with an absolute increase, though relative decrease, of the variable capital: whereas in agriculture the variable capital required for the exploitation of a certain piece of land is decreased absolutely and cannot increase unless new land is taken into cultivation, which implies a still greater previous growth of the non-agricultural population.” (Vol. 3, page 747)
The expropriation of the peasantry and handicraft labor as primitive accumulation of capital takes on new forms in advanced capitalism with the constant shift of the rural to the urban population and the debt-and-mortgage-ridden farmers ever on the increase, in the last analysis resulting in driving them off the land. And if they return, to return as wage laborers or tenants in varied forms.
 
Effects of the Land Crisis
In other words, “healthy” capitalism, carrying out the capitalist process of centralization, concentration and accumulation, creating laws the capitalists cannot control are doing nothing more nor less than is necessary for a capitalist system. Where the “logical” see the weakening of its agricultural base and point there to the “agrarian revolution” In an advanced country or to a “Workers and Farmers Government”, the fact remains that the opposite is true and the weak spot in this process manifests itself in another sphere of capitalist production. In fact, the further tearing down of outlived agricultural relations and the molding of them to capitalist liking is necessary to strengthen this “industry” that has always lagged behind the general development of industrial capitalism. The agrarian crisis in advanced countries creates friction and steam to be let off. But its weakening effect upon capitalism is expressed primarily in the industrial base of advanced countries. It transforms a decisive section of the farmer class into agricultural workers. It shifts the dead weight of the country to the top heavy weight of the city under capitalism, swelling the proletariat from two angles. It further socializes the mode of production and with it, the contradiction of accumulation and capitalist appropriation. It disorganizes the whole world division of labor, shaking up not only the internal relations between agriculture and industry but also the external relations between colonial and imperialist countries, in fact all of the contradictions of town and country as such.
The American farmer, since the war, has overproduction of foodstuffs and raw-material in every line but cannot see his own overproduction, and only points to the tremendous overproduction of the colonial regions, a necessary development and encouragement of industry under imperialism – resulting in the creation a whirlwind pressure from all sides.
“It is precisely the rapidly growing cultivation of such prairie or steppe districts which of late turns the renowned statement of Malthus, that the population ‘presses upon the means of subsistence’, into ridicule, and has created the reverse of it in the complaint of the agrarians, who wail that agriculture, and with it Germany, will be ruined unless the means of subsistence which are pressing upon the population are kept out by force. The cultivation of these steppes, prairies, pampas, llanos, etc., is only in its beginnings; its revolutionary effect on European agriculture will, therefore, make’ itself felt later on even more than hitherto.” (Engels, Vol. 3, page 785)
(To be continued)
 



The Russian Revolution of October 1917 can only be written adequately when the role of Lenin and Trotsky are properly placed. Written history at the time of this event elevated the role of Lenin and Trotsky to its proper height in relation to the 1917 prelude of the world revolution. The attempts of Stalintern to revamp this part of history, and to delete Trotsky’s role from the pages and replace instead – Stalin, is of no avail. The source of material within our party and throughout the world proletarian camp is so voluminous for this research that Stalin’s, attempt to erase Trotsky’s role only complicates matter for Centrism.
But the 1905 Revolution leaves us no such source of material, as to the position of Lenin and Trotsky. Therefore, the haters of Marxism and Internationalism fall back to this period and slur the position of Trotsky. Fortunately though we have the material and writings of Lenin and Trotsky of this period, and since the party leadership only lies about Trotsky’s position it is necessary to constantly bring this material forward, so that the revolutionist and Marxist can decide the facts for himself, as to the position of Lenin and Trotsky.
 
On the February Revolution
Stalinism not only endeavors to misrepresent Trotsky’s position in 1905 but also attempts to falsify the role of Lenin, for the purpose of covering up the blunders of the present epigones in the 1917 period. After Stalin “corrected” history, one of the lesser lights followed up in the Daily Worker with an article on The Historical Experiences of Bolshevism and the International Proletariat. One of the many blunders of the article reads as follows: “The Lessons of the year of 1905 enabled Lenin to draw up that strategic general plan which led the proletariat to victory first in February and afterwards in October 1917.” This thought conveys the idea that long before the arrival of Lenin in Russia and long before his famous April thesis, which amounts to the rearming of the party, Stalin and his like, who were in Russia, were carrying out a correct Bolshevik line. In other words, Lenin’s arrival and Lenin’s April thesis did not correct anything, “the proletariat” were led “to victory first in February” (?). In trying to bury Lenin’s April thesis to cover their blunders the February period the Stalinists create the source of additional blunders.
In the introduction to Lenin’s pamphlet of articles on the Revolution of 1905 the epigones rehash history again. In one place this introduction says,
“On the other hand, Trotsky, who had never had a definite conception of the nature of the bourgeois revolution of 1905, for this reason reached a point, in his theory of ‘permanent revolution’ when he denies the possibility of the revolutionary alliance between proletariat and peasantry and proclaimed a ‘workers’ government’ to be the immediate aim of the revolutionary uprising. And to this he ‘logically’ attached the conception that ‘without direct and governmental aid from the European proletariat the working class of Russia could not maintain it self in power’.” (Our Revolution, page 278 Russian)
 
Trotsky and the Peasantry
Can you say these “Communists” misquote Trotsky’s position in 1905 because they do not know of his position? No. They quote the above from his book, Our Revolution and in that book is sufficient evidence for any class-conscious worker to prove the correct position of Trotsky in 1905. These epigones are quoting Trotsky as the social democrats quoted Marx and Engels.
Trotsky in 1905 said the workers of Russia needed aid from Europe, otherwise they could not maintain themselves – and according to Stalinism this was wrong in 1905. But Lenin, not in 1905 but even ni 1918, said the following: “This is a lesson because the absolute truth is that without a revolution in Germany we will perish.” (Vol. 15, page 132, Russian edition) And, Lenin again, “Our backwardness has thrust us forward and we will perish if we will not be able to hold out until we meet with the mighty support of the insurrectionary workers of the other countries.” (Vol. 15, page 187) What Lenin laid down on this subject in 1918 was equally, if not more so, true in 1905.
Did Trotsky “deny the possibility” of the “revolutionary alliance between the proletariat and peasantry”, in the 1905 period, as is claimed? Trotsky, in 1905 said, “It is self-understood that the proletariat, as in its time the bourgeoisie fulfills its mission, supported upon the peasantry and petit-bourgeoisie. The proletariat leads the village, draws it into the movement, interests it in the success of its plans. The proletariat, however, absolutely remains the leader. This is not the dictatorship of the peasantry and proletariat, but the dictatorship of the proletariat supported by the peasantry.” (1905, page 281) Many more equally important passages can be quoted to prove that Trotsky’s understanding of the peasant problem in 1905 was equal to any and far superior to the epigones of today who lived at that time. Many such quotations can be had in Our Revolution, translated by Olgin, or in Trotsky’s pamphlet on the Permanent Revolution in which he quotes from his works of 1905.
The rank and file Communist members repeat these slanders against Trotsky because they do not know the truth and repeat what they are told. But for the bureaucrats, it is not a matter of ignorance – it is a matter of plain lies, of revisionism; just as the social democrats skillfully quoted Marx and Engels on the state, giving the rank and file a wrong picture. Let me quote just once more from 1905, page 267–68:
“Our revolution, which is a bourgeois revolution according to the immediate tasks it grew out of, knows, as a consequence of the extreme class differences of the industrial population, of no bourgeois class which could place itself at the head of the popular masses by combining its social weight and political experience with revolutionary energy. The suppressed worker and peasant masses, left to their own resources, must take it upon themselves to create, in the hard school of implacable conflict and cruel defeat, the necessary political and organizational preconditions for their triumph. No other road is open to them.”
Does this look as if Trotsky did not understand the relation of the proletariat and peasantry in 1905? Does this look as if Trotsky did not understand the nature of the bourgeois revolution of 1905? Let the revisionists talk. They have their day as the leaders of the Second International had theirs. We, the Marxists, are sure of victory. Material facts and Marxian truths are greater than all the lies of the epigones.
 
Lenin on Colonial Revolution
In the Daily Worker article, quoted above, they say, “The task of organizing the united front of all the exploited and oppressed under the leadership of the proletariat was raised by Lenin to the level of the world problem of the revolutionary alliance of proletariat of the advanced countries with the enslaved peoples of the colonies and semi-colonial countries.” This is a jumble and is not the position of Lenin. As Trotsky says, “Lenin thus raised the national liberation movement, the colonial insurrection and wars of the oppressed nations to the level of the bourgeois democratic revolutions, particularly in the period prior to the Russian revolution of 1905. But Lenin did not at all rank the national liberation wars above the bourgeois revolution as this is now done by Bukharin who has turned an angle of 180 degree.” (Criticism of the Draft Program) And to this day the revisionist rank this movement above the bourgeois democratic revolution.
All of this revamping of history in relation to the 1905 revolution is necessary on the revisionist part, first to smash the Marxian position of Trotsky and second, to enable them to build a case for the use of the slogan of the democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry, as it appears in the Sixth World Congress Program. In order to do this, they must not only throw overboard all the facts of Trotsky’s position but with it the position of Lenin on this subject. This hypothetical slogan raised in 1905 was discarded events concretized the perspective through the 1917 revolution. It was discarded by Lenin, but not by the epigones although he criticized them on this very point in April 1917.
 
The “Democratic Dictatorship”
The introduction to Lenin’s valuable book on 1905 also says, “Because of this circumstance, the 1905 revolution may be called the dress rehearsal not only of October 1917, but of the World October.” Because of the colonial conditions of China and India, etc. In other words, 1905 is the dress rehearsal for the backward countries in revolutions and 1917 is the dress rehearsal for the industrially developed countries.
In answer to this, we can show that 1917 has been the dress rehearsal not only for the revolutions of industrial Europe, but also for the Chinese revolution of 1925–27. But to this day the Stalinites and Right wingers have not recognized this historic fact. There can be no other than a dictatorship of the proletariat or a dictatorship of the capitalist in content. The form will vary but the form of the proletarian dictatorship in backward countries will not be a “democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and peasants.” On the contrary, the more backward the country, the weaker the country is economically, the more open will our dictatorship with the peasant alliance have to be in order to hold power with a minority of the proletariat and here we have the revolution in countries with the majority of the proletariat, the more proletarian democracy can we have in the early years of our role.
 



The recent revolt in upper Llobregat, in Callent Suvia, Berga, Figolo and Cardoner had completely paralyzed the power of the exploiters for several days. The red flag of the workers waved over the city hall in several of the towns. All of the currents of the Spanish revolutionary movement again tested their theories in practice. The party press in America, which had ignored the Spanish revolution for months and months, all of a sudden broadcast the news that they had established Soviets in several towns in Spain. And among many other things, they said the the Left Opposition was playing a counter-revolutionary role in the struggle. But a few days passed, and even the blind could see that, sad to say, the Communist party was not leading the revolts. Nothing more is said or heard in the Party press or its meetings about Spain, yet the struggle has not stopped, in spite of the fact the Centrist press is silent now, as they were in the previous months.
The leadership of the National Confederation of Labor again showed its hand in stemming the tide rather than flaming the revolt. The vanguard action of the American Stalinites in proclaiming leadership of the struggles was followed by the tail-endism of the Spanish Stalinites in the struggle. The socialist and anarchist role adds new weight to their role of betrayals, all of which is summed up in a recent document of the Spanish Left Opposition published in The Militant, Feb. 27.
But since this document, we have new material on the Anarchists that further confirms the position of the Left Opposition on the role of the Anarchists in the Spanish revolution. The Industrial Worker of March 8 carried an article by de Guzman, from the La Tierra, translated by M. Olay. This article proves the anarchists have learned nothing since their master, Bakunin, “captured power” in Lyons, France in 1870.
In Spain, “Figols was the first town to revolt and the last to be entered by troops. The town was for five days, from Monday to Saturday, living a regime of libertarian communism.” Libertarian communism? And we ask, what may libertarian communism be? We are informed that, “Anarchism has been a reality for a week. And at no place or time were there killings, robberies, and excesses which according to the detractors of anarchism are their very essence.” These kind souls, these humanitarians, the subjective individuals are more concerned with the bourgeois opinion of them, than they are with the interest of the workers. What of it, if the bourgeois slander revolutionists, call them thieves, murderers, robbers and enemies of society? Can you expect anything else from the exploiters and their flunkies? Have exploiters ever called the exploited nice names when the slave class desire to throw off the burden of exploitation? If the exploiters confine their opposition to “nasty names” we would have no trouble in taking power, but sad to say, this slander is only a slight breeze of the hurricane they let loose on us ever chance we give them. The individualism of the anarchists is more concerned about their subjective feelings than about the interest of the workers.
The anarchists, to make sure the bourgeois learn how Christlike or Ghandi-like anarchism is – “generous and idealist spirits that they were – once triumphant with the social revolution proclaimed, did not think of squaring accounts; they did not want to shed blood, they did not even bother to humiliate them. They seized all arms to prevent the enemy from attacking them; they posted guards to avoid being surprised, and leaving everybody in absolute freedom they continued working the same as before, without thinking for a moment that the triumph of the social revolution would release them from digging coal from the entrails of the earth.” More confusion in fewer words is very difficult to write. They “did not think of squaring accounts”. They disarmed them and left everybody, “in absolute freedom”. Without expropriating and imprisoning the main forces of the enemy class and finishing those who resist, without establishing a Red Guard and a dictatorship of the proletariat, they left the door wide open for the exploiters to return, to reorganize and to annihilate them. Their concept is to – decree the state out of existence; to simply proclaim the social revolution, – but reality is not so simple. You can proclaim the social revolution and raise the red flag today and tomorrow find white terror at its heights unless adequate steps are taken to follow up the first victory and to smash the enemy, to smash their state and all means of exploitation that goes with it and establish a workers’ dictatorship.
These “generous and idealist spirits” who established “libertarian communism” say, “In every place the Civil Guards, sheltered in their barracks, where they take refuge; the bourgeoisie, locked up in their homes, are left alone. The revolution had triumphed and the revolutionists cannot imitate their former oppressors, by forcing them and the others to share their ideas.” This is nothing less than a betrayal of the workers. The anarchists do not know the elementary difference between a successful social revolution and a successful Battle in a revolution, which, if not immediately followed up – will result in defeat. They do not know the elementary difference between the bourgeoisie as the ruling power. The former exploiters, “are left alone” by the anarchist leaders and the enemy reorganizes its forces after the first wave of revolt and comes back in the form of bourgeois terror, that should by all means cause us to congratulate and honor the “generous and idealist spirits”, the anarchists of Spain! The anarchists in Lyons in 1870 decreed the state out of existence and established a “libertarian communism” but before 24 hours had passed, the state, in the form of the National guards, returned and dispersed the rebels. And once again history repeats itself, only this time as a farce.
They paid dearly for their “generous and idealist spirit”, by “idealists who were fighting to make a better world”. The same article in La Tierra tell us: “Of the rebellion there only remains, apparently, the memory of a handful of men who, in jails and prison boats, dream that the desired triumph will come in the near future”. Yes, it will only be a dream if the same strategy is repeated, a dream for some but more bloodshed and misery for the workers. In “avoiding” bloodshed they only bring on more bloodshed and prolonged misery and leave the door open for counterrevolution to give the workers a blood bath.
The anarchist leaders have learned nothing from these events but the workers are far from being fools, as the bourgeoisie claims. They have learned by these revolts. Our document from Spain, says in part: “In spite of the incapable leadership and organization of the anarchists, the workers of Cardoner and Llobregat fought with admirable solidarity and discipline and withdrew in perfect strategic order and with a minimum of losses, when they were convinced the movement was defeated. “The most important fact to be recorded in the uprising of Cardoner and Llobergat is the distinct political character. The workers had seized the city halls and hoisted the banner of the proletarian revolution on top of the buildings themselves. That is to say, they had seized political power for themselves. In some places, the anarchist element had proclaimed openly that their aim was the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat. This is a big step forward that the Communists can point to.”
Yes, many worker-followers of anarchism, seeing “libertarian communism” in practice drew the conclusion that they must establish a dictatorship of the proletariat. This is a big step forward.
 



Part 1

Part 2
 



(Continued from last issue)
In America the problem of city and country has taken on new dimensions. The 1930 census reports a 68,954,823 urban population and a 53,820,223 rural population. The majority are urban, the overwhelming majority are proletarian while, in the country where we seized power first, the overwhelming majority were peasants. Rural, in no sense means farmers. For example of the rurals only 30,447,229 make up the farm population. In other words the farm population is only 56% of the rural and only 24.8% of the total population. The bourgeois economist presents the problem as though it is about 50–50 for town and country, for “farmers and city people” and the average worker has accepted this trash. The farm population as 24.8% of the total population are by no means farmers. This means all persons living on farms without regard to occupation.
Taking this 24.8% and seeing what makes it up we find it is further narrowed by analysis. Under occupations, gainfully employed, the census lists (1920 figures – the 1930 figures not available, are even more in our favor) as dairy farmers, farmers and stock raisers; 6,201,261, and for dairy farm, farm and stock, laborers; 3,041,027. This means 6 million farmers and 4 million as agricultural workers. But of, these 6 million farmers we find (1920 figures) 2,454,804 as tenant farmers, 1,461,306 as mortgaged farmers and 2,074,325 as farmers owing their farms. However, I am sure the 1930 figures, when published, will show even less farm owners today.
The big agricultural population in the last analysis boils down considerably, and the farmer as an ally does not lose any of his significance but he does lose much of his specific weight for America. The farm population as 24% of the teal (1920) is composed of about 40% agricultural workers, 25% tenant farmers, 15% mortgaged farmers and 20% farm owners. This does not settle the problem and does not prove that the majority are revolutionary. One knows the majority of the American industrial workers are not revolutionary. However, once we obtain a proper perspective it shows the relation of the workers and farmers in the coming revolution.
This block of agricultural workers on cattle raising and dairy farms are not approached as farmers, but are won as workers. They are not allies, they are ours as a class. The varied forms of cropper dirt farmer and tenant farmer which make up the poor and middle farmer are our allies. As for the owners, yes even some of them will make good allies. As for the capitalist farmer – they are not allies, they are enemies and will be treated as such. We will waste no time in winning them over. Our allies lie in the percentage between the agrarian workers and the capitalist farmers. These must be won. Their relation to the workers in the problem of the American revolution is the most “insignificant” any proletariat in any advanced country has to contend with, maybe with the exception of England. In the Russian revolution, the minority, the proletariat, was the decisive force over the overwhelming majority of peasantry. In America a revolution which will release the energies of the American proletariat, who stand as the vast majority will call forth proletarian energy unknown in the past.
America has developed its wheat belt, corn belt, cotton belt and has its agricultural states and its industrial states, but as its stands today, it is of no value for analysis of class forces in the revolution. The line of demarcation between industrial and. agricultural states is of little value, because the most important industrial states are also the most important agricultural producers, too. Agricultural states as such, only have a meaning when the problem is confined within the states, and we show that the products from agriculture are of greater value than the products from industry, etc. But when one compares the amount and value of the products from agriculture with the agricultural products of the leading industrial states, one finds that the industrial states in many cases are more productive in agricultural products than the agricultural states, and where there is a close margin the industrial states make a good showing for themselves. New York Pennsylvania, Illinois, Ohio and the other important industrial states are also states producing more foodstuffs than the majority of the so-called agricultural states.
The industrial centers where the proletariat, the decisive force of revolution, resides, also has in its immediate vicinity the production of the food supply of first importance for short periods. It is not an easy matter to bottle up a proletariat in an industrial center if power is in their hands, with all the avenues of modern transportation to nearby food supplies. The agricultural worker will do his share and the poor and middle farmer must be won over.
The tremendous grain elevators, meat and food storage plants for the products of the country are controlled by the city and who controls the city controls this supply. American capitalism does not worry about peasant economy holding back on it as do some other capitalist nations with carry overs of natural economy where the rural population can hold without the city. The machine development and its use on American farms in a lesser or greater degree forces the agricultural economy to rest upon the industrial city. The methods of farming, storing, transportation, selling, etc., all bring capitalist agricultural relations under the industrial city to which it is bound and from which American agriculture cannot escape, not retreat, not to mention the financial network that encompasses agriculture and ties it, binds it to the city.
In capitalist countries with feudal carry-overs, with peasant economy still lingering, we have a far more difficult problem. Although at that level, capital has already shown itself to be master of the house, it by no means has a free reign. The peasant economy weighs heavy upon capital and its development, but nevertheless, capital, and in turn the proletarian class is the decisive force in the relationship of the class struggle. What is true in these backward sections,
where the country can eke out an existence even if the city goes to hell, but where in the city cannot continue without the country; is more so true, in developed capitalist countries like America. In fact, however, the problem is turned around. The city needs the country and has safe-guarded this need by a thousand and one ties that bind the country to the city, but the country on the other hand cannot exist without the city, – not in advanced America. Not on the present mode of production. That is only possible by stepping back a stage or two and this is not an overnight step but one which would follow a chaos, when neither capitalist nor proletarian rules.
The very connections of city and countries under developed capitalism give the American proletariat the advantage of the problem of revolution once this is concretely put on the agenda for the seizure of power. The very relation of forces with the overwhelming majority of the population being proletarian and the “farmers” divided into agrarian workers, tenant farmer, mortgaged farmer and capitalist farmer, with a section of the owner-farmer as allies, makes the problem different and in our favor.
The Farmer-Labor Party is reactionary and will only lead the proletariat into the swamp of opportunism, this even Centrism understands now after years of blunders; but the idea of a “Workers and Farmers Government” and the slogan for it that Centrism still peddles, is just as reactionary, and can lead to nothing but national reformism.
The agrarian workers must be won as workers, the middle and poor farmers as allies according to the form of the problem. Negro and white, share cropper, contract farmer, dirt farmer, etc., and the capitalist farmer should not bother us. The agrarian crisis will not let up, even though there will be ebbs and flows, its basic effects will not be remedied through agrarian reforms. For the capitalist system, the remedy is greater concentration and pulling agriculture more into the orbit of capitalist production, putting agriculture more on the basis of an industry of capitalism – but this lets loose dynamite, which has its most deadly explosive, effects not in the country but in the city. For the agrarian worker and our allies, the poor and middle farmers, the remedy is nothing short; of the Proletarian Revolution and the establishment of the dictatorship of the proletariat. This is the means of transforming of the negative base of the agriculture industry into an industry of the socialist mode of production, completing Ihe cycle agriculture has passed through – and opening the door to a new positive cycle of its development.
 



(Continued from last issue)
The needs of the Negro, Mulatto, Asiatic, Mexican and foreign born workers cannot be solved by first taking steps toward democratic demands, as in Russia, and then proceeding to the socialist demands. Only by direct steps to socialist demands, to socialist reorganization can we solve the problems of the American workers. If the proletarian revolution does not move with speed towards socialist demands we will be lost.
The exclusion of a bourgeois stage, no mutter how short, as the first stage of the Proletarian Revolution is made necessary by the dialectics of history. This excludes and condemns the road Stalinism is following in the United States. The party under Centrist leadership advances the following slogans for the United States: “Workers and Farmers Government.”, “Agrarian revolution in the South”, “National liberation of the Negroes in the South,” “Self-determination for the Negroes in the South”, etc. These Stalinist slogans are driving in the direction, not of a proletarian revolution, they are driving in the direction of a bourgeois first stage of the proletarian revolution. National liberation and self-determination for the colonies, etc., is another question entirely.
In backward countries. Stalinism skips over democratic demands and economic needs and sees no need for such preparation in the class struggle toward revolution. But when Stalinism arrives face to face with the revolution in backward countries it does not intend to establish a Dictatorship of the Proletariat, but instead intends to establish a “Democratic Dictatorship of the Proletariat and Peasantry.’’
In advanced capitalist countries Stalinism swings to the other wrong extreme. It skips back to what economic conditions have already surpassed and presents slogans that can only be classed under bourgeois democratic demands and not socialist demands.
We are discussing programmatic slogans, not tactical slogans. In this case, what must, our slogans drive at? Our tactical slogans must coordinate the special grievances of the class and of sections of the class with our programmatic slogans, our goal. The special forms of exploitation and suppression of the Negro, Asiatic, Mexican and foreign-born workers can only be solved by socialist measures in the first stage of the coming revolution – the Proletarian Revolution. The slogans Stalinism presents are not special tactical slogans but programmatic slogans. They lead in the wrong direction.
Once we brush aside the wrong programmatic slogans of Stalinism for the coming American revolution we will be able to proceed to the pressing tactical slogans to coordinate the problems of the Negro race, the other subjected races, as well as other classes who will be our allies.
The Left Opposition must lead the way in formulating the correct tactical and strategical problems for the coming revolution. The first in order is: to correct the wrong programmatic slogans and then follow up with proper tactical slogans leading up to the revolution.
The proletarian revolution in America will establish a dictatorship. What will be the form of the Soviets? It will not be a “Workers and Farmers Government.” It will not be the result of a “People’s Revolution.” In America, the form of the Soviets will right at the beginning be at a higher level than the form of the Soviets established in Russia in 1917. In Russia the overwhelming majority of the people are peasants and in America the overwhelming majority are workers. This reflects the different stages of the two countries in economic development. This lays the basis for different forms of Soviets. The existence of the Soviet Union is another powerful factor favoring the coming revolution in America. Workers’ Councils will be established on a higher plane in America and will usher in a higher type of proletarian democracy at the start. Our Soviets will lay a much stronger foundation for the Dictatorship of the Proletariat in America, much stronger than we had in the first stage of the Soviets in Russia after October. The strength of the class dictatorship lays the basis for the higher class democracy. Class democracy and “democracy” under a classless society are two different things, just as capitalist “democracy” and workers’ democracy are the different expressions of different systems. In order to win the American workers to Communism it is necessary to explain the differences in the two forms of Soviets. Only in this manner can we really clear up the question of content and give a proper answer to the question of our Dictatorship of the Proletariat.
On the continent it may be possible for one of the lesser countries to overthrow its exploiters before we do. Unless we give them support unequalled in the past the new Soviets will not be able to hold out against the American imperialists. This does not mean that the reactionary, non-revolutionary theory must be advanced – that we must not strike for power in these countries – because we cannot hold out. With proper support from the world proletariat and the Soviet Union they can hold out and extend the revolution. The struggle for power always means the struggle against world capitalism at this stage of the class war.
On the other hand, a successful revolution in the United States will carry with it. the continent, extending far down into Latin America. This opens a broad perspective and confirms the theory of the permanent revolution. The revolution in the United States will flow over the continent in revolutionary storms which will wipe out the capitalists and their flunkies. The slogan for the United States – For a “Proletarian Revolution” – leads directly to extension of civil war on the continent and to the slogan of the “All-American Soviet Republic.”
If the Soviet Union can withstand the coming storms, and the Left Opposition must see to it that our fatherland does in spite of the stranglehold Stalinism has on the world revolutionary movement, we can say the world proletariat has before it not only the realization of the Soviet United States of Europe, not only of the All-American Soviet Republic, but also of the World Soviet.
 



The accelerated pace of the decay of capitalism in the present period, regardless of the ebbs and flows, raises more sharply the question of the coming American revolution. Many workers dismiss this question with a sentence or two. It is either around the corner; a general strike will usher it in; or the revolution in America is decades away. Communists cannot leave this question unanswered. We cannot draw a blue print but we can define the general features of the coming revolution, to enable us to work out tactics and strategy leading toward revolution.
In the post-war period it was the duty of the Communists to settle the question of the state because the leaders of the Second International revised the Marxian concept on this fundamental problem. It was necessary to re-examine the state, explain what it is, and tell the workers that our road to power leads through revolution, to the smashing of the capitalist state and to the establishment of Soviets and the Dictatorship of the Proletariat. For the vanguard this is a settled question, especially since the 1917 revolution. Under Lenin and Trotsky this abstraction was brought to life in Russia, but under Stalin the concept of Soviets and of the Dictatorship is kept in the abstract for all other countries.
Unless the Marxists proceed to clothe this abstraction with at least the general outlines of the American form we will be lost on the road between here and power. Up to the present we have not accomplished this task. Due to this shortcoming the Communist party, first under the leadership of the Right wing and now under the leadership of Stalinism has presented tactics and strategy leading in the wrong direction, a direction which will, if continued, prevent us from establishing the dictatorship of the proletariat.
 
American Revolution – When?
It is our task to explain the American form, its peculiarities as well as the relations to the first Soviet Republic, not only from the standpoint of the Dictatorship, but especially from the point of view of the process on the road to power. In this respect we can present variants which are possible and eliminate what is not possible. This will enable us to offset the incorrect, harmful, non-Marxian trend of Centrism today.
At one period in the development of the Marxian current in America, before the 1917 revolution, many “Marxists” were positive the revolution would proceed from the maturing highly developed capitalist countries rather mechanically, in their industrial order. The Russian revolution of 1917 and what followed corrected this non-Marxist theory, but in its place the mechanical materialists, parading as Marxists, have developed the theory that the United States will be the last to have the social revolution, because it is too strong, because it is so highly developed. Marxism gives no grounds for either concept, but some muddle-headed Communists do.
The idea of strong links and weak links of the capitalist chains does not flow mechanically from the idea of highly developed and under-developed capitalist countries. Backward countries are not strong links of the capitalist chain but it is false to think that developed countries are strong links of the capitalist world system. Such a concept does not explain the contradictions in this decay stage of capitalism. Germany as a highly developed capitalist country is the best example to refute such mechanical reasoning.
 
The World Position of U.S. Imperialism
In the present stage the American imperialists play a dominating role in world politics. From this world position flow the factors undermining this strong link of world capitalism. It is laying the basis, with coming sharp turns in world events, to America’s becoming a weak link of the chain.
Will the Communist party be equal to its task? Only we can answer this question. The economic foundation of American imperialism no longer rests upon the 48 states. Its structure rests upon the quicksands of world capitalism: in South America, Asia and Europe as well as the whole North American continent. The contradictions of the world capitalists have become the contradictions of American capitalism.
The re-division of the world markets becomes the burning problem of the world imperialists. The revolutionary storms of any nation become of utmost importance for the capitalists in America. American wealth and capital today require a world police force and a world outlook. The economic stability of the United States depends upon the economic stability of world capitalism. The internal contradictions of American capitalism are so great that the American imperialists are forced out into deeper water tor a solution, and this in turn shakes the whole structure.
The developing civil war in Germany, with the danger of a Fascist dictatorship hanging as a living menace over the Soviet Union and the world proletariat, looms as a military guarantee and a breathing spell for decay capitalism. The contradictions between the imperialist powers themselves and the contradictions between the imperialists and the Soviet Union are bundled up into a knot in the present German situation. The relation of the German situation to the U.S. will be taken up later.
 
Our Approach
We must approach the coming revolution in the United States from two angles. First, a theoretical analysis: to consider what kind of a revolution is in store for the United States. Second: a review of the line of march of the party under Stalinist leadership in order to find out if Stalinism is leading in the correct direction.
The American revolution of 1775 was a product of the birth stage of capitalism. The coming revolution will be a product of decay capitalism. The first American revolution was a struggle to establish the bourgeois system. The coming revolution in America will be a struggle to destroy the capitalist system in America. The first revolution was a war between a rising colonial bourgeoisie and its mother country.
The American colonies were unhampered by feudal carry-overs and were able to plow forward swiftly. But the American revolution did not settle all of the problems of the rising bourgeois class. The problem of state power was not entirely to their liking. In Europe, the capitalists were forced to share their power with the feudal landowners. In America the capitalists were forced to share their power with the chattel slave owners. Both groups of capitalists had to compromise with other exploiters because a new enemy, the proletariat, was developing from the left. The bourgeois revolution could not be considered complete so long as the class did not have the state power in their hands, as their own instrument of suppression.
No sooner were accounts with England, the mother country, settled, after 1812, than the struggle between the two American exploiting classes, the rising capitalists and the chattel masters, took on new and sharper forms. A struggle for state power, for example control developed. The carry-over in America was more backward than that which the capitalists of Europe contended with, a backward system warping the substance of the struggle with the race issue, cloaking the class problem in the race form.
 
The Capitalists and the Civil War
Every expansion move the American capitalists made met with resistance from the plantation owner of the South. Only by compromise and joint expeditions of conquest were the capitalists of the north able to push westward. Such conquests were planned and carried out. Mexico was defeated, land was “bought” from Spain and France and in all of these joint struggles the landowner’s of the South obtained more than their share of the robbery. However, the parallel needs of expansion soon crossed each other, became entangled, and finally led to the Civil War.
Texas was ‘’ceded” long before the final conflict and showed the uncompromising position t he two forces wore heading toward. They planned to divide it into three states that would send six senators instead of two to the Senate. In the race for the colonization of Texas, the landowners of the South had more than an even break. The fight for control of the government shifted more and more away from “peaceful” struggles into open conflicts. A struggle for the West followed. Bloody Kansas was a prelude to the Civil War to follow: Just like John Brown’s action, it also cast a shadow on the future from the class angle.
The Civil War was the second edition of the bourgeois revolution and settled the question as to who was master of the state. Following the let-up of the postwar dictatorship against the landlords in the South, the world crisis of 1873 ushered in a new period for American development. The capitalists moved for ward with rapid strides – towards monopoly capitalism.
 
A Third Edition of the Bourgeois Revolution?
The question must now be asked: Will America have a third edition of the bourgeois revolution? Are there still carry-overs, are there democratic demands the capitalists must fight for in America, as they did in Russia, in Spain, and in other countries? To say that all of the democratic demands have been realized for all the people of the United States is the height of ignorance but to confuse this with the question of the necessity of a third edition of the bourgeois revolution is even worse.
There are democratic demands and economic needs large sections of the workers and the farmers have which cannot be fulfilled under capitalism. We must fight for these demands as workers. The capitalists are not fighting for these demands. Whom are they struggling against for these democratic demands? The democratic demands and the economic needs of the Negroes, Mulattoes, Asiatic, Mexican, the foreign born and Indians are not even questions of a bourgeois stage of the coming proletarian revolution, no matter how short its duration. American conditions have not only passed beyond the February period of Russia in 1917 but have also passed beyond the bourgeois stage of the October revolution.
The capitalists of America do not share their power with other exploiters. Other exploiters obtain part of the plunder as subordinated flunkies. Sharing profits as subordinated plunderers does not in any way signify sharing power, as for example, the sharing of power by the landlords, in Europe and Asia. In America there are no exploiting classes preventing the “good progressive” capitalist from carrying out the democratic demands and economic needs. It is the capitalists who thrive and maintain their system by the prevention of the carrying out of the democratic demands and economic needs.
(To be continued)
 



The strike of the farmers in Sioux City has spread to other parts of the state, of Iowa and Indiana, and into nearby states. Truck gardeners and dairy farmers have joined the movement and threaten the law and order of the authorities. Minneapolis reports show the strike has reached the Northwest. This new strike action of this section of the petty bourgeois indicates the deep changes the agriculture of the United States is undergoing.
The reduction of wholesale food prices, the bosses’ hold on the farms and the reduction of the purchasing newer of the workers has upset the standards of the rich farm regions which were able to survive the constant agrarian crisis up to the present. In Sioux City and Council Bluffs, Iowa, a higher plane of the struggle has been reached. Mass picketing, fights, and clashes with scabs and authorities are reported daily. In Council Bluffs the striking farmers marched upon the jail and forced the authorities to release 60 striking farmers. All reports indicate the strike is spreading.
Press reports from western papers show that in spite of minor ebbs and flows, the farmers revolt against conditions is growing. The farmers can no longer argue against the striking workers because now the striking farmers have joined them as allies in the struggle against the financiers and their henchman.
August 22, the striking farmers stopped two trains en route to Sioux City with livestock and milk. 400 farmers of the Missouri valley agree to begin a blockade of highways leading to Omaha. On August 26, the press reports re-enforced picket lines on all roads leading to Council Bluffs from the Iowa side. At Sioux City the 88 arrested strikers were released on habeas corpus proceedings, Iowa national guards are in readiness to be sent to any part of the state.
The Nebraska farmers started picketing roads in and around Omaha. In Iowa, the state power of the capitalists has been used against the striking farmers, arresting strikers, routing them with tear gas and general intimidation that striking workers are well trained in.
The farmers of Iowa, Nebraska, North and South Dakota and Minnesota are following up the strike movement in one form or the other. In other farm regions preliminary steps in this direction are being taken. The middle class state farm organisations are endeavoring to give leadership to the movements and link them up in a general struggle against the monopolists. Reports from Lewiston, Idaho, inform us that 400 farmers in this rich wheat district are bound by agreement to sell none of their wheat for 60 days unless a profit can be made. They control 5 million bushels of wheat.
 
Significance of Farm Strike
What significance has the farmers strike? What is the relation the farmers strike has to the workers struggles? A survey of this struggle is essential to prevent the vanguard from being shifted into opportunist channels by Stalinism today as was the case in the past when Pepper, as a representative of the Right-Center bloc, lost the Communist movement into opportunism with his two-class party idea.
The crisis is throwing upon the surface new layers of rebels. These new layers crystallize around issues of immediate demands at hand. The Bonus March was a typical example of this. The Bonus Army with the exception of the minority Left wing, was a force made up of patriotic Americans, “Loyal Americans”, who wanted relief from mass hunger and starvation. The Government answer to their cry for bread with bullets shifted the “army” and many of its sympathizers to the Left, and away from their patriotism.
The farmers’ strike follows this new trail, but throws to the surface an entirely different layer of “enemies” of capitalism. The reorganization of agriculture – to coordinate it with industry – by the American imperialists pushed the farmers forward into struggle. Their outlook on property relations warps this movement, restricts it to a struggle attempting to hold in check the concentration and centralization of wealth. They want to turn the wheels of industry backward.
 
Workers’ Strike and Farmers’ Strike
When the workers strike it is a blow against capitalism, at the basic contradictions of the system, a blow at the relation of the exploiting machine owner and the exploited producing wage slaves. But the farmers’ strike turns on a different axis. The farmers strike does not unearth the same relationship to the basic contradictions of capitalism. The farmers’ strike reveals the relationship of a section of the petty-bourgeoisie, the farmers, fighting another section of the capitalists who have monopolized the avenues between production and distribution. The workers solution is forward to the social revolution. The “solution” of the farmers is an attempt to check the march of industry, to turn the wheels backward. This does not mean that we reject the farmers’ struggles as reactionary. It means that it is doomed at the start to certain limitations and. must be supported in this light, as an auxiliary struggle in the class struggle against the capitalists. Not a struggle on an equal basis with the workers’. struggle, as indicated by the slogan of “Workers and Farmers Government”, but’ as a struggle of allies in the fight of the workers to overthrow capitalism.
 
The Middle Class in the Crisis
Large sections of the middle class have already been ruined by the crisis and the attempted reorganization of American industry by the financiers. The farmer, as a section of this class, has been in a permanent crisis. The financiers have already won a section of the “new” middle class as flunkies. Not so with the farmers, who will fight to the end. It is not correct to contend that the imperialists have won the middle class as a whole to their side, nor is it correct to say the middle class will not survive this crisis. The problem is many-sided and not so simple. The whole middle class is divided and moving in many directions and no solution of their problems can be expected under capitalism and particularly from the leaders of the middle class. As allies of the proletariat, they are of value to the further development of society.
This new farmers struggle is on an entirely different plane when compared to the struggles of the former centuries.
The struggle against capitalism in America is the struggle of the workers, industrial and agrarian, black and white, etc. The farmers must be used as allies. The Communist workers must guard against the Stalinist attempt to elevate the farmers’ strike above its proper level in the class struggle. The Stalinists attempt to elevate the farmers’ strike to the same level of the workers’ struggle against capitalism must be rejected, if we are to approach the problems of the farmers with a correct Marxian policy.
 



Part 1

Part 2
 



The approaching election finds the parties of reaction, reform and revolution in full swing. The stock market is bolstered up, the bourgeois economists speak of a revival, the papers talk of wage increase, the politicians dodge the real issues and spout demagogy. The reactionaries do this in an effort to keep the workers from moving to the Left.
And to the left, the parties of Deform: the socialist party; the socialist labor party; the farmer-labor party, etc., are struggling in their own way, to keep the workers from moving into the revolutionary stream, toward the Communist party, to paralyze their militancy
The capitalists have done all in their power to keep the revolutionary party off the ballot. At present we have only 11 states on the ballot. In many states a struggle to get on the ballot has not yet been won. Meetings throughout the country have been broken up by the police. Foster, the presidential candidate, has been arrested several times in different parts of the country on his national tour.
 
Favorable Chances for Communism
This third presidential election campaign of the Communists in America is the most favorable we have yet entered. The reactionary parties have exposed themselves and have shown incompetence in handling the situation. The reformist parties are weak and as yet cannot be compared to the reformist parties in Europe. This leaves the Communist party an open field.
Can the party be equal to this task? This depends upon the program the Communists present in the present campaign and how the Communists conduct the campaign. Previous articles in The Militant criticized the C.P. platform for its opportunism. The program divorces the immediate demands from the ultimate demands, and presents immediate demands that are not satisfactory. A program that does not formulate the immediate needs of the class in coordination with the revolutionary goal is opportunist. Let us determine the party action since the Nominating Convention in Chicago and find out if it has corrected these mistakes.
The party must present its immediate demands as the election platform, demands based upon class struggle and connected with the revolutionary end to be attained. In the campaign, local, national and international issues develop which momentarily gain the spot light of the class attention. The Communist must utilize these struggles to more forcefully bring to the attention of the workers, a revolutionary program in opposition to the reformist and reactionary ones. Or, one may pose the problem this way: The election campaign should be used by the Communists to bring our INTERNATIONAL PROGRAM to the attention of the class through our immediate demands in conjunction with the national and international struggles that develop in the election period. Only on this basis will we be able to put in motion the class and bring recruits to our ranks, workers who come to our ranks on the basis of Marxism.
 
The Opportunist Course of Stalinism
Several important events have happened since the Chicago Nomination Convention, events showing how far into the swamp of opportunism, Stalinism has taken the Communist party. The Bonus March flared across the political horizon and the Stalinites dashed in unconditionally for the bonus. They carried on a campaign in the Daily Worker that overshadowed the election campaign and shifted to the background the main slogan for Social and Unemployment Insurance.
On August first – the calendar day set aside by Stalinism to fight against imperialist wars – the demonstration on Union Square in New York forgot the War Danger, forgot that Fascism threatens Germany and devoted their main blows at Hoover who drove the veterans out of Washington with machine guns, tear gas bombs, and tanks. This important climax of the Bonus March was elevated above the more important question, rather than used as a springboard to the explanation of the war danger connected with threatening Fascism in Germany. We pointed out before that the demand for emergency relief for the farmers was wrong and must be changed to emergency or immediate relief for the WORKERS and Farmers. In New York the party tried to correct this error but only created more errors. The party-controlled unemployment councils called a conference on August the 15th, and a Relief March on September the 10th. The whole program is based upon immediate relief for the workers. They first separate the demand for immediate relief from the more fundamental demands against capitalism and second, they forget entirely that capitalism which is the cause of unemployment must be overthrown. Nowhere in their propaganda, articles, or speeches are these three factors coordinated. First to leave the demand out of the program and then to base a campaign in New York exclusively on the demand of immediate relief that was omitted from the platform – these are flip-flops, detrimental to the party and the class.
The platform forgets the struggle for the shorter work day. However, the bosses have not forgotten this struggle and are busy trying to reorganize labor power (overpopulation to production accumulation), a necessary step for their way out of the crisis. If they succeed in reorganizing and “reducing hours” at the workers’ expense it will give them a breathing spell. On the other hand if, through class struggle we force through the “Six Hour Day, Five Day Week, with NO REDUCTION IN PAY”, our class will be able to take a big step forward. The Communists must give the lead in this struggle.
 
For a Realistic Defense of the U.S.S.R.
In the election platform the defense of the Soviet Union is linked with the defense of the Chinese people. Events have proven that the danger of Fascism in Germany is the determining factor in world politics and the election platform and campaign can only put life into the slogan of the defense of the Soviet Union by mobilizing the workers to support the fight against Fascism in Germany. The Stalinites fail in this major task.
In New York the party has issued the slogan, “For Bread and Freedom, – With Foster, Ford and Amter.” As the election date nears we find Stalinism floundering deeper into the swamp of opportunism.
These activities – the Bonus march, reduction of hours, immediate relief, Anti-War activity and German struggles are not utilized in the election campaign to contrast the party of revolution to the parties of reform and reaction. Rather the party’s way of handling these tasks under the Stalinist leadership has pushed the membership and the party farther to the right, farther into opportunism. Not satisfied with the distance to the right the leaders have dragged the members they top the whole thing with a statements in the Daily Worker which has nothing in common with Marxism.
 
Who Was Exposed?
First they issue a blast against E. Haldeman-Julius, the well-known reformer, a socialist. They “expose” him. Catch him red handed stealing Foster’s acceptance speech. He changes the word Communist to socialist and prints Fosters speech for his platform. We know Haldemann-Julius. It is not Haldemann-Julius who has made a mistake. It is not Haldeman-Julius who should be criticized. He recognized his reformist wares even when they were labeled Communism. Labels don’t mean much to reformers. Purcell and Hicks recognized the wares of the Anglo-Russian Committee. Chang Kai-Shek recognized the wares of the “four-class party.” Barbusse, Rolland and Sinclair recognize the wares of the Stalinist World Anti-War Congress. The name, Communism, without the content of Marxism frightens no one.
The election campaign must be based upon the pressing immediate needs of the class, formulated concretely, but not divorced from the class struggles of the world that develop between the convention and election day. The political consciousness of the workers during the election campaign can only be transformed into class consciousness by the correct coordination of these two factors on the broad basis of our International program which must run as a red thread through the election platform and the election campaign.
 



In the first period of the crisis the Communist League of America advanced a series of slogans for the fight against unemployment. Among these, and as an outstanding propaganda slogan, we advanced the slogan, “For the Six Hour Day, the Five Day week WITH NO REDUCTION IN PAY.” Today, Hoover, Green and Hearst are making capital out of the six-hour day, five-day week proposal. It is advisable to review the present struggle and find out why the capitalists have stolen a march on the workers, WHO is responsible, and FIND OUT WHAT THE RESULT WILL BE. The slogan for the six hour day has been advanced in one form or the other by unions for over a decade, but not until the present crisis and the establishment of a permanent army of unemployed has the slogan attracted widespread attention by different classes, for different ends. This must be explained.
The tremendous increase in productive forces, the rationalization since the last war, has laid the economic base for a corresponding change in the use of labor power. Around the value form of the product the capitalists attempt to reorganize the American labor power, on the basis of the reorganized industrial structure of American imperialism. From this flows increased class struggles. Around the attempted reorganization of the labor power, will first develop struggles on immediate demands that can lead in short order into deeper channels. If we allow the capitalists to reorganize the labor power to their own liking the workers will have less space necessary for the running jump to overthrow capitalism. If we allow the capitalists to reorganize the labor power without presenting a Marxian analysis, the class must again condemn the vanguard for failure. The Stalin policy has already failed in this field.
 
The Capitalist Aim
In this period of capitalism, the fall in the rate of profit forces the capitalists to make up the loss by the most drastic steps. They must change the ratio of necessary labor (wages) and surplus wages (surplus value) to their interest. The lengthening of the workday has given way to the speed-up and drastic reduction of wages in order to reduce the necessary labor and increase the surplus labor to keep up the falling rate of profit. In crises, and in sections of the industrial structure the capitalists are still able to lengthen the workday, but the general trend is in the opposite direction, due to the developed productive forces which forces them to resort to speed-up and general wage cuts. The developed productive forces since the war have forced into the structure for the first time an absolute decrease of the number of workers employed in production, which opened the door for a permanent army of millions of unemployed workers.
This new condition called for new action on the part of the capitalists toward the commodity, labor power, if they intend to continue to exploit the workers. Likewise, it calls for bold steps by the workers’ vanguard; to utilize the contradiction in the capitalist system to enable the class to take one or more steps forward. This can be done in many ways, but in this field it can only be done one way – and that is by presenting a Marxian analysis of the higher relation of labor power to production and present a Marxian program of action for the class. The party under Stalinist leadership not only failed in this task but now comes out with action that closes the door to the whole problem.
The Editorial of the Daily Worker of August 4 (city edition) dealing with Hoover-Green shorter week proposal plays into the hands of the capitalists and presents another heap of confusion in the ranks of Communism. The editorial tells us in terms none too mild that the Hoover-Green, and we may add, Hearst Five-Day week proposal is a maneuver against the working class. To be opposed to the Hoover-Hearst-Green shorter week proposal is not a difficult thing for a Communist paper but to present class reasons why take up. To pass off the shorter work-day proposal of the capitalists as another stagger plan is to miss the very center of the contradiction, the relation of production and the commodity labor power. Not to understand this ABC of Marxism economy, makes impossible an adoption of Marxian tactics and strategy for the class.
 
A Stalinist Muddle
The editorial further, either through ignorance or lies, confuses the stagger plan with the struggle for, “The six hour day, the five day week and no reduction in pay.” The editorial says, “The socialists, the Musteites, the Trotskyites are putting forward the slogan of 30-hour week without reduction of pay. In reality they are helping put into effect the stagger plan.” The above argument is about as effective as the ultra-Leftist who says; because the capitalists rule by the parliament and the Communists participate in parliaments, both are fakers; because the capitalists advocate social insurance and the Communist advocate social and unemployment insurance the Communists are no better than the capitalists. Every immediate demand has two sides to it, its exploiter and exploited side, its reformist and revolutionary side. In the struggle for immediate demands the capitalists and reformers struggle for one end, and the revolutionists for the other. Such is the case with unemployment insurance, with elections, with strikes, with civil war and likewise with the demand for the six-hour day the five day week, and no reduction of pay.
The Stalinists present the seven-hour day slogan as correct, and the six-hour day slogan as false The editorial bases its argument upon, “the full time work week being around 50 hours, the demand for the 30 hour week without reduction of pay would be not to take the struggle of the workers seriously and to pave the way for the stagger plan.” The bourgeois average of 50 hours a week for full time workers (how many at full time work in the crisis?) does not determine the slogan for the class, as Stalinism contends.
The six-hour day, five-day week, without reduction in pay is based upon the needs of the workers at the present stage of American capitalism. The editorial says, “Through speed-up the capitalists hope to get out of the workers the same production in the six hours as they now get out of an eight hour day.” The capitalists have already accomplished this in the past and in the future the speed-up will be increased, even though the workers don’t get any reduction in hours. Seven hours, under capitalist speed-up, is too much. The workers cannot stand the pace. The hours must be reduced to six if ordinary health is to be had. The struggle for the six-hour day does not mean the 30 hour week average. The eight hour movement of the eighties did not mean a 48 hour average. The six hour day struggle is the driving force to reduce all hours in industries that run all the way from 8 to 16 hours. If we win the six hour day it will only mean about a 40 hour AVERAGE for the American industries.
 
Hours and Wages
A reduction of hours for the class, on the basis of class struggle, regardless of the bosses ability here and there to lower wages – has the directly opposite effect on wages. History proves the reduction of the hours of work per day causes wages to rise. Marxism also proves this – in case some Stalinists care to consult their Marxian economics.
We have warned the party many months ago in the columns of the Militant about the danger of playing around with the six-hour day slogan. We said if the party did not take the lead, the reformers and the capitalists would take the lead and turn it into a campaign against us to reduce the standard of living further. The capitalists and reformers, through the neglect of Stalinism, now have their hands on a weapon and will use it on our heads. In the eight-hour day struggle in the Eighties the workers had the weapon and used it over the heads of the capitalists. Every immediate demand is a race between the classes for the lever; and the tactics and strategy, based on Marxian analysis will determine if we can obtain the lever, instead of the capitalists, in the class struggle
The slogan, advanced by us many months ago for “Long Term Credits to the Soviet Union,” has also met the same fate in the hands of these Stalinist muddleheads. The Communist League of America must intensify its activity within and outside of the party in the class struggle to win a greater organized Left Opposition to give us more pressure upon Stalinist revisionism, to enable our class and vanguard more effectively to fight the capitalists.
The slogan for the six-hour day, the five-day week, with no reduction in pay, is the central propaganda slogan for the struggle against unemployment. To unite the employed and unemployed upon a solid organizational basis. It is not a question of social insurance, or immediate relief, or the shorter work day, or long term credits to the Soviet Union or the United Front – which is first and which is second. Immediate relief is the most pressing problem for the class at the moment but this does not mean we build a movement around the slogan of immediate relief as the first or central slogan. Depending upon ebbs and flows, upon sharp turns or victories, other slogans will be shifted to the spotlight and then replaced by one of the other slogans. The structure must be built on a solid organizational base, that touches the roots of the capitalist system that spans the whole period of unemployment, and at the same time enables the other slogans to build upon this structure. This slogan is the slogan for the reduction of hours, “The six-hour day, the five-day week, with no reduction in pay.”
 



The United States has held the dominating position in the world chain of capitalism ever since the world war. Prior to the world war American capitalism struggled to obtain this position. Now the American imperialists must wage a constant struggle to maintain and extend this power against the onslaughts of the other capitalist nations. This new position places greater responsibilities upon the United States in the maintenance of world capitalist conditions.
The contradiction between socialized production and capitalist appropriation, between production for a world market, and national boundaries, lie at the bottom of the contradiction between the international responsibilities and internal needs of the American imperialists. The international responsibilities of American capitalism can only be properly fulfilled on the basis of the solution of the internal needs. On the other hand, the American imperialists can only solve the internal difficulties confronting than on the basis of world capitalism.
The solution of this contradiction is not possible under the rule of the American capitalists or any other capitalists. At the bottom, it is the same contradiction which brought on the last world war and now has developed to greater proportions, endangering the proletariat of the world and the Soviet Union. The real solution of this problem can be had only on the basis of the proletarian world revolution.
The imperialist struggle for the re-division of the earth is the central problem of the American imperialists, to which a other problems are subordinated. But within this imperialist problem there is contained another contradiction of a more menacing character. Each delay in “solving” the question of the re-division of the earth enlarges the prospects of the extension of the October revolution, of the social revolution. On the other hand, each step toward the “solution” of the problem of the re-division of the earth sets into motion the forces of the social revolution. This clearly reveals the present stage of capitalism as the decay stage.
Although a solution for capitalism is not possible, a breathing spell for some imperialists by obtaining markets, by establishing Fascism in Germany, by smashing the Soviet Union is possible. A lease of life for capitalism depends as much upon the action or rather, inaction of the proletarian vanguard as it dotes upon the action of the leading imperialists.
The American imperialists are as much concerned with the world revolution as the Communists are, but for opposite reasons. Therefore, the intervention of the U.S. dollar, for economic or military purpose, to hold in check the October revolution has been a major task of the American Imperialists since 1917. The danger of the extension of the October revolution is a life and death matter for world capitalism and the United States representing the dominating factor. This compels Wall Street to proceed in a fashion altogether contrary to the lingering “isolationist” ideology of the 19th century.
The burning question of the capitalists is the opposite side of the burning problem of the proletariat. Our problem is the understanding and application of the theory of the Permanent Revolution. Theirs – the defeat of the Permanent Revolution.
The word permanent, like the word dialectic or imperialism or a whole series of other words are used in the political sense and not in the bourgeois dictionary sense. The theory of the permanent revolution has nothing in common with the old Bucharin concept, which on the basis of the October revolution, estimates that a mounting wave of revolutions, one right on top of the other, would sweep capitalism from the earth in one straight line. The theory of the Permanent Revolution does not consider as “permanent”, the time element in the series of revolution. The theory of the Permanent Revolution considers the development of the revolution from country to country, in their interrelationship, regardless of ebbs and flows, PERMANENT until the class problems of the proletariat are SOLVED. Let us follow the process of the class struggle, explaining the meaning of the Permanent Revolution and its relation to American imperialism.
The most important Marxian concept today, repeated by Stalinism in dead form but not understood in living reality, is the Lenin formula, “Without a revolutionary theory there can be no revolution.” In 1917, Lenin and Trotsky filled this formula with reality by applying the theory of the Permanent Revolution to the weakest link in the capitalist chain. Other weak links of the capitalist chain followed, in Italy, in Germany 1918, in Hungary, in Finland, in Bulgaria, in Germany in 1923 and in China, but all were drowned in the workers’ blood. Weak links and favorable objective situations but – wrong policies.
The vanguard fighters already know the role social democracy played in these revolutions. It is the task of the Left Opposition to explain the role Stalinism played in these revolutions since 1923. History will look to Stalinism for an answer. And the question can only be answered upon the basis of the application of the theory of the Permanent Revolution. Stalinism as a bud and now as the flower of the reaction against October did not then, nor does it now, understand the theory of the Permanent Revolution. Stalinism has merely usurped the heritage of the October Revolution, which is the first fruit of the theory of the Permanent Revolution.
There are reasons for the one successful revolution and the many failures that followed. The determining factor in the problem was not the objective condition which was the most favorable, but the vanguard and its policies or lack of policies. The major defeats of the proletariat and the Communist vanguard commenced with the 1923 revolution in Germany. Up to that time the Russian revolution under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky was consolidating itself, the International was building a world party, and the workers were in motion against world capitalism. Upon the defeat of the 1923 revolution the American dollar propped up decay capitalism, and Stalinism replaced Marxism in the Communist International. The theory of socialism in one country replaced the theory of the Permanent Revolution, national reformism replaced internationalism.
The theory of the Permanent Revolution may be outlined in the following manner:
“First, it embraces the problem of the transition of the democratic revolution into the socialist. This is really the historic origin of the theory. The conception of the permanent revolution was set up by the great Communists of the middle of the 19th century, by Marx and his adherents, in opposition to the democratic ideology which, as is known, presumed that all questions should be settled peacefully, in the reformist or evolutionary way, by the erection of the ‘rational’ or democratic state. Marx regarded the bourgeois revolution as the direct introduction to the proletarian revolution.”
“The second aspect of the ‘permanent’ theory already characterizes the socialist revolution as such. For an indefinitely long time and in constant internal struggle all social relations are transformed. The process necessarily retains a political character, that is, it develops through collisions of various groups of society in transformation. Outbreaks of Civil War and foreign wars alternate with periods of ‘peaceful’ reforms. Revolutions in economy, technique, science, the family, morals and usages develop in complicated reciprocal action and do not allow society to reach an equilibrium. Therein lies the permanent character of the social revolution as such.”
“The international character of the social revolution which constitutes the third aspect of the theory of the permanent revolution, results from the state of economy and social structure of humanity. Internationalism is no abstract principle, but a theoretical and political reflection of the character of world economy, of the world development of productive forces, and the world scale of the class struggle. The social revolution begins on national grounds. But it cannot be completed on these grounds.”
“In an isolated proletarian dictatorship, the internal and external contradictions grow inevitably together with the growing successes. Remaining isolated, the proletarian state must finally become a victim of these contradictions. The way out for it lies only in the victory of the proletariat of the advanced countries. Viewed from this standpoint, the national revolution is not a self-sufficient whole! It is only a link in the international chain. The international revolution presents a permanent process in spite of all fleeting rises and falls.” [1]
What is the relation of American imperialism to this theory, or to be more exact, the continuation of the Russian revolution to the world revolution? The United States as the strongest link of world capitalism struggles to prevent the proletarian revolution from absorbing the world, no matter where the civil war breaks out. World capitalism, which includes American Imperialism as the dynamo of the system of reaction, intervenes in every class struggle between the exploiters and exploited.
The weak links of the capitalist chain must be smashed. The October revolution must be extended. The iron ring of the world capitalists (with the backing of the American dollar) around the Soviet Union must be broken. The extension of the October revolution means to fight, not only the national bourgeoisie, but to fight world capitalism and particularly the economic pressure of American imperialism.
The break-down of capitalism, in the economic and political crisis stays the hands of world capitalism in their fight against the world proletariat and the revolutionary workers fighting the capitalists on the “weak link”. The intervention of the imperialists in support of the capitalists of the “weak link” only becomes effective when the vanguard of the proletariat does not present a policy based on a Marxian revolutionary theory. In Russia, with Lenin and Trotsky, the correct revolutionary theory and action held at bay the world capitalist intervention. But the non-Marxian revolutionary theory of Stalinism, for a series of revolutions, since 1923 did not enable the proletariat to hold in check the counter-offensive of the imperialists.
Only after the defeat of the German revolution in 1923 were the world imperialists successful in their intervention through the Dawes Plan and then the Young Plan. And likewise, in every other revolutionary situation, the world capitalists intervened at the start but were only successful to the degree that the policies of the vanguard deviated from Marxism, from the theory of the Permanent Revolution. Correct theory and correct action is no guarantee to victory but only through the Marxian policy and action can the proletariat gain power.
American imperialism in its “peace role” stands as the bulwark against the extension of the October revolution. We expect nothing else from America and fight accordingly. Today we have another problem. Stalinism is a new growth of revisionism, poisoning the Marxian stream with the theory of socialism in one country. A theory which stifles and checks the action of the Communist parties in the struggle to extend the October revolution.
To extend the October revolution, means to understand the relation of American Imperialism to world capitalism and world economy. To extend the October revolution means to reject the Stalinist revisionist theory of socialism in one country and all that flows from it. To extend the October revolution means in the first place, to arm the vanguard with the Marxian theory of the Permanent Revolution.

Footnote
1. All quotations from L.D. Trotsky, The Permanent Revolution, New York 1931.
 



The thesis of the 12th Plenum of the ECCI, published in the Daily Worker of October 20th (City Edition) once more gives us an Inside picture of the bankruptcy of Stalinism. A resolution with more mistakes and with a greater number of meaningless revolutionary phrases is difficult to conceive of. A thesis of the vanguard of the revolution must present the determining factors of the world situation. The C.I. thesis gives more space to secondary questions, leaves out some determining factors and does not deal correctly with the important factors which are taken up.
A Communist thesis for 1932 even though it leaves out the fact the Communist International is itself going through a profound crisis under the Stalin leadership must at least give an answer to the following problems: (1) the world crisis and the perspective. (2) the danger of Fascism in Germany. (3) the role of American imperialism in the present period. (4) the invasion of China by Japanese imperialism (5) the position of the USSR after 15 years and the relation of its contradictions to the imperialist contradictions. From this analysis, directives for the sections of the C.I. must be formulated. The C.I. thesis does not take up these points in their proper relationship.
The third year of the world crisis has long ago passed beyond the economic stage, and has reached a stage of open conflict between the imperialists, in China, in South America; and in Spain and Germany where revolutionary situations developed out of the crisis. The C.I. thesis says that the crisis is moving to new low levels. It says the end of capitalist stabilization is at hand.
In 1928 the C.I. introduced the “Third Period”, as the end of stabilization and the beginning of a period of revolutionary upsurge. In 1930 the C.I. swung to the Right. That is, the theoreticians of the C.I. moved to the Right as the crisis was moving the workers to the Left. Now in 1932, the C.I. in the 12th Plenum informs us that “the end of capitalist stabilization” is at hand. Compared to the Right zig-zag of 1930 (which dropped the form of the “Third period” but which retained the kernel of the Left zig-zag) this seems to be a return to the 1928 Left zig-zag. However, facts prove the opposite: that the Left shell of the present move is a cloak for a new Rightward shift in the Soviet Union by Stalinism presented by the recent bureaucratic decrees, the expulsions of the 12th Plenum and the growth of the reactionary element.
If, as the thesis says, we are confronted with the end of the period of capitalist stabilization, we would like to know: was capitalism in a condition of stabilization for the last three years of the world crisis? A crisis itself is a condition of the shaking of the economic equilibrium. It is the economic explosion of the accumulation of the contradictions of the capitalist mode of production. Further, if the “Third Period” of 1928 ushered in the end of stabilization and in 1932 we again have the end of stabilization, then it follows that stabilization existed in between. This is a contradiction the Stalinists do not examine.
To pose the question in the fourth year of the crisis as the end of the period of stabilization is to use phrases instead of analysis unless the “analysis” means that after three years of crisis the condition is to become worse for capitalism, that the semi-open conflicts are to break out into open imperialist wars and revolutions. However, we will show that the thesis speaks differently on this point. We will take this phase up later.
If we are now at the end of stabilization what would you call the period of the crisis just before, where we have had the invasion of China by Japan, the revolutions “between” the United States and Great Britain in South America, the Spanish revolution, the Indian situation and above all the danger of Fascism in Germany? Was this the characterization of stabilization?
To draw an analogy we can say that the “Third Period” designed the second period as a period of stabilization, from 1923 or 1921 to 1928. In this period of stabilization we had the British General strike, the Vienna uprising and the Chinese revolution. Following this second period came the third period of revolutionary upsurges. The C.I.’s guess was a miserable failure. But history does not repeat itself. We are on safer ground, not due to Stalinism, but due to the Left Opposition.
 
Ebbs and Flows in the Decay Stage
To talk constantly about the end of stabilization and revolutionary upsurge is to replace Marxian analysis with Stalinist phrases. The “beginning” of stabilization is just as dangerous for capitalism as the “end” of stabilization. Because this mechanical schema does not fit the facts of the dialectic stages and its cycle. Because the cycle of capitalism has reached the decay stage. The whole period is a period of wars and revolutions, but within this period there are ebbs and flows.
In this decay stage, favorable situations for the seizure of power will exist and have existed in the periods of ebbs as well as flows. A Marxist must present strategy for the party and the class in the decay stage, but this can only be done providing the ebbs and flows, that is, the general direction of the whole in the downward curve of decay capitalism, as well as the parts to the whole, are presented. In other words, the whole period is a period of revolutionary possibilities and in either periods of ebbs and flows within the whole period these revolutionary possibilities are transformed into realities. To take advantage of these realities means to know the direction, the ebb or flow, so that proper tactic can be formulated. This the Stalinists are failing to do and have failed to do.
 
What Is the Perspective?
After three years of crisis and depression what is the perspective? Are there still possibilities for ebbs and flows in the economy of capitalism, or will the whole future from now on be downward? On the contrary, ebbs and flows are ahead, but different kinds of ebbs and flows than we had in the growth stage of capitalism.
The reorganization and readjustments are proceeding not only in the United States but in other important links at the expense of the working class, the peasantry and the weaker section of the exploiters. The failure of the Stalinist leadership to take advantage of the favorable revolutionary situations since the 1923 German revolution as well as the present German situation has not only enabled the capitalist class to obtain a worthwhile breathing spell, but has weakened our forces.
Considering all these factors together, one cannot at this stage lay down a definite perspective of a worse condition as the only variant ahead, as the C.I. does. On the contrary, one possible variant, far from excluded, is the possibility of a short upturn. Not a return to prosperity or the end of capitalist stabilization, which was not stable for the last three years. It will be one of the brief flows in the downward curve of decay capitalism. This holds the upturn within definite limitations. Every process as well as every major stage, of birth, growth and decay has within it its ebbs and flows. Growth has its dynamic flows and difficult ebbs but decay has its turbulent flows and prolonged spasmodic ebbs.
A short upturn solves nothing for the workers – the way towards which the social reformer is looking and hoping. For the capitalist, it prepares the way for greater explosions or greater accumulations of contradictions.
Crises and depressions, unless transformed to deeper levels of revolutionary situations, always put the workers on the defense, drive them to lower standards and scatter their organized forces. Upturns have the opposite effects upon our class. Upturns release a certain economic pressure but at the same time usher in the workers into the new conditions with no economic gains, which means relatively worse conditons. The released pressure and worse conditions creates a contradiction, this time for the capitalists which drives the workers into the counter-offensive. Signs of this are already at hand in isolated examples especially the miners’ strike in Belgium and the miners’ strike in Illinois, embryonic signs but nevertheless signs.
 
Did Stalinism Forget America?
In considering the role of American imperialism this thesis seems to think that such an imperialism is of little importance in world politics. The proper elevation of the role of American imperialism, in a C.I. resolution today, must place it as the leading imperialist power of world capitalism, as the dominating economic power that has in the past and continues in the present to take the determining role in the struggle against the extension of the October revolution. The role of American imperialism, in Europe, in Asia, in South America as well as its relations to the Soviet Union must be an elementary consideration for a thesis that makes up the world problems of the vanguard.
 
The Main Danger in Germany
The danger of Fascism in Germany is not posed in its proper relationship. The resolution uses enough ink in speaking of Fascism and Germany but does not pull out the determining factor – THE DANGER OF FASCISM IN GERMANY. Instead, the thesis turns the problem upside down and tells us that the main enemy is the social democrats. It says, “Only by directing our main blows against social democracy, this social mainstay of the bourgeoisie.”
The thesis clings to the theory of “social-Fascism” and tells us most learned and wanted wisdom – that the bourgeoisie is the main enemy of the proletariat in Germany. This is not told to school children but to the vanguard of the proletariat. Abstract thinking is essential but there are times when abstract thinking and presentations become the worst enemy for advancing the workers cause. Or more often it is a cheap substitute for lack of knowledge as to what to do. The latter is the case with the Stalinists The danger of Fascism in Germany and its international historical importance is brushed over with meaningless phrases.
 
The Far East Conflict
The Manchurian situation is treated in an equal bankrupt fashion. The thesis says, “The chief hot-bed for breeding a new imperialist war is the Pacific.” “Japanese imperialism, in alliance with France and with the actual support of England, is converting Manchuria into its colony and has thus put the armed struggle for the partition of China and intervention against the USSR on the order of the day.” In this sentence the United States, which the thesis correctly says, “is pursuing its imperialist aims in the Far East” is put on the basis as struggling against a line-up of Japan “in alliance with France” and “actually supported by England.” This is not the line up in the Far East, even though interests ran parallel for a time.
All facts point to a much more complicated imperialist as well as Soviet Union problem. To pass this problem off in such a “simple” way and at the same time fail to show its relations to the danger of Fascism in Germany is to fail to present the contradictions of world capitalism in their proper relationship.
 
The Position of the Soviet Union
The question of the position of the Soviet Union is the most disgraceful part. To cover up our weak points, to hide from the world proletariat our true conditions, when the whole capitalist world knows these difficulties, is to lull to sleep the only class that will defend the Soviet Union, disarming them and helping the enemy. The thesis says referring to the Soviet Union, “That country has completely established itself in the position of socialism; the second five year plan provides for the final abolition of classes and the conversion of the whole toiling population of the country into active and conscious builders of a classless society.” The internal difficulties due to objective conditions of a backward country industrializing the country, with world capitalism fighting this industrialization, and the subjective difficulties of the wrong theory of socialism in one country, combined with the effects of the world crisis upon the Soviet Union, have placed our fatherland in a most difficult position. The policy of Stalinism is accelerating the difficulties.
 
Directives for the United States
The resolution ends by giving such directives in the coming period. With the end of capitalist stabilization the thesis gives the following directives for the United States. Even though we grant that the tempo toward revolutionary upsurge in the United States will be slower than the other countries the directives are inadequate and wrong for this period, for any period. They say, “For social insurance, against wage cuts, for immediate assistance for the unemployed. For equal rights for the Negroes and self-determination in the Black Belts. For assistance for the ruined farmers. For the defense of the Chinese people and the Soviet Union”.
The thesis, you will remember speaks of “the end of capitalist stabilization”, and “the development of the revolutionary upsurge and preparation for the struggle for the dictatorship of the proletariat.” Not that the upsurge will be even, or everywhere at once, but that in the present period the general direction for the whole, is toward revolutionary upsurge. No sooner do they tell us this, when we are ready to prepare for action to fit this, that is action to fit the end of capitalist stabilization and revolutionary upsurge, than the fifth section of the thesis presents the directives. And here they are:
“The general task of the Comintern and its sections in the present period is to wage a concrete struggle: (1) Against the capitalist offensive. (2) Against Fascism and reaction. (3) Against the impending war and intervention in the Soviet Union.”
The directives contradict the first part of the thesis. The directives are DEFENSIVE struggles against the capitalists. If the first part is true: “the end of capitalist stabilization and revolutionary upsurge are ahead”, then the “general tasks” are not correct. And if the general tasks are correct for the coming period, defensive struggles, then the first part of the thesis is incorrect. There will be defensive struggles in the period of preparation for revolutionary upsurge, that is sure, but the general tasks, means to point to the main line of march and preparations.
The economic analysis of the Left Opposition of world capitalism, on the contrary, points to a period ahead where we must now inform the party and the class to prepare the battle-lines to transform the present and past several years of defensive struggles into offensive struggles of the proletariat against the capitalist. First for immediate demands to be developed with the tempo and to conform to the strength or weakness of the link to a higher stage of an offensive for the overthrow of the capitalist rule.
 



Without electricity modern capitalism would not be writing history in its present form. Modern capitalism rests upon economic relations which have been accelerated, and the exploitation heightened by the use and control of electric power. Electric power grips the entire modern industrial structure. The electrification of the capitalist tools of production has not been completed and will not be completed under capitalism, but in America there are still prospects for forward steps in this line by the capitalist class.
 
Problem of Power Control
The control of power becomes a burning problem of the ruling class, not only between imperialist nations but also between sections of the capitalist class within the nation. The control of electric-power, like other important capitalist industries has evolved and now confronts the “people” as the Power Trust. It is an octopus of modern capitalism, more powerful in control of life than many other capitalist trusts and more menacing to the “people” – say those out of office to those in it.
The capitalist, private-owned power utilities are centralized into about a dozen gigantic holding companies. These power combines are “regulated” by State Utilities Commissions, but like the Sherman Anti-Trust Act or the Interstate Commerce Commission they are of no value to the “people” but only cloaks for further concentration of industries.
The State Utilities Commissions have, without a doubt proven bankrupt in safeguarding rates for the consumers or protecting the small investors. No wonder the small investors, the middle class, have their representatives in Congress clamoring for revenge. No wonder they want to make “Power” an issue in this election campaign.
The Federal Trade Commission, like all government commissions have conducted several costly investigations of the Power Trust, and as in all other investigations “abuses” and “startling” information have been unearthed – but nothing, absolutely nothing has been done about it, except as political capital for the outs against the ins, and as middle class campaign material.
The Federal Trade Commission unearthed many abuses liable to criminal action. For example, watered stock or arbitrarily “writing up” the valuation of the utility property, was found prevalent. This enabled the trust to increase the rate base. The books show a “fair return” and “normal rates” but facts prove (for the thousandth time) a tremendous return and robber rates.
 
Fictitious Capitalizations
The Federal Trade Commission found the following fictitious capitalizations:



American Gas and Electric Company


  


$88,492,000




American Power and Light


74,000,000




Electric Power and Light Company


70,103,600




Miss. Electric Power and Light


10,000,000




Buffalo Niagara and Eastern


53,000,000




La. Power and Light


10,000,000



The inflation of only those investigated showed padding running into billions of dollars. This increased the consumers’ bill by millions, monopoly prices are the order of the day.
The present crisis has hit the Power Trust too. The Tri-Utility System has gone under. The Middle West Utilities, the Insull economic and political organization with ramifications in 31 states, is in the hands of receivers. They are still investigating the company.
The consumers have no voice. The trusts control part of the government and, with the other financiers and monopolists, control the whole government. The middle class investigations never complete the rounds and in the long run help let off steam, while profits continue to roll in. The shareholders have less say-so. The shareholders should, according to “fair ethics”, have a voice, but the ramifications of the holding companies, of separate classes of bonds, prevent all this. It is well known that the great mass of “unfortunate” and “discontented” investors are disfranchized and have no voice in the actual business. But these investors need not worry. Norman Thomas of the Socialist party has come to their rescue. Norris and Roosevelt are “doing” their share. So, all in all, the middle class is ... well protected, while the monopolists move forward.
The Muscle Shoals war project has not been of service to the middle class in spite of the “public sentiment” and the fight of the middle class and farm interests.
 
The Power Projects
The Power Trust told Washington what to do – and orders are orders. But in spite of this the Power Trust is a good campaign issue and will be used as such. Roosevelt pulled a fast one on Hoover over the discussion of the St. Lawrence project. The St. Lawrence project for navigation and power is vital for a whole section of the American capitalists all the way over to Chicago and the two parties of the capitalists and their reformer brothers, the socialists, know this well enough. He who serves his master on this big waterway and power project will obtain his just reward, because it has great value for American imperialism in the coming period.
The economic and political organization of the Power Trust is great. Muscle Shoals was an early test of strength and the monopolist won. The urban and rural middle class are reorganizing for a fight in the present campaign. The four great power projects under way in one degree or the other in the United States are vital for the capitalists and the financiers; the industrialists and the middle class are endeavoring to obtain their sectional interests now. Muscle Shoals, the Hoover Dam, the St. Lawrence dam and the Columbia River dam will lay the basis for a vast electrification. It will in turn accelerate the centralization and concentration of wealth. That is the reason the forces are again testing their strength in the present election. Certain control gained now will go a long way for future domination.
 
The Insull Collapse
Insull is down but not out of the race. Years ago the Senate investigation proved that Samuel Insull was a campaign contributor to the Republican and Democratic parties in the Illinois fight for U.S. Senator. He gave the greater part of both campaign funds. Col. Smith accidentally happened to be chairman of the Illinois Commerce Commission which regulates utilities in the state as well as a candidate.
The fall of the Insull interests in the middle West, has transferred control directly to the other financial capitalists. The “prosecution” of the Insulls will not alter the process. The Morgan United Corporation, with assets above six hundred million, through stock ownership and interlocking interests, dominates the Eastern field. Three groups, the Morgans in the East, the banks which took over the Insull interests in the middle West and one in the West are utilizing the depression for further domination of the electric power.
In Montana the Power Trust and the Anaconda Copper Company struggle for power. The two control the state. Wheeler, who had the backing of Anaconda, made a heroic “middle “class” fight against the Power Trust. Similar examples can be multiplied manifold. Many prominent politicians, national committee-men and state officials are officers of Power Companies. The reformers object to this. The reformer seems to think that private capitalist ownership is alright providing these same robbers keep out of politics!
The Power Trust, the holding companies, the monopolists and financiers have their sectional class interest, just like the industrialists, who need a large supply of cheap power. They have their objections to the monopolist prices as well as the middle class, urban and rural, who by all means want cheap power – and the mass of consumers who can be lined up to fight the trust. The Republicans represent this standpat Trust’s interest. The Democrats and Roosevelt are not a bit better, but have their own sectional class interests. The progressives and socialist are the champions of the middle class. They want government ownership. Only the Communist party has a program suitable for the working class. The solution of the Power Trust like other Trusts is only possible through the proletarian revolution.
 



At a regular meeting of the New York branch on September 27, the branch unanimously voted to expel Robert Brilliant from the Left Opposition. The trial for Brilliant has been carried on since September 9, when written charges were presented against him and at the meeting where he gave a report in his defense. Since then despite notices, personal and written, Brilliant has not appeared at the Trial Committee nor attended any meetings or activity of the Left Opposition. After the committee heard evidence from a number of League members and other union workers the committee came to a unanimous decision for the expulsion of Brilliant.
The outstanding violations of Communist principles have been: that Brilliant worked in another shop while his shop was on strike. In this period he did not carry on any strike activity he deserted his comrades who were forced to elect another shop chairman in his place. After the strike was over, Brilliant asked the N.T.I.U. for a work card. This was refused on the grounds that he was working during the strike. Instead of correcting his position or coming to his fraction or to the League to present his case, he went to the Right wing union officials and to persons connected with the Forward and gave them information which appeared in the Forward.
After this non-Communist action was brought before the needle trades’ fraction and the League and after Brilliant was called to the trial committee he continued to carry on his struggle against the Industrial Union, by continuing his action with the Right wing officials, the Forward and the Day.
These deeds and actions are contrary to elementary Communist proceedings and outside the bounds of membership in the Left Opposition faction of the Communist movement.
 



Every important revolutionary question that Stalinism has attempted to solve and explain, to the party and to the class, has resulted in, greater confusion and further revision of Marxism. Since the 1923 revolution in Germany, Stalinism has grown to a full size menace to the Bolshevik-Leninist position of the proletarian revolution. In every part of the world, where revolutionary situations have developed favorable to the extension of the October revolution, Stalinism has stayed the hand of the Communist vanguard, sowed confusion, by a combination of zig-zags, from opportunism to adventurism.
In the United States we have not yet had a revolutionary situation favorable for the proletarian seizure of power, notwithstanding the fact that the VII National Convention of the Communist Party of the United States adopted a thesis which said we were faced with a revolutionary upsurge in 1930 – that is, in the first year of the present crisis. Because our “test” is still ahead Stalinism has not been able to repeat its criminal action in America.
The absence of a revolutionary situation in the United States up to the present has prevented the Stalinists from presenting us with their directives in action. However, there is sufficient material on hand to determine what road to power the Stalinists have charted out for the American workers.
 
The Stalinist “Chart for the U.S.”
In the present decay stage of capitalism we are confronted with an era of proletarian revolutions which will be supported in the backward and underdeveloped capitalist countries by colonial uprisings and bourgeois-democratic revolutions, which have as their driving force, not the bourgeoisie, but the proletariat, with the support of the peasantry. In the developed capitalist countries, particularly in the United States, we are heading for a proletarian revolution.
The Centrists present their position in the Resolution of the Communist International on the Negro Question in the United States, of October 1930. The C.I. resolution says, “The various forms of oppression of the Negro masses, who are concentrated mainly in the so-called ‘Black Belt’ provide the necessary conditions for a national revolutionary movement among the Negroes.” We are thus informed by Stalinism that the road to power in parts of the United States leads through the ‘’national revolution.” Stalinism says the “national revolution” will come first or that an agrarian revolution in the South will lay the basis for self-determination for the Negro masses. Let us see what the C.I. resolution says,
“Therefore, the overthrow of this class rule in the Black Belt is unconditionally necessary in the struggle for the Negroes’ right to self-determination. This, however, means at the same time the overthrow of the yoke of American imperialism in the Black Belt on which the forces of the local white bourgeoisie depend. Only in this way, only if the Negro population of the Black Belt wins its freedom from American imperialism even to the point of deciding itself the relations between its country and other governments, especially the United States, will it win real and complete self-determination. One should demand from the beginning that no armed forces of the American imperialists should remain on the territory of the Black Belt.”
 
The Farce of the “Democratic Dictatorship” in the South
According to this quotation, Stalinism does not only believe in a national revolution in PART of the United States but considers this national revolution to be the prelude to the proletarian revolution. Or, that first we will have a national revolution in the South – which will overthrow American Imperialism – and then, sometime later, the proletariat will have its revolution. There are plenty of quotations in the history of the American Communist movement to prove that the party is aiming at a proletarian revolution – but the present Stalinist position on the Negro question, which speaks of an agrarian revolution, of a “national revolution”, shows that they are badly confused. They are now aiming not only at a proletarian revolution but are also aiming to establish a power in the South by a national revolution. Stalinism will not be able to wipe this out of the Communist movement until it corrects its position on the Negro question.
The resolution says, “Moreover, the party cannot make its stand for this slogan depend upon any condition, even the condition that the proletariat has the hegemony in the national revolutionary Negro movement or that the majority of the Negro population in the Black Belt adopt the Soviet form (as Pepper demanded) etc.” This is not an abstract sentence speaking of colonial movements where we will support revolutions against imperialism even though we do not have hegemony. It is a concrete statement for the southern part of the United States. In other words, they leave the door open for a revolution, a national revolution, in the southern part of the UNITED STATES which will not have a proletarian hegemony and will establish a power – other than a Soviet. What kind of a revolution have the Stalinists in store for us? What is their perspective? They can speak of a proletarian revolution all they want to but if they at the same time speak of a “national revolution” in the South, which will be the first or coming revolution – this in itself discounts what they say about the revolution to follow. To aim, first at a national revolution and then at a proletarian revolution in the United States is worse than the path of Stalinism in China, where they first aimed at the “democratic dictatorship” through the four class party – and then (?) later (?) at the dictatorship of the proletariat.
This false base in the United States is no accident – it flows from the false premise of the theory of socialism in one country. On this revisionist base no Marxian theory for revolution for developed or backward capitalist countries can be developed.
The resolution is a bundle of confusion. A couple of examples can be presented. The resolution says the Black Belt cannot be “called a special colony of the United States”, but at the same time the resolution says,
“In the interest of the utmost clarity of ideas on this question, the Negro question in the United States must be reviewed from the standpoint of its peculiarity, namely, as a question of an oppressed nation, which in a peculiar and extraordinary distressing situation of national oppression not only in view of the prominent radical distinction (marked difference of color of skin, etc.), but above all, because of considerable social antagonism (remnants of slavery).”
After we are informed that remnants of slavery are a fact, the same resolution tells us that slavery is a fact. “It is only a Yankee bourgeois lie to say that the yoke of Negro slavery has been lifted in the United States. Formally it has been abolished but in practise the great majority of the Negro masses in the South are living in slavery in the literal sense of the word.” Economic analysis has been replaced by “moral determinism.” After we are told of remnants of slavery and then of slavery, the resolution continues, “More than three-fourths of all the Negro farmers have been bound in actual serfdom to farms and plantations of white exploiters by the feudal system of ‘share cropping’.” The national question as well as the kind of labor: slaves, serfs or workers and farmer’s under capitalism depends, not upon moral conclusions of double exploitation, but upon economic relations.
One cannot come to a correct conclusion by approaching the problem of the coming revolution in the United States from the standpoint of the parts (south). Only by considering the part, the South, in relation to the whole, to the United States and world capitalism, can we find the Marxian road to power. The unsolved carry-overs in the South, the economic needs and democratic demands that capitalism thrives on can not be fulfilled by a national revolution. They can only be eliminated in the United States by the overthrow of American imperialism.
The only force capable of this task is the proletarian revolution under the leadership of the Communist Party led by Marxists and not muddle-headed Stalinists.
The C.I. resolution informs us that the agrarian problem is the basis of the national question. This is a return to an economic base. But this correct abstraction is used for false conclusions. The agrarian problem of the Russian, Chinese or Mexican peasants is not the same agrarian problem of the American Negroes. From the standpoint of exploitation or from the standpoint of moral consideration we can say the Negroes of the South are as bad off, if not worse off, than the others, but this does not solve the problem. The approach to the problem must be the ECONOMIC RELATIONSHIPS. Carryovers in developed America and feudal remnants of backward countries are two different problems. We do not conclude after we have analyzed the relation of the sharecroppers to the landowners and local bankers. This must be extended to the WHOLE, which is within the framework of the capitalist mode of production of developed American imperialism. The question of the state and the ruling class cannot be ignored in the problem.
The condition of the Negro farmers is a remnant, a carryover which no one can deny, but the uneven development within countries as well as between countries which express the law of uneven development, not only skips stages but also bundles into knots different problems, which can only be untangled if the key is found. The keys for colonial countries and for the United States are different. For colonial countries, the solution of the agrarian problem, under the dictatorship of the proletariat expresses itself through giving land to the peasants, as a transition measure, essential, because a machine base for proper collectivization is lacking.
The solution of the agrarian problem in the United States, and this includes the Negro farmers, is not through TRANSITION STEPS (national revolution, agrarian revolution, etc.) but through the transformation of these antiquated methods of agricultural production into modern machine production. The collectivization of the farms, upon a machine base, and the transformation of oppressed farmers, black and white, not into free farmers with a plot of land, but into agrarian wage workers of the collectivized projects. This will be the product of the proletarian revolution.
We ask you readers to read the C.I. resolution yourself. It is printed by the party as, The Communist Position on the Negro Question. The sections of the book by Browder and others present the case in an even more confused manner.
 
A Loophole for a Retreat
In the same resolution, they quote the Colonial Theses of the Sixth World Congress. “But it is also clear that only a victorious proletarian revolution will finally decide the agrarian question and the national question in the South of the United States, in the interest of the predominating mass of Negro population of the country.” The sentence says, “finally decide”, meaning that the first revolution will be a “national revolution” and later we will have a proletarian revolution.
The socialists tell us they are aiming at a socialist mode of production. But what road do they follow to get it? The Stalinists tell us that hey are aiming at the proletarian revolution too. But what road do they follow in the United States to get it? They tell us – first, a national revolution in the South, and then a proletarian revolution. The road to power cannot be separated from power itself, nor can the road to power be corrected if we tack on for the distant future the goal of the proletarian revolution, or the socialist mode of production. So many good words and intentions, and that’s all.
The rejection of the Marxian theory of the permanent revolution by Stalinism and the adoption of the non-Marxian theory of socialism in one country is the base of these blunders, not only in America but wherever the Stalinists participated in a revolution or where they present directives for the coming revolution. The coming revolution in America will be a proletarian revolution. It will not only complete the unfinished carryovers but it will primarily solve the problems of the working class.
 



The NRA promised the people social peace, class harmony and prosperity. But after one year of the Blue Eagles’ rule, we witness a spiral wave of strike struggles that threaten to shake America out of its old way of thinking and make it realize that a “new day” is here for capital and labor. It is not a new day of class peace as promised by Roosevelt. It heralds a period of intensified antagonisms in the camp of the exploiting classes and between capital and labor.
At present a new strike wave is spreading throughout the nation. Most of the struggles are for the elementary right of union organization and union recognition, but they all include a struggle for higher pay and a decrease in hours. Everywhere workers are becoming disappointed with the NRA, especially since the Roosevelt Auto Settlement interpretation of collective bargaining.
The “Tory” of American politics tells us that the strike waves are due to the NRA. But this is far from the truth. The labor unrest and the importance of the union question today is a phenomena that can be traced to more fundamental sources, which in turn place the NRA as a capitalist stop-gap for the powerful upsurge of the working class.
 
NRA in the First Strike Wave
The first strike wave swept the country at the very beginning of the NRA and was dramatized by the Pennsylvania mine strikes and the Paterson silk strike. The NRA revealed itself in this situation, along with the A.F. of L. labor leaders, as a force in the defense of capital, against the workers, attempting, at every opportunity, to corral them into class collaboration machinery and to blunt their class weapons, thereby compelling the workers to return to work at the bosses’ terms.
The second strike wave, which threatened to rock the very foundation of American capitalism, was checked at first by the sell-out of the Auto workers by Green and Company under the Roosevelt-NRA plan. This was a decided set-back for organized labor. But no sooner had the bosses said “all’s well”, than local strikes in the auto industry upset all the plans. Other strikes in the basic industries followed in quick order and are now sweeping the country. All indications are that a new upsurge of greater scope is now in the making.
 
The Capitalist Plans
The capitalist class foresaw the developing strike struggles and prepared in advance to meet the situation. For this purpose the NRA was adopted by their government. Although the NRA serves a broader purpose than as a class collaboration machinery to hold in check the class struggle, this, nevertheless, is one of its basic features. The capitalists realized that the conservative A.F. of L. base was too narrow to cope with the new situation. The A.F. of L. was losing its economic base, as a natural process of the crisis. The workers of the basic industries were outside of the A.F. of L., the unskilled workers were ignored and the labor fakers showed no inclination to organize them. The vast majority of the American workers were unorganized.
To confront a period of increased class antagonisms between capital and labor with such a labor condition may be fatal for capital. Because the inevitable increase in strike struggles and motion toward union organization may get out of the hands of the conservative labor leaders and into class struggle channels. In other words, the class collaboration machinery of the A.F. of L. was too narrow to cope with the new situation.
 
Aim of the New Deal
The labor provisions under the New Deal, through the NRA section dealing with this, were designed to extend this base of class collaboration machinery. At the same time it was the aim to involve the existing A.F. of L. leaders in order to reach the millions of unorganized and unskilled.
A review of the strike struggles reported and analyzed in the columns of the Militant will convince one that the whole NRA labor machinery and its intervention in labor disputes, locally and nationally, has been to confuse and disorganize the workers and finally hand down decisions against them. Its first task is to prevent strikes. If this cannot be accomplished it continues its treacherous role with the labor fakers and the bosses. Even reports of strike struggles in the leading bourgeois papers cannot hide these facts. Every intervention of the Labor Boards and every settlement of strikes stands out in bold relief as an attempt to betray and defeat the working class. This, together with the open betrayal of the A.F. of L. leaders, is pushing the strike struggles to the left.
 
The Present Task
More independent action on the one hand, and outlaw strikes within the conservative unions on the other, indicate in which direction things are heading. This calls for an intensification of the work within the conservative unions in order to widen the gap between the rank and file and the fake leaders and, at the same time, to provide independent action outside of the A.F. of L., where such action becomes necessary.
The best way to retard this left wing development and help bolster up the labor fakers, and enable them again to save their faces, is to proceed to form a “new federation of labor” without the proper basis for it. This is the plan of the Stalinists to replace the Trade Union Unity League. Such a federation, controlled by the Stalinists, will play the same role today, on a larger scale, than the T.U.U.L. played when it was formed. It will retard the development of a genuine left wing movement in the conservative unions and also interfere with the building, of independent industrial unions. The building of independent industrial unions is directly connected with a live active left wing in the conservative unions which can give the proper support to the new unions and at the same time stay the hand of the labor fakers.
The confusion that Stalinism brings into the working class ranks plays havoc with the class conscious workers’ struggle against the labor fakers and the struggle against the NRA codes.
 
Results of the New Deal
The codes adopted so far are a disgrace to organized labor. They must be wiped out if labor is to benefit. The closed shop is outlawed. The open shop is legalized. The company unions are legalized. Minimum hours are entirely too long. Minimum wages are entirely too low for a living standard. With the legalizing of certain low minimum wage levels, combined with the different forms of inflation and price increase, the real wages of the workers have been reduced. Unless a more powerful strike wave develops, the real wage will be reduced further. Strikes are already outlawed. At any time deemed necessary the full force of the state power against the workers can be set in motion. An increase in brutal police and military repression of strikes is already evident.
The NRA class collaboration machinery and the A.F. of L. fakers’ betrayals will not be sufficient to stop the rising tide of labor struggles in America. The vitality and class action of the American workers will sweep them aside. Great historic battles are ahead. Let us sharpen our class weapons.
 



American imperialism, through the Roosevelt government has discontinued the Platt Amendment, which accorded to the United States the right of intervention in Cuban affairs. In its place a new treaty has been drawn up which retains the Guantanamo naval base.
The Platt Amendment has been one of the main causes of friction and hatred against the United States in Cuba and throughout the whole of Latin America. Now it is hoped that the new treaty will modify these antagonisms and place American imperialism in a better light. But why does the United States give up its rights under the Platt Amendment and what effects will this have in Latin American relations?
This concession to Latin America is one of the results of the Cuban revolution. Although unable to reach the goal of a Soviet government, the Cuban revolution was powerful enough to shake to the very foundation the rule of the exploiters in Cuba. The few reforms granted in Cuba, and the discontinuing of the Platt Amendment are measures of the American imperialists, in conjunction with the native exploiters, to prevent the rekindling of the revolutionary fires and prevent it from spreading and consuming everything dear to the capitalists and landowners. Under the cover of this the bitter persecution of the revolutionists can be continued more effectively.
The Abrogation of the Platt Amendment alters nothing fundamentally regarding American imperialism’s position on intervention in Latin America. From a tactical standpoint, however, – and this is highly significant – it will have a favorable effect for the United States. This forced concession on the part of the United States is passed off as a magnanimous deed and as a new policy toward Latin America. It is part of a new policy; a new policy of greater penetration and domination of Latin America by American imperialism, not through the clumsy big stick method, but by a more subtle and more clever, but just as deadly method.
The friends of Roosevelt should also call this another master stroke of Roosevelt diplomacy. It will appease a large section of the national bourgeoisie of Cuba and will pacify large layers of the petty bourgeoisie throughout Latin America. In this sense it will strengthen American imperialism in its struggle for greater hegemony over America. It will be worthwhile propaganda against the rising wave of anti-American and anti-imperialist discontent in Cuba and in Latin America.
At the same time the new treaty combined with the economic might of American imperialism and the Monroe Doctrine insures American domination not only in Cuba but the rest of Latin America. The new treaty provides for the naval base and so far as the right of Intervention is concerned imperialism needs no written permissions.
Latin America has been raped many times by American intervention. Mexico has felt the iron heel of the north. Wherever the American imperialist interests were at stake, intervention in one form or another has been resorted to in the past, and will be resorted to in the future.
The New York Times in an editorial of May 31 says, “But it remains true with or without a treaty, the American Government may lawfully intervene in Cuba to protect its own nationals or their property in case the territorial government is unable to do so.” That states the matter bluntly and clearly.
 



As Congress nears the close of the present session, President Roosevelt delivered what is supposed to be one of the most important and far reaching messages presented to it. The bourgeois press hailed the message as the dawn of a new day. The message called for “security for all” through a housing program and ask for the enactment of old age and unemployment insurance.
Without a doubt Roosevelt is a master at the art of demagogy, and in that sense this speech was one of the best. Once we analyze the Roosevelt program presented to Congress we will find that this sugar coated pill, delivered in the name of the “common people”, is In reality, a program against the working class.
Roosevelt’s speech was designed for public consumption while at the same time it must inform Congress what the President hoped would be enacted before adjournment. The speech is only an outline and if the administration desires its parts to be enacted they must be turned over to the proper sub-committees or administration forces and drawn up in Bills for Congressional consideration. When we examine those parts of the speech that have been presented in proper form for consideration we find that the high points of the President’s speech and the parts the press played up could not possibly be enacted this session. Therefore it becomes good propaganda, that costs nothing and will pave the way for the administration’s rallying cry for the next election. The points that deal with old age and unemployment insurance are those that catch the imagination of the working class, and take the wind out of the sails of the social reformers.
An examination of the bills pending before Congress will prove that they are measures for and by the imperialist group of capitalists that the Roosevelt administration serves. In last week’s issue of the Militant we have dealt with the Wagner Bill and have shown how this bill is not a savior for labor, but a straightjacket. Before we deal with the other acts it is advisable to say a few words about the social insurance features of the Roosevelt program.
It means that America has at last been forced through necessity to realize that the millions of unemployed are a permanent feature of our industrial system. That this so-called un-American foreign dole must be resorted to if capitalism is to continue. It means that the President has at last realized that it will cost no more, to set up a mild bourgeois form of social insurance, than it cost the government at the present to maintain its present form of city, county, state and national charity relief. The estimations presented for the coming period of what will be needed by the nation to continue its present charity relief can be taken care of far more effectively by changing the system of relief from charity to social insurance. Of course it will not be a social insurance as needed by the working class. That is not the purpose of the Roosevelt Program. It will head off criticism, cost no more than the present or rather future estimates and requirements, and will at the same time, snatch the fruit from the hands of the social reformers. Roosevelt’s propaganda speech is to pave the way, not only to dupe the workers, but also to educate the backward layers of the capitalist class.
The National Housing Act and the Industrial Loan Act are primarily aimed at the worst phase of the crisis and to speed up recovery in the basic industries that have not been touched by the other measures so far passed under the New Deal. The Industrial Loan Act will authorize the R.F.C. to use a half billion fund for direct loans to industries falling in the category of durable goods and will endeavor to stimulate the reinvestment of new capital in the means of production.
The Reciprocal Tariff Act is intended to give the president power to make arrangements with any and all countries in any part of the earth, where reciprocal tariff relations on commodities will enable America to increase her exports. The Sugar Control Act and the Cotton Control Act are intended to enable the American imperialists to eliminate the worst features of free competition and attempt to modify overproduction.
If one reviews the results of the New Peal and the measures enacted, one will find that they are all measures to further strengthen imperialist rule over the United States and strengthen its world position. From the NRA down through the list from A.A.A., to the Gold Reserve Act, the Silver Purchasing Act, to the Stock Exchange Act one finds links comprising a chain that tightens the capitalist grip upon the workers and the middle class. The clever demagogic way in which the Roosevelt administration put through these measures receives its due praise from the Wall Street overlords. The working class must become more capable of distinguishing words from deeds.
 



The actions taken by the 73rd Congress under the leadership of the Roosevelt regime reveal far-reaching bourgeois reforms aimed to prop up world capitalism.
The outstanding features of the 73rd Congress were:
1. Cleverly demagogic but firm steps to centralize and support the exploiting minority, and weaken labor by tying it to class collaboration machinery. This was the main task of the internal measures of the Congressional session. Banking and Industry, Agriculture, and Labor are the three divisions under which these measures fall.
The two outstanding features of the NRA are:

The economic feature. It organizes the industries on a national scale under Code Authority Bodies. It sets aside the Anti-Trust Laws and enables further consolidation and centralization of finance and industry through government cooperation, to form cartels, national industrial groups and monopolies. The small capitalists and sections of the middle class are driven out of business.
 
The “social relation” feature. It corrals the working class and their struggles against the capitalists into class collaboration machinery. The A.F. of L.’s class collaboration ideology was not sufficient to cope with the rising strike struggles and new class relations. The new and extensive machinery of labor boards and arbitration is needed to check, to disorganize and to prevent the workers’ struggles, especially those of the semi-skilled end unskilled millions of American workers.

The NRA has been strengthened in the last days of Congress by the act empowering the President to set up boards to attempt to force through arbitration wherever strikes threaten. In addition, the setting up of a national Railroad Adjustment Board shows the further steps necessary in this industry, which is one of the sickest capital enterprises today.
The monetary and banking apparatus is being adjusted to conform with the greater centralization of industry. Particularly the first steps were taken toward chain banks and a more unified and consistent bank structure to meet the international needs of American imperialism. The present banking structure of America is one of the most antiquated among leading imperialist countries.
The measures dealing with Agriculture will have far-reaching effects in reorganizing American agriculture to fit present requirements of American capitalism in a world of shrinking markets. The major effort of America is directed to increasing the export of capital, where safe investments can be found, and the export of industrial and finished commodities. This requires reorganizing agriculture, in order to leave the door open for the importation of raw material and some farm products to enable creditor nations to pay. This means a sharp curtailment of domestic production is necessary, and the AAA is designed to this end, as are also the bills for the compulsory control of tobacco and cotton. The curtailment program necessitated special relief to the drought area, and the measure, through the Frazer-Lemke Bill, to help the mortgage companies holding farmers’ mortgages.
 
Government Subsidies
2. Government subsidies to industry have become a dominant factor in this stage of capitalism. In the earliest stages of capitalism, government subsidies were a necessity for the development of the national capitalists. Now it is a necessity to maintain the decaying capitalist system. The direct loans to industry through the Federal Reserve Bank and the R.F.C. and the Housing Act are a huge subsidy, as we have pointed out before in the Militant, to stimulate the production of durable goods and turn the wheels in the heavy industries which has meant profits to industry and a slight increase of production, but with no appreciable effect on unemployment.
3. Outstanding is the fact that many issues, especially international issues, are not handled by Congress, and only reach Congress for its rubber stamp which, especially this year when Congress is thoroughly dominated by the President, means that for practical purposes international issues are in the hands of the Executive. In addition, Congress has delegated power to the President to conclude reciprocal treaties with foreign nations and to raise or lower duties by 50%.
 
International Policy
The Gold Act, vesting control in the President, was not only significant as an internal measure, but as a weapon of international policy which is now out of the hands of Congress. In these various ways power and funds have been centered in the hands of the Executive, so that pressing international issues can be handled with dictatorial decisiveness and rapidity by the President. These issues are the imperialist armament race, which will be cloaked in naval treaties and peace pacts, and the trade war that is already in full swing, disguised by reciprocal treaties and tariff manipulations.
4. In spite of all this increase of dictatorial power and centralization, bourgeois democracy in the United States is still a powerful force. Under conditions in any way approximating the present situation, the bourgeoisie will not have to resort to an open dictatorship. It still has sufficient internal strength and resources, so that further shifts of the workers to the left will be met by concessions designed to check and scatter the concentration of this leftward shift. Unemployment Belief
Further struggles of the unemployed will bring forward additional relief funds. More basic reforms, dealing with the thirty-hour week and unemployment and old age insurance (of a kind) have been left over for the next Congress, as concessions to be held in reserve to be presented later when the class storms become greater. Naturally, even these bourgeois substitutes and imitations of real social insurance measures, are only granted if the pressure of the working class is sufficient to warrant such stop-gap measures.
The Administration hopes to be able to handle the rising strike struggles in the coming period as effectively as it handled the Auto and Steel strike threats. The measures passed in the last days of Congress, giving the President full power to act and the setting up of arbitration boards is to be used in an attempt to keep class peace at home and the workers in subjection while the imperialist mongers are busy with the International problems confronting them in their attempt to organize the world.
 



The much talked of Wagner “Labor” Bill has been finally remoulded to the satisfaction of the class collaboration section of the exploiters, and is to be rushed through this session of the House and the Senate in order that it may become law and a part of the NRA structure before Congress adjourns. The attempt to speed up the Bill is entirely due to the rising wave of strike struggles that are sweeping the country. It is due, to the increasing militancy displayed by the workers in resisting the violence of the bosses’ agencies.
The Wagner Bill, when introduced, was heralded as a means to settle the disputed questions over interpretations of Section 7a of the NRA. Under this Bill labor would be placed in its highest status. On the other hand, it was designed to outlaw company unions. The final draft of the Bill, as it will be presented for consideration and vote contains none of these objectives attributed to it. What additional reactionary amendments will be tacked on before it gets through the House and Senate no one can predict now. It is vicious enough as it stands. In reality, the Bill is just the opposite of what it was proclaimed to be.
Under the cloak of checking company unions the Wagner Bill will legalize the company unions. The Labor Board to be established will define the difference between “good” and “bad” company unions. Section 7a stands as it did before with President Roosevelt’s interpretation, in relation to the Auto Strike settlement, as the main guiding line for the revised Wagner Bill.
Most Sinister Aspect of the Bill The Wagner Bill presents nothing new to the American way of handling class warfare. It only extends the methods that have been used by the employers for some time. The advanced section of the capitalists find that the NRA apparatus as now constituted does not have a satisfactory machinery to stifle, and to prevent strikes. It is not sufficient to hold in check the rising militancy of the working class. The Wagner Bill is to make up for this defect. It will establish Labor Boards fully in control of the capitalist monopoly owners and their agents that will handle all labor disputes. In whose interests the disputes will be decided should be obvious from the experiences of the Labor Board so far. The Board to be created by this Bill is to be appointed wholly by the President, three representing the so-called public, and one each representing capital and labor. It is to have power to prevent anyone from engaging in what is called “unfair labor practices ... that has led, or threatens to lead to a labor dispute that might effect commerce or obstruct the free flow of commerce.” When put into plain language, what is here somewhat concealed will stand out very clearly. It means that the Board will have powers to outlaw strikes. The Board will be a national institution fully backed up by the forces of the State, the courts, the police, the army and the navy.
 
Why Labor Leaders Support Bill
While it is true that a large section of the advanced capitalists are in favor of the Wagner Bill, it is equally true that a very large section are opposed to the Bill. The latter represent chiefly the monopoly concerns in which trades unions have the least foothold. Their main opposition was expressed to the Bill in its original form. Now that it has been revised the opposition will be less, but there will continue the opposition from the open shoppers who as yet rule undisputed and have no need of arbitration Their kind of class peace is no different in content from the class peace desired by the others. The difference is in the method. One uses bullets to crush strikes while the other thinks there is a more humane way of killing.
The Wagner Bill aims to satisfy as large a section of the exploiters as possible. It aims also to corral the A.F. of L. leaders. This is not so difficult because both accept the principles of class collaboration. Only the Bill must have a face that will be possible for the labor leaders to hide behind. What differences exist can mainly be explained in the fact that the A.F. of L. leaders are holding out for as much as they can get in the new set-up of Labor Boards against the working class. The labor leaders will do their share and give their services, but they are holding out for a price. Yet before this class collaboration machinery is set up these labor fakers will be on the band wagon. They have their special interests in outlawing strikes.
 



The class struggle of the American workers has been known throughout the world for its militancy and its sudden flare-ups. Likewise, among the workers of he advanced capitalist countries, the American, workers have been known as the most politically backward. The expression of their political backwardness was not confined to the spheres of ideology and theory. It was expressed most glaringly in the sphere of organization.
The highest developed capitalist nation with the lowest percentage of organized workers in the elementary trade union form of organization, and with a Socialist and later a Stalinist party that were no more than caricatures of their European sections, clearly revealed this backward organization state of affairs. Beneath these outstanding organizational shortcomings there was concealed a more fundamental one that is now in the first stage of change – as a reflection of the fundamental economic and class relation changes taking place In the United States.
 
Remoulding Workers’ Organizations
The old organization forms used by the American workers for elementary industrial struggles up to the highest political struggles have existed so long that every one takes them as a matter of course. Now that the basis of the old forms is in the flux it is vital that the class conscious element help remould these organization forms into a higher type for our class struggles.
The old forms primarily revolve around the craft structure for the trade unions, language and territorial structures and local and national central bodies. Conferences and permanent bodies that were formed on a city-wide or national issue merely knitted together the existing forms, which meant merely heaping together a quantity of the same backward forms.
A class that is politically backward, with a low class ideological level, can tolerate such antiquated forms. But a rapidly developing class in motion, such as we find in America today, already shows signs of a struggle to grasp new and higher organization forms.
The higher forms we must work toward revolve around the shop meeting and the shop committees a the basic units of the industrial union. This form has been propagandized for years. Now it is within reach of fulfillment.
The shop committee and Industrial union call for a new centralizing and coordinating structure if we are to be effective in combating the centralization, the concentration and cartels developing through the aid of the NRA. If the shop committee and industrial union use the old vehicle, which successfully coordinated the old craft, language and territorial structures, the effectiveness of the new weapons are reduced tenfold.
Shop Delegate Bodies
Craft and territorial forms called for centralization through conferences and permanent bodies by heaping together as many of these organizations as possible. Shop units and the industrial form of organization call for centralization through shop delegate bodies and committees. If the object is to solve working class problems in one industry the centralization of these shop units takes on the form of the industrial union as its highest expression. If the object is to solve some broader problems on a local or national scale the shop units are brought together in a centralizing structure by delegates from all of the shops in the city, region, or nation. The councils of delegates in a city elect delegates to the next higher body, and so on up to the national conference.
A transition stage from the old organization forms to the new is now beginning. This calls for special attention and guidance on the part of the class conscious workers. The transition will result in a struggle between the old and the new forms. Both forms will be used but it should be our deliberate policy to replace the old with the new as rapidly as possible until the new forms dominate and overshadow the old ones.
New Forms to the Fore
The crisis has brought the new forms to the fore. In the past this form only cropped up in the propaganda of the advanced workers. It made its way in life only when the heat of the class struggle reached a stage where the old broke down and the workers picked’ up the new forms. But in this whole period the old forms dominated the situation.
The new organizational forms are now pushing forward. Already hybrid and distorted forms of the new organizations can be noted. The Federal Union is an attempt to “answer the demand” by sidestepping the issue. The employers, in turn, go the labor fakers one better and answer the demand for Federal Unions in the Auto Industry by establishing “Works Councils” (employee representation company unions). However, shop delegate meetings based upon shop meetings and industrial unions are becoming more than talk and propaganda among the American workers.
It is very difficult to organize shop delegate bodies in the cities dominated by the diversified and small industries and in wholesale distributing centers for farm areas. Such localities give birth to a cluster of retail establishments which when combined with the other factors, make up a tremendous petty bourgeois section which dominates or wields tremendous influence in shaping, the immediate course of the class relations.
On the other hand, the basic industries of the country are so located and concentrated that they lend themselves readily to the industrial form and to the shop delegate bodies. Such industries as steel, coal, auto, textile, etc. add weight to the new form of organization.
 
Utilize Federal Unions
The struggle within the Federal unions must be utilized by those who support the industrial union and shop committees as embryo organizations for industrial unions.
The key to the change does not rest with the shop unit and industrial unions, although they constitute the foundation. The key to the change is in the United Front of all existing workers’ organizations. By this force conferences and organizations of SHOP DELEGATE BODIES can be established, with ample provisions for the representation of workers’ political organizations, the unorganized hops, the organized unemployed workers, and with fraternal delegates from the other workers’ organizations, with no discrimination against race, nationality, religious or political opinion. These bodies to constitute the new organizational forms of the workers united front for their demands.
At the start such shop delegate bodies will only be able to take root in certain sections, cities and regions. But later they will be able to spread nationally as the heat of the class struggles remoulds the new and higher organizational forms for the workers struggles.
The shop delegate bodies shall be democratic bodies representing all shops in the given area, regardless of what union the workers are affiliated to. The unorganized shops shall also send representatives and place on the first order of business the organization of the shops into units of the industrial union of the country.
 
The Answer to the NRA
This organizational structure should be the workers’ answer to the NRA. This should be the answer to Green’s class collaboration NRA plan. These shop delegate bodies shall fulfill the needs of tie class and safeguard and extend its democratic rights. Such a structure must be separate and apart from the NRA or any other class collaboration machinery.
The completion of the transform ation from the old to the new forms cannot be carried through artificially by the radicals. However, proper propaganda and agitation to popularize the new forms, with their use wherever possible, taking into consideration, at the same time, the fact that the forces of the class struggle are working in our favor can enable these forms’ to develop quite rapidly.
There is no short-cut to working class results. Some argue that this process is too slow, that work in the NRA will be faster. Yes faster in strait-jacketting the working class. Inside the NRA apparatus the workers are harnessed into class collaboration. The NRA apparatus can be entered by the workers as visitors, with the understanding that only the organized might of the workers outside of the NRA can win the workers demands. Pressure upon the NRA and its “use” upon this basis will obtain results and also enable us to expose it as a capitalist structure against the working class.
 



White supremacy in the Orient is again being seriously challenged This time it is not the workers of the world who are demanding “Hands Off China”, in the interest of the Chinese Revolution. Now it is Japanese imperialism which is demanding that the American and British imperialism check their aggressive action in the Chinese markets. China, the main country concerned, has little or nothing to say and must continue to play the role of expressing her bourgeois needs through imperialist spokesmen.
The declaration of Amau of the Japanese Foreign Office which was the unofficial announcement of official action taken two mouths prior in communications to China, was followed up by government declaration which affirmed the Japanese policy of the “Monroe Doctrine” for Asia. Japan, the leading imperialist power in Asia, long ago decided that the American imperialist policy of “America for the Americans” is a good policy for Asia.
In 1915, when Japanese imperialism endeavored to impose the twenty-one demands upon China, while the western imperialists were engaged in armed conflict, everyone knew that this meant the establishment of a protectorate over China. Japan did not succeed in 1915, and all indications are that she has not succeeded this time. But Japan is in a far more favorable position now to continue her Mauchurian policy of acting first and speaking afterwards.
 
The Struggle for China
The struggle for domination over China, which can only be accomplished at the expense of other imperialist powers, to say nothing of the interests of the Chinese workers and peasants, has been the consistent policy of Japanese and other imperialist powers. While the main strategy of American and European imperialist powers, for domination and markets, revolved around hegemony in Europe, and, in turn, in the colonial countries as the outcome of domination on the continent, the main strategy of Japanese imperialism for the whole century revolved around the struggle for domination of Asia.
U.S. imperialism won its position of domination in Americas as the broader base of operations for the struggle to place Europe on rations. Japan seeks a broad Asiatic base as her first step in an attempt to prevent American imperialism from “organizing the world” to her own liking.
America’s attempt to organize the world presses heavily upon Great Britain, Japan, France and Germany in all parts of the world. At present it finds one of its main focal points over the struggle for hegemony in China. It expresses itself in opposition to Japan’s closed door policy. But this in no way signifies a lessening of the antagonisms to England.
The Chinese market, for all purposes, is the prize and most important conquest of the imperialist needs today. No one realizes this better than Japanese imperialism. The steady encroachment of the Western Imperialists since the defeat of the second Chinese revolution compels Japan, as a life and death matter, to answer each step of further penetration by other imperialists with a more aggressive policy for her own ends. This is leading directly to the new imperialist war.
 
International Policy Decisive
The reorganization of the different imperialist nations within the depression cycle has passed the initial stage. The internal reorganization, based on one form of nationalism or the other, through inflation, currency devaluation and reduced wages and concentration and centralization of finance and capital, has reached the stage where the international policies, coordinated with the internal policies of the imperialist nations, become decisive.
This phase primarily expresses Itself in a war for markets. Trade wars and dumping intensify all the economic contradictions that national internal reorganization was supposed to have modified, if not eliminated altogether. The only stage that can follow this under capitalism is the stage of open armed conflict expressed in imperialist wars and civil wars between classes.
The main contending forces concerned in this struggle in the Orient are: Japan, the United States and Great Britain as the main imperialist contenders; the oppressed millions of China; the Soviet Union and the proletariat of the world which will defend the U.S.S.R. against imperialist attacks.
The pressure of the crisis of world economy upon Japan was almost as great as that which affected Germany before Hitler took power. But Japan was faced with a more favorable capitalist variant and found an outlet in the armed invasion and further conquest of China. With this military strategy Japan was forced to intensify her trade war with the other imperialist powers and has successfully invaded and challenged the Western robbers on every continent, making inroads in strongholds of the United States and Great Britain.
 
Enlarging the Contradictions
Japan’s way out of the crisis and the contradictions of world economy is proving no more successful than the way attempted by Germany or any other imperialist power. Japan’s way out has accomplished in the Far East what Germany’s way out is accomplishing in Europe. It is extending and enlarging the contradiction and causing a concentration of the war clouds which inevitably lead to war.
Therefore, China, as the most important market for Japan, as well as for the other imperialists, is at the same time the base for Japanese war supplies in the struggle against Western Imperialism. Japan cannot let go of China and retreat. Diplomatic retreats will only cloak economic and military advances and preparations for Japan’s defense of her “rights” to domination in the Orient.
Great Britain sees this problem as clearly as do the American imperialists. But England does not hold the same favorable world position. This forces the British imperialists to take more drastic steps at once which are resulting in a gigantic trade war between England and Japan. It has reached the point where British diplomacy must openly and bluntly speak of a trade war with Japan.
 
The U.S. and England
To some this implies a united front of the United States and England against Japan. But in reality a trade war by England aimed a Japan, which gains the support o the Empire, will at the same time become an intensified force against the American imperialists in their search for markets. This will intensify the antagonisms and, unless agreements and concessions between British and American imperialism can be arranged, it will result in an extension of the trade war to new heights and bring the war just that much closer.
This increasing war danger am growing reaction in Europe will tighten the grip of world economy around Soviet economy. With Stalin at the helm, the Soviet Union will undoubtedly give more concessions to world imperialism. The American imperialist recognition of the Soviet Union, which was cloaked as a peace move and heralded by the Pravda as a big step to further world peace, was in reality a strategic move in the war preparations of America, aimed on the one hand against the new Hitler Germany and on the other hand against aggressive Japanese imperialism in the Orient.
 
Upset “Balance of Power”
The successful invasion of China by Japan and the victory of Fascism in Germany upset the “balance of power”, both in the Orient and in Europe, and called for a regrouping of forces in preparation for the coming war. Of course it also called for increased armaments, a mad race of imperialism for war supplies and instruments of death.
The position of the United States in regard to Japan was as firm as the position taken by England, but could be presented in a different fashion. The battle of diplomacy over China is only a spark of what is really going on under the surface. The moves and preparations of American imperialism in the race for the Chinese markets, and other markets Japan is invading, are laying the basis for a gigantic explosion.
America’s imperialist success in Latin America, and her strategic position in relation to decadent Europe, make it necessary to challenge the Japanese or any other imperialist power aiming to dominate the Orient. Otherwise, America’s desire to organize the world for her economic needs will receive a blow which it will be difficult to recover from.
 



The Darrow Review Board’s findings on the NRA has resulted in a bitter fight on Capitol Hill between the spokesmen for the different sections of the exploiters. Although the Review Board was only appointed March 7th by Executive Order, it has already received its death sentence, to take place next month. The hundred-thousand word report is to be followed in a week, before the expiration of its short life, by another report which promises to reveal more of the NRA doings.
The National Recovery Review Board report says that the NRA is helping the trusts, that the NRA tends toward monopoly, that the little fellows under the codes are stifled. It sharply assails the codes reviewed; especially the steel code where the monopolistic practices are exposed.
The report reveals with facts and figures, that the NRA is helping the large concerns and is systematically freezing out small business under all of the codes reviewed. To the readers of the Militant this is nothing new. From the very first day of the NRA we have clearly pointed out this phase of its functioning. What is important in the Darrow review is the fact that the antagonisms and conflicts inside the camp of the exploiters are sharpening. The report is one of its expressions. It will be used by a large section of the middle class.
 
Darrow Speaks for Middle Class
More significant than what is said in the Darrow report is what is left unsaid. The report gives a little attention to the problems of the working class. Hut it does not deal with the fundamental problems confronting the working class under the codes. This is not an accident. Darrow speaks for the middle class and not for the working class. The committee and those that back the committee, such as Borah and Nye, are fighting for the little business man and a large section of the middle class. In such a fight they come into conflict with the working class, even though they hope to involve large sections of the working class in their fight against big capital.
It is true that Darrow and Tompson, in a supplementary report, call for the socialization of industry as an alternative to the NRA. This does not represent a left position. It signifies a position in which left phrases cover the worst kind of social reformist and reactionary ideas. Johnson, in his reply, correctly pointed out that the Darrow position leads either to Communism or Fascism. And correctly so. We do not expect Darrow in his report to specify which road he desires after the NRA – Fascism or Communism. We only point out that these two roads are open. The sloppy middle class report of the Darrow committee which cannot find space for the working class in a hundred-thousand word criticism of the NRA in no sense throws a favorable light upon the committee. A committee’s report which criticizes the NRA, which is against big business and for the “little fellow” and which, at the same time, speaks of socialization as an alternative but leaves out any reference to the problems of the working class – such a report can become a basis for the worst kind of a middle class movement to rally the workers “against the trusts”.
 
Pressure on the Workers
How anyone can write a hundred-thousand word document and criticism and say so little about the working class is a surprise to us. For every ounce of monopolistic pressure against the little fellow under the codes there is a ton of pressure against the working class. The fact that the Roosevelt New Deal was so capable of putting over its big business measures in the name of the workers calls all the more for an exposure of the clever methods used under the NRA to lower the standard of living of the American workers, and to hold it in check.
The expression of class antagonisms through the NRA has simplified the previously complicated problem of the relation of economics to politics and class interests. In the past the ruling class had the simple task of issuing every measure in the name of the “people”. They still do this, but before the ink is dry on the new measures the “people” split up into struggling classes.
 
Who is the NRA For?
The NRA is detrimental to the working class. The NRA is also detrimental to the middle class, as Darrow points out. And, according to some of the big fellows of the Chamber of Commerce, the Manufacturers Association, the Steel Association, etc., the NRA is also detrimental to them. If this is the case who is the NRA for?
Under the NRA the working class received crumbs in order to restrain them from taking more in strike struggles and organization. Also, the little fellow is being driven out of business through the operation of the codes. This much of the problem is not so difficult to understand. What confuses many is the fact that monopolists also criticize the NRA. Marx pointed out the significance of such phenomena in the last century. Here we have a striking confirmation of his analysis. The conflict within the national ruling class is sharpening. There is not only a conflict between imperialist nations. There is, likewise, a struggle between groups of imperialists within the nation. The Roosevelt group is in sharp conflict with the Hoover group. Besides this, other groups are struggling for sectional control of the country and of industries.
 
Finance Capital and the New Deal
The bitterest attacks on the NRA have come from the groups of financial capitalists, who are not on the inside of the New Deal. They have more foresight for their own interests. This does not account for the whole of their criticism. Much of their criticism against the NRA has only been leveled at Section 7a. They know that the precedents established at the start will, to a large extent, govern the whole unless labor can demand a change. Therefore, they hammer away against labor. They want to give as few crumbs as possible and, at the same time, make a lot of noise to cover up the increase of profits rolling into them.
The Darrow report is speaking for a section of the middle class and small industrialists. The working class must use their criticism to further expose the NRA. But the workers must steer clear of Darrow, Nye and all of the other liberals and social reformers.
 



The A.F. of L. has issued its annual business review which claims three gains for the workers under the NRA. At the same time the statement criticizes the NRA for not giving the labor leaders greater representation in the bodies set up by the code apparatus. The A.F. of L. report says that the gains have been: greater employment, shorter hours and increase in pay. The statement adds that the workers are “better organized to handle their problems and share in industrial control than they were last year.”
The three gains are qualified with a few ifs and buts which do not add clarity. No conclusions have been drawn by the statement; regarding the relation of the working class to the NRA. In fact many bank reports have presented labor’s problems with greater clarity.
 
Basic Problem Untouched
The report says that 1,800,000 laborers have been put back to work. But they do not state at what weekly wage. We know that the great majority of those who returned to work have been placed on the minimum wage rate. Others are on piece work with weekly earnings far below the blanket code minimum. Four and a half million have been given temporary work under the Civil and Public works programs. The report fails to explain that this is just another form of work-relief. These millions were taken off the relief list and were compelled to work for the equivalent of relief in order to carry them through the winter. The basic problem of unemployment under the capitalist system, the return of the workers to industry, has not been solved. The basic problem is not even touched.
 
Reduction in Real Wages
The hourly wage increase is reported to be 51 cents, and is qualified by the fact that this has not compensated for the shorter hours nor the rise in prices. The report also informs us that wage gains have been made by low-paid workers but that workers with a higher wage rate have been forced to a lower living standard. What the report fails to say is the following: That the rise in money wages coincided with a reduction in real wages due to the increase of prices of the essentials. Further, the number of high paid workers forced to a lower standard of living outweigh the number of low paid workers who obtained a slight increase.
The main point, however, is entirely missed or covered up in the A.F. of L. report. Granting for the moment that some of the workers can register a small gain in hours, wages and employment, even though the rest of the class has sunk lower, the fact remains that this “gain” is a cheap price for the capitalists to pay to keep the workers in check while they distribute billions for their own class at the same time. The NRA and all of the internal measures for recovery, as well as the proposed eleven billion dollar budget, are for the benefit of capitalist class. Naturally, they can afford to pay the price of a few crumbs to the working class in order to be left in peace to find a way out of the crisis. The A.F. of L. leaders help the capitalists in this game.
 
Green Appeals to Capitalists
The A.F. of L. report devotes a couple of paragraphs to the wage slave; the rest is a warning to the capitalist class. Not a warning that the A.F. of L. will lead the workers in struggle against the capitalists, but a warning that the capitalists had better be careful lest the workers get out of control. And the best way to keep the workers in control is to give us, the labor leaders, more of a hand in the affairs of the NRA and “industrial control”. Such is Green’s basic argument.
The report warns the capitalists that they had better get busy and not let the government take the whole initiative. Roosevelt knows how to use Green and Company – so why not you, the capitalists? The report warns against currency inflation but has praise for the other forms of inflation being carried out. The report ends by begging the capitalists and their government to give labor representation on the mechanism established with each code adopted. The A.F. of L. leaders desire to extend the present methods of class collaboration used by the NRA.
 
Role of Labor Leaders in N.R.A.
They were allowed in the first committees which were established to muffle and beat down the first strike wave. They did their job well and are reserved a place to prevent strikes and to break them. The capitalists needed them for this job and allow them to continue in this position. The A.F. of L. report is a plea for the extension of these “privileges” in the government machinery. The capitalists will grant such an extension when the need for it is clear to them, that is when the class storms break out more turbulently.
To the A.F. of L. leaders’ policy of class collaboration should be counterposed the workers’ struggle for the organization and recognition of shop committees in every establishment. Shop committees, in conjunction with trade unions, fighting on the basis of the class struggle, constitute the apparatus which should be counterposed to the class-collaboration apparatus defended by Green & Co.
 



Throughout the crisis mass unemployment has been one of the most complex problems of capitalism. As the crisis passed from months into years the ruling class followed every phase of the problem of the unemployed and endeavored to check this rising tide from finding an outlet into the class struggle.
At first they denied its existence. Then the exploiters claimed it was a temporary phenomenon. Next they denied its magnitude. Only after a long period of many months, with resistance every inch of the way, did the capitalists admit that charity and local and state relief must be replaced by a national policy to cope with the “emergency”. They continue to fight against considering unemployment as a social problem and oppose social insurance. Many far-sighted exploiters, it is true, now realize that unemployment is a permanent problem. The majority, however – and they dominate the government policy – continue to try every form of emergency relief possible in order to avoid facing the issue of unemployment insurance.
Title Two of the Recovery Act provided for a public works program and the expenditure of over three billion dollars. The method of handling the problem of unemployment under the NRA was coordinated into a two-fold policy. On the one hand the public works program was to take millions off the relief lists. The reduction of hours was to put more millions back to work at reduced real wages. The government had to admit at a very early date that the public works program failed to accomplish this purpose. It did, as we stated before, enable a goodly number of exploiters to get in on the pork barrel. All but a half a billion of the fund has been allotted and it has failed as a factor to cause re-employment.
When this phase of the NRA cracked wide open the administration inaugurated the Civil Works Program designed to give jobs, in place of relief to four million. Stripped of its high-sounding pretensions and its publicity tricks the Civil Works Program was an emergency stop-gap – a scheme for winter, which is the worst period for the unemployed, to give them just a sufficient amount to keep them from starving to death, until spring. Four billion dollars four million workers, deducting the regular American graft along the way, leaves less than fifty dollars for the winter for the “bread winner” of an average family of four. The Civil Works Program was a necessary supplementary measure to prop up the breakdown of the NRA.
The Civil Works Program, like all other government measures dealing with the problem of unemployment, is so organized that the relief and work given is spread over the nation through a process of selecting the most menacing sections of the problems and taking off their sharp edges. The object is, first, to protect private property from individual acts of robbery and, last but not least, to protect capitalist property from the threat of expropriation by the working class. This Is attempted by singling out for attention the most difficult family cases as well as by a consideration of all other social factors in the given local situation.
The record for 1933 shows March to be the peak month with four and a half million receiving public aid. Over five million families were placed on a fifty cents per day average last winter; at the present time with all the new measures taken for their “benefit”, they are doing good if they get sixty cents a day. In addition to this large number on the relief list, there exists that growing army of destitute individuals below this level who sleep under viaducts and on doorsteps by night and roam the streets looking for a handout by day. Above the multitude on relief list there is a still larger number of families, with the bread earners out of work, which exists precariously one way or another – some families are broken up and dispersed in the homes of relatives or friend’s; some used up their treasured rainy dry savings: others have become houseworkers and janitors in exchange for the necessities of life.
The government adopts those measures for the problem of unemployment which benefit the ruling class. But they twist the question upside down so that it looks as though they are trying to solve the problem for labor’s benefit. The majority of the unemployed as well as the employed are not yet disillusioned and accept the inverted bourgeois explanation as correct. The workers must be taught that bourgeois charity and relief, which take from the super-abundant supply and overproduction only a sufficient amount of food and necessities to keep the wage slaves from starving to death, are not really designed] to help them. The object in reality is to prevent individual and, later, social expropriation of capitalist property and, at the same time, to insure the capitalists an abundant supply of cheap labor power. This is the dominating motive of all unemployment measures of the capitalists.
The Civil Works Program will face its death crisis in the spring as the public works program of the NRA confronted it in the fall. The ruling exploiters look forward to warm weather and the hoped-for revival. If the revival does not take place they will drive through another “emergency measure”.
The extension of the original Public Works Program to the Civil Works Program has solved nothing fundamentally. It has only postponed the showdown. It has, in a negative way, further educated the unemployed as to what kind of a government and what kind of a crazy economic system we have.
 



To the Militant:
In reporting the Bryant Hall strike meeting you mention my name as a strike organizer. My acting as chairman of the meeting was not in that capacity. I am a rank and file member of the union, not an official.
Hugo Oehler
 



Speaking before the NRA Code Authorities, President Roosevelt said: “The real truth of the matter is that for a number of years in our country the machinery of democracy had failed to function.” It is no accident that the President and the NRA officials do not report to Congress but instead present the 12 point program of the NRA at the “Public Hearing” while Roosevelt and Johnson deliver their speeches on policies and aims of the NRA to the meeting of the Code Authorities.
 
Speak to the “Captains of Industry”
They speak to the “captains” of our economic system, lining up support that can bring the necessary pressure on the Senate and House for any rubber stamp legislation required for speedy action in the whirl of deepening international antagonisms and conflicts of world capitalism.
Under the NRA the further centralization of government and industry is rapidly proceeding. The order of the day does not present us with the alternative of Communism or Fascism. This is a problem of the not too distant future. The task of the rulers of today and their NRA office boys is to answer the immediate problems of the capitalist mode of production in order to canalize the class relations. The latest moves of the Roosevelt administration are designed to serve this purpose.
 
The “12 Points” Ballyhoo
The NRA ballyhoo about the 12 points means nothing more or less, when boiled down, than an increased offensive against the small producers and the working class. It is an old trick to speak of peace when preparing for war. And, likewise, it is an old trick to speak about the workers’ needs and the small producers’ interests when the dominating exploiters are going to take another pound of flesh.
One of the most effective ways of drive out the small producer is to place restrictions on free competition. When the large producer, operating with modern machinery and a high rate of exploitation of his labor power, is placed on an equal basis with the small producer, with a lesser degree of exploitation – with hours and wages the same – the small producer will be driven to the wall faster than if the process is left to unbridled competition.
 
Reducing the Hours
A permanent army of millions of unemployed American workers calls for a reorganization of labor power in relation to machine production. This can only be expressed by the reduction of the hours. As far as the ruling exploiters are concerned, the workers’ interests have nothing to do with it. They are making a forced retreat to safeguard their own rule. At the present juncture this forced retreat, as we have pointed out before in the Militant on the question of the Six Hour Day with no reduction in pay, has also resulted in a political defeat of the working class. There is a world of difference between “concessions” put through by the capitalists and those forced by the workers.
The reduction of hours under the NRA calls for wage increases. Up to the present this has resulted in a reduction of the real wages of the workers. Concealed under the talk of a money wage increase a leveling off process for the American workers has taken place. There has been a reduction in real wages, and a little bribery here and there whenever the rulers had to turn a sharp corner.
 
Senator Wagner’s Admissions
Senator Wagner admits this. He says: “Real earnings of the individuals working full time are slightly less than they were last March.” Further: “Some of the minimum wage provisions under the codes are lower than the standards actually prevailing in the industry”. And the skilled have had hours reduced but no pay increase.
Right now the capitalists are turning another sharp corner. That is the reasons for the 12 point program and the special talks on policy by the President and the General. Industry under the NRA is not solving the crisis. Johnston let the cat out of the bag in the speech before the NRA Code Authorities when he said: “We know something about what is toward in this country – the worst epidemic of strikes in our history. Why suffer it. There is a way out. Play the game. Submit to the law and get it over quickly.”
Johnson warns the exploiters to go easy with their Company Unions and tells them to deal with Green, Lewis, and Company. The thought is unsaid but understood – that the agents of the capitalists in the ranks of the workers are far better to deal with “in the worst epidemic of strikes in our history” than leaders of strikes who represent the working class.
 



The programs of the different currents of the working class movement are being tested by the Spanish revolution – a revolution which is now in Socialist-Republican hands, but a revolution these forces are unable to solve, a revolution slipping from their grasp, either to be carried to the successful conclusion of a dictatorship of the proletariat by a Marxian leadership or to be spilled back in the hands of the capitalist-feudalist forces.
In the onward march of the revolution the syndicalists hold a key position not because of their theoretical position, but due to their lack of one and the fact that they are the most powerfully organized and militant proletarian force. The Communist program that does not give special attention to this part of the heterogenous problem will be unable “to reduce all the contradictions and tasks to one co-efficient – the dictatorship of the proletariat”. Before dealing with what kind of special attention we must take up the syndicalist movement of Spain.
The Russian Revolution and the German revolution had to contend with the socialists as the most powerful organized force with a non-Marxian position. The Chinese revolution has a different relationship of these forces. Although the present Spanish revolution brings out a relationship with the socialists resembling the German and Russian revolutions it nevertheless opens up a new problem when considering the relationship of the socialists syndicalists and Communists in Spain as well as what lessons revolutionists have already learned about the role of the socialists.
We are actively participating in a revolution that can be compared with the Russian revolution. If we are to list the striking differences between these two revolutions special attention must be given to the syndicalist problem, because the Left Opposition has already dealt with the other vital problems to a greater degree. The capitalist press of the continent is comparing the Spanish revolution with the French revolution and the American press has followed its lead. What blindness and lack of understanding of their own capitalist problems! The French revolution came in the period of the birth of capitalism and the Spanish revolution breaks out in the period of the decay of capitalism. The capitalist comparison holds no water.
The syndicalist movement took root in Spain at the beginning of the century, as it did in most capitalist countries, as a “healthy” reaction to the revision and opportunism of the Second International. The “denial” of politics and the attitude toward the State was the most favorable ground for the philosophy of Anarchism. The old problems of capitalism are incorporated in the new problems of capitalism and the old problems of the Marxian movement (Bakunin, Proudhon etc.) are incorporated in our new problems. They are not to be dismissed as settled problems, as an unnecessary retracing of steps over ground covered but to be treated as part of the contradictions of the present stage of imperialism. Stalinism as a revision of Marxism and the tactics of the Comintern have been feeding the stream of syndicalism. Driving workers to reformism and syndicalism is part of Stalinism. To win the workers from the reformist and anarcho-syndicalist leadership, to the road of the proletarian revolution is a task that falls upon the shoulders of the Left Opposition. We must remember that the road does not lead around the party but through the party. But we must also add that “through the party” does not exclude independent action – it necessarily includes such.
The General Confederation of Labor, as a syndicalist organization, is far from homogeneous. At present the anarcho-syndicalists are in control but the very process of the revolution and the wrong policies of this leadership must accelerate tho division in the organization. The 1919 Congress decided to join the Third International, but desiring to join and being Communist are two different things. By 1920 the confederation had over 800,000 members, according to their reports, but the eventful years and defeats since then have left them with a small underground organization which is rapidly growing in the present revolution.
 
The General Strike
The defeat of the general strike in 1923 in Spain and the general world effects of the defeat of the October German revolution enabled the dictatorship of Primo De Rivera to establish its rule on the backs of the workers and peasants of Spain. The syndicalist program is brought out in full light in the events since 1923 as an utter minus in relation to solving the problems of the proletariat and peasantry. To the syndicalist, the general strike means everything. To us the general strike is a most powerful weapon in the hands of Marxian leadership; yet it only RAISES the question of power but does not SETTLE it. Only the smashing of the capitalist state machinery and its replacement with a proletarian state machine, a dictatorship of the proletariat in Alliance with the peasantry in Spain, will settle the question of power.
The “Syndicat” as a federated system of autonomy is the syndicalist structure to take over production. Workers’ federalism vs. centralism is their keynote. Under capitalism the organization of production has already surpassed this syndicalist federated or local commune stage. Capitalism has combined industry, etc., nationally and internationally interlocking numbers of industries under finance-capitalism. The syndicalist proposal is a step backward to the organization of productive forces on a lower level, while the socialist solution of the proletarian problem lies in surpassing the capitalist mode of production. We must build a higher stage of economic production as well as distribution. The Centrist with his theory of socialism in one country is only different in degree from the syndicalist conception of the solution of the toiling masses’ problems under the socialist mode of production. Stalinism can build socialism in an isolated economic backward unit and the syndicalist can build socialism through local communes. The Left Opposition say the solution of our problems and of the Socialist mode of production lies in the world arena through the world revolution. The seizure of power in Spain now by the proletariat would be another step, a link in the chain of world revolution and would bring greater clarity to our ranks and more unity between the proletariat and peasantry – a unity with an accelerated solution of the peasant problem. Lenin wrote, “The basic question of any revolution is that of state power. Unless this is understood there can be no intelligent participation in the revolution, let alone directing it.” The leaders of the syndicalists have not learned this BASIC question but fortunately the rank and file followers of the syndicalist and some capable proletarian leaders of their camp are learning this basic problem not only in Spain but throughout the world. The quicker we teach this basic point to the Spanish syndicalist followers the faster will be the development of a party, a Marxian party of Communists.
The capitalists may be “dumb” but they at least can distinguish friend from foe. They recognize the Soviet Union not as a friend but as a foe, in spite of the blunders of Stalin. But the syndicalist cannot understand this distinction. No matter how far Stalin has gone up to now with his theory of socialism in one country the international capitalists will not confuse this with capitalist rule even though they realize his policies are strengthening the element that want the return of capitalist rule. The syndicalists often say they would rather have a capitalist dictatorship (U.S. “democracy”) than the Russian dictatorship (Soviet power under Communist leadership). Their actions in Spain prove it.
 
“Freedom” and Dictatorship
Pestaña, leader of the syndicalist says, “A dictatorship of the proletariat is continually mentioned. We want no dictatorship. The workers must be educated for freedom, not tyranny. The syndicate is the solution.” There is nothing in between the dictatorship of the capitalist today in Spain and the dictatorship of the proletariat tomorrow. The only choice lies between rule of the workers and peasants and the rule of the capitalist and feudalist. We say to the syndicalists: If you establish your “federation of syndicates” and the capitalists endeavor to take them back, you must either use force against them or give up – to use force against them, to keep them from a return to private property is the dictation of one class the working class over the capitalist class, and such, in plain English, is the dictatorship of the proletariat through the Soviets. You want freedom and we tell you freedom for the capitalist and feudalist is tyranny for the workers and peasants and freedom for the workers and peasants is “tyranny” for the capitalist and feudalist. Only, our rule is the rule of the majority over the minority.
The objective conditions favor us, the masses learn fast in a revolution and through united fronts with revolutionary syndicalists fighting the Socialist-Republican government we can help them to discard their anarchist prejudices.
Worker, peasant and soldier Juntas with the Communist program presented by the Left Opposition, is the road to power in Spain for the workers and peasants.
 



The motion within the working class caused by the present crisis is a forerunner to impeding historic changes. In such a situation it is the duty and task of the Communist to point out the road and lead the way. But once again we find the revisionists within our ranks, the Stalinites, pointing out the road, first of adventure and then of opportunism. This contradictory swing from one extreme to the other is most glaring in the unemployment activity. To the Browders, Johnstones and the district organizers throughout the country, the six hour day slogan is counter-revolutionary, and a new name for the stagger-system.
We present some facts for the comrades. Our literature and propaganda must be so conducted that we never lose sight of our goal, which we must constantly point out to the working class. The party in its Right swing has left this by the wayside, and only now and then in a mechanical way does one find party functionaries presenting the revolutionary conclusions. When a Communist party presents a string of immediate demands for unemployment activity and does not connect them with the ultimate aim, it is a serious situation; to fail to select the DETERMINING connecting link between the present class relationships and our goal is to blunt our weapons and sidetrack our movement into an opportunist swamp, no matter how loudly we proclaim our support of the Soviet Union, etc.
Immediate demands, without proper connection with the revolutionary conclusion are of no value, and are of great harm to the Communist movement. But even if we properly connect the immediate demands to the goal, but fail to pick out the determining slogans in a given situation we also, “lag dangerously behind the task of organizing a widespread movement of the unemployed.” In the resolution of the Central Committee of the party (Daily Worker, 11-28-31) the American bureaucrats list one central unifying slogan: Unemployment Insurance at full wages, a slogan with 29 words. They then present seven main national slogans, which include everything, free rent, gas, light, water and immediate, extensive public work at trade union wages, and the seven hour day.
This is worse than the New York election program which was a local affair, while this is a national directive for the whole American working class. To these main slogans, the resolution adds, “It is necessary to raise local demands in the various localities.”
 
The Main Slogans
The party does not present to the workers one, two or three short, snappy slogans as the MAIN DETERMINING slogans for our class in the present situation; this is vitally necessary. In my estimation the three outstanding slogans to be given national prominence are: The Six Hour day, the five day week with no reduction in pay, and Immediate Relief and Social Insurance (Not Social Insurance BILL). The last two have been dealt with by the party; I devote myself to the importance of the reduction of hours struggle.
Every worker with ordinary sense is for the reduction of his hours of toil. But the problem does not stop here. Some are working 12 hours, others 10 and some 8 hours. What should be the slogan for this variation? Before the worker will jump, he will want to know if he will receive less pay, because what he makes now by working from 8 to 12 hours is not enough, and if he gets less, he just can’t get by. The slogan for a six hour day does not imply 6 hours of work for every worker in the country at once, no matter how we would desire such. It means (as, (for example, the 8 hour movement of the ’80s) that this slogan rallies the greatest class forces in organized opposition to the capitalists, and where our pressure is the strongest, forces a reduction of hours.
If we look back at the history of our own pages of struggle, we can understand the powerful movements organized around the 10 hour struggle of the ’30s and the 8 hour struggle in the ’80s. Today, American industry has reached a stage rotten ripe for the struggle for the 6 hour day. The American workers of today must continue the heroic examples of the proletariat before us. The historic trend has witnessed the reduction of hours as a national outcome of the class struggle, and with it has developed the intensification of their exploitation. You cannot have your choice If you “refuse” the reduction of hours today – the speed-up of labor will proceed full speed anyway.
 
The Importance of the Struggle to Reduce Working Hours
Its form may be altered somewhat, but it would be the same speed-up we all know so well. The class conscious worker knows the positive effect powerful unions and successful strikes have on real wages and the standard of living. But in spite of this constant struggle, real wages show little change, that is, the working class in the past and now receive an average wage that is equal to the minimum subsistence level. This is no argument against the struggle for these immediate demands, but it is a powerful argument against those who think they can gain their objective through immediate demands, as well as those who lose sight of the revolutionary goal. On the other hand, the above shows the futility of the social reformist struggle for immediate demands alone, but on the other hand it does not substantiate the “ultra-Leftists” who are against all immediate demands. Immediate demands are the links for the vanguard and the class. What kind of immediate demands, how they are formulated and fought for, is the decisive factor. The slogans the Central Committee of the Party presents for unemployment activity fall short of this test.
The struggle for the reduction of hours is only dragged in by the tail as an additional slogan, and is wrongly formulated at that. If it were possible to add one more hour of work per day to every employed worker, the resulting reaction, in addition to increased unemployment, would be a reduction of pay and less workers doing more work. The problem is stated wrong when one says a low hourly wage rate brings long hours – it is industries with long hours that bring in low hourly rates. On the other hand, if the workers through struggle are able to reduce the hours of toil in decisive sections of industry throughout the country, the reaction would be more workers employed and a tendency toward a rise in wages. The reduction of hours from sun-up to sundown to the present standard has not been accompanied by a proportionate reduction in wages. On the contrary, the reduction of hours through working class struggle has witnessed an increase in wages.
 
Reduction of Hours Is Strong Blow Against the Bosses
Considering the three overlapping factors; reduction of hours, social insurance and immediate relief for the unemployed the one that will hit the bosses the hardest is the reduction of hours. The reduction of hours hits on the source of profits, at surplus value by reducing the hours of surplus labor-time. Further, of the three, it will lay the basis for greater contradictions for capitalism once a reduction of hours is achieved. Neither immediate relief in the form of government funds, charity or social insurance will cause capitalism as many contradictions as the reduction of hours. At the same time, it is a powerful lever to unite the employed and unemployed, a weak side of the present unemployed movement; and enable the Communist vanguard to build a more durable and stable organizational structure through the united front tactic, which in turn can be used more effectively for the other two points – immediate relief and social insurance. In other words, it is not a matter of a struggle for the reduction of hours first, and the others later, or the sidetracking of the other two factors. It is a question, not only which has the most propaganda value today, social insurance, immediate relief or the reduction of hours, but a question of how to coordinate the three factors, laying a strong organizational basis as we go along and at the same time finding the determining connecting link of the present class relations and our revolutionary goal. The reduction of hours struggle, concretized by the slogan of the Six Hour day, the five day week and no reduction of pay is the fourfold factor.
The hopeless bureaucrat immediately says. Isn’t it .true that many capitalists and reformers are for the six hour day, and do not Green and the rest of the fakers say the same? He draws the conclusion that it must be counter-revolutionary – particularly since the Left Opposition presented this slogan at the very start. What more evidence does anyone want?
 
Party Policy Makes Easier the Role of Reformists and Fakers
For every capitalist, reformer and labor faker who is for the six hour day, I can point out an equal number (without trouble) who are for social insurance and particularly a Social Insurance BILL. Further, if we count noses, we will find that the Second International, numerically greater than we Communists, also say they are against capitalism and for the socialist mode of production. The main contending classes in society are vitally interested in unemployment, but for opposite reasons. The same is true of all problems of the class struggle. Only stupid bureaucrats, non-Marxists could present such arguments, as the Centrists do.
The failure of the party to lead in the struggle for the Six Hour day, the five day week and no reduction of pay and the organizational weakness of the Communist League to transform this correct theoretical analysis into practice has resulted in allowing the social reformists and reformers to obtain the lead. They are making hay while the sun shines, because they know the impasse America is in with her tremendous machine development and the absolute decrease in the number of workers in production. American Imperialism, in order not to allow the basic contradiction of her capitalist system to mature, is forced to prevent such by taking steps and measure which are in themselves contradictions, and in turn pave the way for an enlargement of the basic contradiction she is hopelessly trying to sidestep. A powerful class movement of the workers for the reduction of hours can hasten this contradiction upon capitalism, creating a condition where we have nothing to lose and everything to gain. Providing this comes about through class struggle and not through SOCIAL REFORMIST channels.
The American Stalinist leadership, with their present perspective and analysis on the unemployment question, have throw overboard the very ABC of Marxism, not only on the theoretical side, but also in elementary economics.
It is indeed time for the Communists of America to map out a program of action in all its detail for the Six Hour Day, the Five Day week with no reduction in pay.

(Supplementing comrade Oehler’s valid arguments, it is necessary to add that, particularly and directly in relation to mass unemployment and efforts to relieve it, the international slogan propounded by comrade Trotsky and the Left Opposition, has the necessary strength, appeal and validity to arouse and mobilize wide masses of workers around it.
That is the slogan of large and long-term credits to the Soviet Union, a slogan that is applicable on an international scale, but is especially so in the United States. We have elaborated this question on previous occasions, and the official Communist Party, though in a backhanded inadequate and stupid manner, has found it necessary to finally also raise this slogan. With this additional slogan, as mentioned above, the position of the Communist League of America (Opposition) is a completely correct one. – Ed.).
 



The revolt against the Fishwick-Lewis sell-out agreement brought ninety-nine delegates, representing miners in all parts of the country, to the St. Louis convention, April 15. The sentiment of the miners in mass meetings preceding this gathering was for a house-cleaning from top to bottom and for the building of a new union. But these hopes did not materialize.
The hitter attacks upon the rank and file by the reactionary U.M.W. officials, lack of finances, and lack of actual preparatory organization resulted in only one-sixth of the Illinois miners being represented. Those present however were there on behalf of the most live section, a total of sixty-one delegates representing thirty-three locals. Ohio was represented by eight delegates, Kansas by twenty delegates, Indiana by two delegates, and West Virginia by eight.
From the first day of the convention the Muste-Howat type of “progressive” proved to be in the majority and had the control. But before adjournment the bankruptcy of their policy for a solution to the miners’ present problem stood out clearly. Further to the Right of this combination were elements unorganized but exercising a certain weight on the policies of the social reformers. To the Left was a minority of honest rank and file delegates who wanted a new union but were pulled into the orbit of the bankrupt Muste policy through the weight of the organized majority faction. The National Miners’ Union, directed by the Stalinist party bureaucrats, had issued leaflets in the field urging the miners to stay away from the convention. Nevertheless, it was represented there by Joe Tash. A minority of delegates supporting the policy of the Left Communist Opposition carried the main burden of the fight for a new union.
Alexander Howat made the opening political speech which gave a good deal of evidence on the sell-out agreement but failed to give any indication as to what should be done. In his conclusion he praised the “revolt of the masses in South America who had kicked out their kings and rulers and the Spanish workers who are kicking out their king.” In the past, when Howat was still a rebel, he would always remember to point to the workers’ achievements in the Russian Revolution; now he failed to mention that. Apparently he does not know that the revolts he mentioned are purely bourgeois revolts. Muste, Daeck, Tippet and Hapgood also proved by their speeches and actions their inability to present a program although Muste and Hapgood by far were the most active in giving lip service to a new union. In this situation their position as a whole became a thoroughly reactionary one.
The most important point on the agenda around which everything else revolved was the question of forming a new union. Every time delegates supporting the Left Communist Opposition raised this issue the Muste followers denounced such talk. One delegate said: “When we had the ‘reorganized’ union we had the officials and the operators on our side. Now we don’t have them and cannot organize a union.” He seemed blissfully ignorant of the fact that a union which really represents the interests of the workers can be organized only in opposition to the officials and the operators. Another delegate, remembering the glorious traditions and great sacrifices of the United Mine Workers, wanted a return to these conditions of years ago but did not want a new union right now. Still another delegate said: “We can’t go back to Lewis, we won’t pay dues to him, but we can’t organize a new union.” The bankruptcy of the upper strata of the Muste leadership was thoroughly proved by actually proposing exactly the same thing, although using plenty of radical sounding phrases and giving plenty of lip service to deceive the workers into a belief that their course was a different one.
There were in reality only two roads open to the convention. One to go back to the Lewis union, a road which the convention repudiated by rejecting the Lewis-Fishwick compromise and by a call to stop dues payments to both factions. The other, the building of a new miners’ union, was also rejected. Hence this convention was left rudderless and the course finally accepted, entirely a negative one, can at best only spell demoralization for the miners. It is true that a new union formed at this moment would have resulted in the most extreme Right wing delegates leaving the convention. But that would just have been a blessing as there are miners all over the country who would replace this deserting element tenfold. It must also be remembered that the convention had delegates from new local unions organized which could have no cause whatever to become a part of the remnants of the Lewis-controlled U.M. of A.
To gauge the level of the convention, a resolution was introduced by Gerry Allard for the release of class war prisoners which struck a unanimous chord. But a resolution, introduced by Joe Angelo, for the defense of the Soviet Union and the granting of long term credits to help build industry in the Workers’ Republic resulted in only seventeen votes in favor. Somehow Hapgood happened to both speak and vote for this resolution Joe Tash, who was present on behalf of the National Miners’ Union, but not a delegate, obtained the floor partly due to the fairness of chairman Haynes and by motion made by delegates supporting the Left Communist Opposition. He said that the N.M.U. had not sent delegates knowing this convention would not take proper action. A few minutes later he added that he wanted the floor in order to speak to the honest rank and file delegates present. If a Communist knows that a convention will not take proper action but that there are nevertheless honest rank and file delegates present then it becomes so much more a Communist duty to endeavor to send delegates who will know how to act in order to defeat the bankrupt reformers and their wrong policies as well as to win the workers to the Communist ranks. The solution presented by Tash was a propoal that the convention adopt the program of the N.M.U., elect a rank and file committee and form a united front with the N.M.U. This was a complete right-about turn from the former position of boycotting the convention and came very near to the correct policy previously advanced by the Left Communist Opposition and published in the April first issue of the Militant.
We might add, if this convention was worthy of being asked to form a united front with the N.M.U. it should not have been boycotted. That merely gives the reformers and fakers full control. This policy of the Stalinist bureaucrats played into the hands of those elements. The failure of the Muste-Howat wing played into the hands of the Lewis-Fishwick operators united front.
As the convention proceeded further, showing its inability for decisive action toward the formation of a new union, the question finally was referred to a Policy Committee elected by the convention to report back. This Policy Committee narrowed down the forces and gave the Muste-Howat element full control. Its report to the convention brought forth the following proposals : First, to reject the Lewis-Fishwick compromise. This was accepted unanimously. Secondly, to refuse payment of [the per] capita tax to any branch of the U.M.W. of A., and to demand that the charters of “dead locals” be withdrawn in order to eliminate them. This proposal was carried although the latter part is meaningless because to refuse to pay a per capita tax to the U.M.W. of A. means to be out of it. The third and most vital point was the following: “That the delegates and representatives in the convention create a permanent policy committee of two from each district; these committees to be selected by the representatives of each respective district, which shall function as a national Policy Committee and that each local union select local committees whose duties will be to keep the district committee informed concerning developments from time to time.” After three days of convention and all that occurred before it, the Muste-Howat reformists could offer only this, which meant offering nothing, an acknowledgment of bankruptcy.
Gerry Allard immediately introduced a motion for the formation of a new union and to set up the apparatus for it now. Other delegates supporting the Left Opposition views spoke in detail for the correctness of his motion and for the defeat of the committee’s report. One delegate Dan Winnigan of Indiana, and apparently the only general supporter of the party among the delegates, also supported this motion.
Some of the so-called progressives, however, realized that the proposal of the Policy Committee needed a bit of sugar coating. This was accomplished in a substitute introduced by Hapgood and accepted by the Policy Committee reading as follows: “The purpose of the Policy Committee shall be to continue the agitation in order to keep the workers alive to their own interests so that we will be in a position to build a new national union at the proper time and to help in the organization of the new union in the outlying districts such as West Virginia and Ohio.” Hapgood’s substitute motion was adopted by 81 votes in favor and seven against, thus defeating the motion of Allard for the formation of a new union. Finally, it was completely proved that the Muste-Howat reformists were unanimous against a new union at this allegedly “inopportune” time.
What is the sum and substance of the results of this convention? They are negative. It decided to reject the Lewis-Fishwick sell-out agreement, it decided to refuse to pay the per capita tax to these fakers. By this time, the latter in combination with the operators have just as much “evidence” against the rank and file workers as if they had built a new union. They will use that wherever possible to blacklist and to expel, and to employ other means of suppression in an endeavor to smash the rank and file movement. The failure of the convention means the failure to build a real instrument for both the defensive and offensive of the coal miners. None of the problems was solved. The policy of the Muste-Howat outfit played into the hands of the enemy. The boycott policy pursued by the National Miners’ Union elements under direction of the party bureaucrats despite its turn, which came too late, is largely responsible for making this possible. It helped to secure the control for the Muste-Howat group which could otherwise easily have been dislodged.
The Left Communist Opposition warned in advance against the bankruptcy of these Muste “progressives”. The delegation supporting our views emphasized this before the delegates and proposed the correct course. The problems of the miners remain thus far unsolved and the course proposed by the Left Opposition remains as correct now as it was then. New miners’ revolts will take place and our forces will continue to fight for a correct course.
 



At the beginning of the present crisis, the I.W.W. saw no need of spending much energy upon the unemployment problem. Now, having obtained a late start, they are presenting as their main slogans: “The six-hour day and five-day week” and “Bread lines or picket lines?” Leaflets, stickers and meetings are being pushed everywhere in the country that they can rally forces. While their program has a certain positive side, it is far exceeded by its negative features, which we point out not for the sake of abstract criticism alone but because they are so characteristic of the sectarian futility to which the once vigorous organization has been condemned.
In their reaction against purely parliamentary activity – as against revolutionary political action which the Stalinist bureaucrats have understood so poorly – the I.W.W. have swung in the opposite direction and are narrowing the possibilities for development by the lack of a correct analysis and program. Their poverty in Marxism, to which they acknowledge a formal adherence at times, is shown by their explanation of the cause of unemployment. In one leaflet they say: “Unemployment is caused by long hours and short wages.” In another, they say that culminative (organic or permanent) unemployment has been added because of “the industrialization of the backward countries and the increased productivity of labor chiefly through automatic machines”. Increased productivity and automatic machinery have undoubtedly played a big part in the increase of unemployment, but the so-called industrialization of the backward countries – a flashback in the I.W.W. of the notorious “de-colonization” theory – does not reflect realities. On the one hand, imperialism gives an impetus to the development of industry in the colonial countries; on the other, it strives to keep these countries in subjection and backwardness. This contradiction is one of the great sources of colonial revolution and the need for supporting them which the I.W.W. fails to acknowledge.
But even the development of the ‘backward countries is still not the determining cause of unemployment. The latter is produced by the whole system of productive relationships under capitalism, and the crises which accompany it are intensified by the fact that capitalist production has become so intertwined on a world market that over-production constantly threatens its equilibrium, produces crises, and mass unemployment.
Even if we were to obtain shorter hours and bigger pay from the capitalists we would not have eliminated unemployment. One leaflet says: “Unemployment can be cured by small hours and big pay.” The only cure for unemployment is the overthrow of the capitalist system.
The way the official party is fighting for unemployment insurance must be criticized as a mixture of parliamentary opportunism and adventurism. But to swing to the other extreme and say that a fight for unemployment insurance is wrong is equally false. By leaving this field to the reformists, opportunists and labor fakers, we allow them to corrall large masses of workers by having them appear as the only defenders of their immediate interests and needs.
In the leaflet: “Bread lines or picket lines?”, we read: “Such is our program to abolish unemployment and such are its consequences.” The I.W.W. once knew that unemployment could only be abolished by the proletarian revolution: apparently it no longer knows this elementary truth. As for a program, picket lines do not constitute one. They are the tactics to carry out a program. A correct one must resolve around the slogan for the six-hour day and five-day week without wage reductions.
Organizationally, the I.W.W. have out-Stalinized the Stalinists by organizing an “Unemployed Workers Industrial Union” (!) with membership cards. The party formed unemployment councils and tied them to the T.U.U.L., determining in advance a narrow basis for the unemployed movement which must be made up of workers with varying ideologies who will follow revolutionary leadership only on the basis of the most elementary issue. By seeking to confine the unemployment movement – and in the form of a union, at that – strictly as a tail to the sect which the I.W.W. is today, to reject in practise the need of the united front, is to commit, on a smaller scale, the same blunder as the official party leadership.
 



The thesis deals at some length with the crisis and presents many facts, but leaves unanswered a couple of important points which I desire to raise for discussion. One place, the thesis says “The present crisis is distinguished from many which proceeded it in the history of capitalist production by its virtually planetary character.” The universal character of the crisis is not new nor the distinguishing character. Marx and Engels of the last century pointed them out more than once. The universal character is an effect and not a cause. The above sentence explaining its scope nevertheless explains none of the basic difference in relation to past crises.
In another part, the thesis says, “The present crisis comes after the existence of an acute disruption of the ‘equilibrium’ between agriculture and industry, and only serves to aggravate the agrarian situation; it appears coincidentally with a contracting domestic market which gives no appearance of noteworthy extension in the immediate future; and, finally, it occurs in the period of declining world imperialism and is part of a planetary crisis which, precisely because American imperialism’s sources of power are spread all over the world, invest the disruption of American economy with highly perilous character.” Of the three points, the last is of vital importance, the basic but the first two are of no value. In other parts of the thesis more sentences are presented to show this differences but it does not negate the above question; however, such a vital point should not be scattered through the thesis. Speaking of agriculture and industry, the “acute disruption” is not new; American agriculture is a subordinated part of machine development and industry and the process of disintegration and centralisation has been the logical outflow of the general process of capitalist production in America, in relation to agriculture.
To say, “coincidentally with a contracting market” is to put the problem upside down and approach from the side of consumption rather than the point of production. This factor should be presented as an ABSOLUTE decrease in the number of workers in production, a fact Marx predicted in the last century.
Further, the most vital point, not only in regard to the world crisis, but particularly in regard to American imperialism – an excess of capital a new form of overproduction in the period of financial capitalism, is not even considered or presented in its proper light in relation to the crisis.
As to prospects, the thesis says, in a criticism of the Annalist perspective, that “A more objective estimation of the prospects for a decisive upward swing of the conjuncture would put the period for a commencement of recovery at an even later date.” Saying such without explaining what kind of a revival it can be is to leave hanging in the air the main point of the perspective. We may add that the date of recovery is not as important as the kind of recovery.
No blueprint can be given, nor asked for, but a Marxian group must at least present possible variants as well as what is not possible. The thesis takes up what is not possible but does not deal with what is possible.
It is possible for the crisis to develop into a war. Such a one would be not a mere economic crisis, but a new problem of higher dimensions. With it would proceed a negative revival of industry and production only to end in greater difficulties. At least there would be a flow before the next ebb, considering capitalist economy. It is most probable (as presented by the thesis) that American imperialism, at the expense of the other imperialisms, will come out on top. But on top of what, is as important as to specify: on top. Such a revival will not be the prosperity of the immediate past; however, this does not mean decline.
The Leninist analysis that we are in a period of decay capitalism means that capitalism as a WHOLE is in decay and from this approach American imperialism, from the absolute standpoint, is also in the decline. However, from the relative standpoint the problem is different. From the relative standpoint, American imperialism still has ebbs and flows because its holds the upper hand and all indications are that, in the downward curve American imperialism will be able to holds its upper position (at the expense of the others). The problem can only be considered correctly from its twofold relation of the absolute and relative.
To show that there will be a diminishing rate of profit and draw conclusions that this holds decay and decline for American production, is false. A diminishing rate of profit in the past has accompanied an increase in production and logically so. Profit is only a part of surplus value and such an approach will not settle the basic problem of capitalist production and its crisis.
We must have more discussion on these two points; difference of this crisis in relation to the past and the variations possible for the future in order to round out the thesis on this point.
 



When the present Left Opposition were still members of the American party, the presentation of a thesis by the Executive Committee always brought out fundamental differences between the embryo three currents, which were more than mere tactical questions or questions of formulations. The difference may have started on tactical questions formulations, but only the blind could not see the deep channels these questions led to. The break-up into three currents is a proof of this. Our thesis presented for discussion gives a Marxian analysis of conditions and in the main is correct. I think our group, not through bureaucratic suppression but through Marxian understanding is the closest knit group of our faction. Because we hold such an unanimous position on the main theoretical questions and don’t have to “waste time” on these issues, we should devote a greater amount of time and discussion on the concretization of our international position for America. Therefore, for this purpose, I raise some tactical questions and questions of formulation of the thesis.
The section presenting the perspective of the Left Opposition, as a faction of the party, and not to build a new party; to win the membership of the Third International to our Marxian position and not to build a fourth international; and a role of reform in relation to the Soviet Union with its opposite in relation to capitalism the theory of the permanent revolution is correct considering all factors of today. How to carry out this perspective is a question the thesis does not handle in all its aspects.
 
Wrong Views
The ultra-Lefts who desire a new party are wrong, likewise the other extreme of being a tail to the ACTIVITY of the party is wrong. First let us dispose of the question of criticism of the Center and then consider the relation of Marxian criticism to activity. A faster tempo of change from a negative criticism to a positive criticism of Centrism must be made. A turn toward speaking to the class (which includes the party) has been made which has increased our effectiveness in speaking to the party, just like a correct elevation of Centrism has made more effective our struggle against syndicalism and anarchism. This positive approach will accelerate the process of correction through greater pressure and on the other hand help correct our position in relation to party activity.
The line of march laid down in the thesis eliminates the danger of ultra-Leftism in the form of a new party and a fourth international, but it leaves wide open the door for sectarianism and for a “Marxian” retreat for tired radicals because the thesis does not explain our relation to party ACTIVITY, or rather lack of activity, with a Marxian line.
We have a double task in our relation as the Left Opposition. First, in relation to the Party – to correct it and win the members to our position, and second, in relation to the class, where the party has not penetrated or has no influence we must function as Communists. The thesis explains the first point, the relation of the Left Opposition to Centrism, to the party but the thesis does not even raise the second point, the relation to the class where the party’s wrong policy or neglect leaves us to raise the banner of Communism and lash the party into understanding and activity (for example, the Spanish Revolution).
Does the thesis mean we are to be the tail of party activity? Does it mean we are to wait for the party bureaucrats to act? Does it mean we don’t act where Centrism fails to act, but where we are capable of acting? They are strong compared to our forces, but any Marxist knows that numbers and wrong policy cannot correct the non-Marxist position; few in numbers with a correct policy can obtain numbers in activity, in struggle. Our action of the past and present disproves the very questions I raise, but the thesis does not disprove this. Our action disproves this in isolated examples in America to a greater extent in other sections and particularly in the Spanish Revolution.
Because this action is not explained, it results in ACTION on our part which is either tailendism on the one hand and fourth international action on the other hand, where the party fails to act and lead. Only by explaining such can we eliminate both evils.
 
The Pressure of the Left
Concretely, for America, it means, where the party has failed to act through wrong policies, which results either in wrong action or no action, and where we are able to carry out our Marxian position and are unable to impress the Centrists we must take the initiative and lead, forcing the party into activity and directing the class battles. The more pressure we can bring against the Centrist bureaucrats the more will the program of the Left Opposition become the program of the C.I. But the correct function of our forces, in the party, supporting the party as expelled members and in direct leadership where they fail or are incapable – is the way to increase the pressure of the Left, the party members and the class against the Stalin bureaucrats.
Where the party is leading a struggle or engaged in activity, it is our duty to support them, first with Marxian criticism of their strategy and tactics and second with all the activity possible. This is not tail-endism, if this kind of activity is coordinated with the other phase I refer to, and that is – where the party fails to act and leaves the field open to the reformers or syndicalists it is our duty as Communists and particularly as Left Oppositionists, to fill the gaps left by the Centrists.
One can answer that our forces are too small, we will be lost in mass work, etc., etc. I am not calling for mass work of the Weisbord type. The wrong theoretical position puts Centrism in a position where they are incapable of carrying out many tasks Communists must. Our forces are too limited numerically to carry them out, even though we have a position and understanding of the needs and road to follow. Such on our part, is a good “excuse” for not finishing the activity but it is no excuse for not starting such activity. The Bolshevik party in Russia by itself could not complete the revolution, neither can the Left Opposition by itself complete tasks in America which we are compelled to take up because the theoretical position, which causes wrong tactics and strategy of the Centrists, renders them incapable of taking up. Our Communist duty is this two-fold activity to properly support the party and the Third International.
 



In dealing with social reformism and the labor party the thesis presents a position of correction compared to the previous analysis and although the main points are correct, there are, nevertheless, a couple of points that need further clarification. The thesis says, “Add to this fact, that American bourgeoisie is still powerful enough to grant ‘concessions’ as the growth of reforms, and we not only have an explanation of its expansion but also to calculate upon its growth (not its ‘narrowing down’) In the coining period.” Considering this in relation to, “Abstractly considered to be sure, were there a mass movement which would organize a labor party, the Communists would have to take up the question of working within as a revolutionary nucleus.” If we can “calculate upon its growth” then how can we calculate that the labor party “is a matter which has less timely significance today – even abstractly – than in years past, since there is no substantial movement at all for a labor party in the 1932 elections?”
If we consider the crisis and all the economic implications that go with It, as well as the future trend, we can agree that the degree of exploitation is increasing and the standard of living declining. Also considering the weakness of the unions and the Communist party, we can say the trend is toward a narrowing ECONOMIC base of social reformism. In other words, the trend of the economic factors favors the revolutionist and not the reformer. Such could not be said (except historically) of capitalism in its growth stage when “granting” crumbs could be well afforded for “peace-development” while today these concessions are for breathing spells of decay capitalism.
In this sense, the economic base for social reformism is narrowing but from this we cannot conclude, as the Stalinists do that reformism is done for – nor can we, by seeing actual growth of reformism, dismiss the problem by saying the base is not narrowing but has ability to widen, as the thesis says.
In realizing the historic limitations of reformism in America (as Trotsky points out) it would be wrong to deny its possible growth (Stalinism) but also wrong to present it as the thesis does. The difference between growth and decay capitalism, which turns around so many problems, also changes the problem of reformism. Reformism can have a narrowing economic base with an ideological growth. As Trotsky says, the support of the social democrats in Germany is not faith in the leadership but lack of faith in the Communists.
Since the developing of American economics is not moving in favor of the capitalists and their social reformers, but in favor of greater class battles and the revolutionist, it follows that the economic base of social reformism is narrowing. But because the economic base is narrowing it does not follow that capitalism will not and cannot grant social reforms. Precisely because the capitalist economic base is sliding, making more insecure its position against the onslaught of the workers, it must “grant” social reforms in order to stem the tide and save a tottering world system.
Material gains of the past and material gains of today as social reforms are different, just like some material gains of the workers favor the social reformers while other material gains favor the revolutionist, the Communist. In other words, social reforms of developing capitalism and social reforms of decaying capitalism have a different base although they both serve the same ends and same masters. But in serving the same ends, the social reformers are not as secure at present as they were in the past, because they don’t have the favorable base of yesteryear. This factor is what makes the following sentence in the thesis so vital and the key to the problem, “The proportionate strength of the two parallel streams (social reformism and Communism – H.O.) will depend in a large measure upon the course pursued by the Communists.”
The thesis must explain social reformism in relation to growing and decaying capitalism and the change of emphasis of some problems from emphasis of objective factors to emphasis of subjective factors. The basic reason for the changed relationship being the OPPOSITE TREND OF OBJECTIVE FACTORS in the growth and decay stages of capitalism.
Further the thesis must not deal with the labor party in the abstract. All indications are that the question of the labor party will be more important in the future than in the past (to a large extent due to the Right wingers and Centrists). This means to present our position on the labor party and farmer labor party, as well as the relation of the two which we are sure to have in complex American developments, yet maintaining the basic correct analysis on social reformism and the labor party as presented in the thesis.
 



I take advantage of an incorrect formulation in the thesis in order to raise more vital questions dealing with its content. The thesis labels the practical needs of the day, reforms. It says, “It is the Communists who are the most ardent and willing defenders not only of their broad historical interests (the social revolution) but of most narrow, limited and practical needs of the day (reforms). It is in this way of linking the struggles for daily needs with the final aim, of having the former pave the way for the latter, that the struggle for reforms can be carried on in a revolutionary sense that is it can be directed against the reformists.” Not only is it improper to use the word or impression “fighting for reforms” but the way the problem is formulated the relation of immediate demands with ultimate demand, is wrong.
Can we Marxists use the word reform in this sense? No, I think we have been playing with this word long enough and it is time we start a thorough discussion in the Left Opposition, not on the word reform, but what is more important and behind it – the understanding of immediate demands and practical needs of the class.
 
The Position of Negation
All working class organisations claiming to fight for the class have stumbled on this problem to a greater or lesser degree. Outstanding in the Marxian camp are De Leon and the S.L.P., which, unable to find a way out, just threw the whole thing overboard and denied it all. But since practical needs of the class today are material things and not ghosts their denial was to no avail. The P.P., to this day, is following the footsteps of the S.L.P., on this vital class question. Both of these organizations have taken a negative position while the S.P., swinging to the opposite direction, has transformed every struggle for immediate demands into reforms of the worst kind. In the Communist currents, sad to say, we find them handling the question with kid gloves.
The three main currents of Communism take a correct abstract position on the question of immediate demands but experience has proven that the Right wing and Stalin Centrist are muddled and confused when the question descends to the sphere of practical life.
Experience has shown that the Left Opposition understands what is meant by immediate demands and its relation to the social revolution. Events which have followed the programs tactics and strategy we presented for these class battles vindicate our current; but the way the thesis handles the question does not come up to this standard.
We Marxists cannot borrow many dictionary words and use them to define things and conditions in the class struggle. The word reform is one such word. Considering how the word is used in the thesis (and not what you mean) I can follow it to the logical conclusion and add, the bigger and better and more reforms we fight for and gain the closer we will be to the social revolution. But facts prove this is far from the truth.
Is there any difference in the material gains or practical needs of the day for our class “given” by the bosses or their labor leaders or won by our class in struggle? To every Marxist (and the writers of the thesis have said such time and again), we know there is a fundamental difference for our class position. But the expression in the thesis does not say this. Only by understanding the class forces and causes for the way our class receives these material gains from “day to day” can we (after explaining) use it in a “revolutionary sense”. This understanding enables us to label the kind of material gain to denote reformist or revolutionary action in the struggle for immediate demands.
 
False Abstractions
If the practical needs of the day are “given” by the bosses or their government they are reforms; if they come from the bosses’ labor leaders, trade union or political, they are social reforms and if these gains are won by our class in struggle led by its vanguard they are sparks for revolution. Practical needs of the day for our class cannot be abstracted from the class struggle and the organizational and ideological position of the class. If we could abstract these immediate demands or gains from the position of battle of the class forces we could say all these gains are reforms. But such an abstraction is false while other abstractions, such as are explained in Capital are not false
We know that reforms or social reforms do not come from the big kind hearts of the bosses and their flunkeys We know they are granted from above because the class pressure from below compels them to relinquish this material gain for our class in order to stem the tide and check the growing opposition. It is more profitable to “kill with kindness” than to kill through white terror, providing the position of the bosses enables them to carry out the former. The degree of class pressure determines, in the majority of cases if the practical needs will be direct from the bosses or from their flunkeys or from the class itself through correct leadership. Reforms can be said to result from class pressure but class pressure without, or lack of, or wrong pressure of the class vanguard means a disproportion in the relation of class and party.
The growth and decay stage of capitalism will cause a big variance in this disproportion. In the growth stage of capitalism, the objective factors favor the capitalist and naturally reforms while the decay stage gives the objective factors to the revolutionist to a far greater degree. This brings to the fore the subjective factor, the vanguard as the vital determining factor of the problem as Trotsky points out, not only in revolutions but also in the struggle for immediate demands.
The degree of class pressure does not always determine the success of reformism, as the above will indicate. The stage of capitalism we live in as well as its ebbs and flows, and also its uneven capitalist development, is no abstraction in the class struggle. In the growth stage of capitalism, crumbs in respond to class pressure were the least evil for the bosses, because the very expansion and new markets more than made up tor the loss. In the decay stage reforms are bitter concessions from the capitalist, knit to a higher degree not only to the class pressure but more so to the policies of the vanguard.
 
When Bosses Grant Reform
If capitalism grants reforms (beats us to our point of advantage) this has its ideological influence upon our class or section of the class as well as a negative organizational result, scattering our forces and at the same time driving these class forces into some form of capitalist controlled organization.
Such prevents the crystallization of our class ideology and unless the vanguard is wide awake and capable we lose even the possibility of retrenching ourselves for the next struggle. In this sense, as a class problem and not as an abstract material gain our class, which only learns by experience, has lost by the bosses’ coup and with it the vanguard loses. Do not material gains even void these above mentioned factors, gains and a step toward revolution? No.
With the capitalist coup in reforms, the class line re-forms with the bosses at a more advantageous position than before. A material gain given by capitalism as a reform is just so much labor power (controlled by capitalism) spent as it would be spent on the battlefield in destruction of the enemy forces by shells and ammunition. But the comparison does not hold water. Because a material gain even in relation to the capitalist is just so much spent, in relation to the workers it is a material gain. Let us see. If the vanguard of the workers moves up and intrenches the class behind the material gain (reform and not a spark) it is already a NEW PROBLEM and especially a total different struggle if the capitalists try to retake it. If the capitalists try to retake what they gave, and not what we won, it is no longer a question of reform in the sense of immediate demand (offensive struggle) but a problem of defensive struggles of our class.
How many material gains (regardless of how they came) were retaken and are being retaken by the capitalist in the present crisis? Any thinking worker can answer this fairly well. In this case if the vanguard does not measure up to standards we can say, the greater the number of these gains through reforms and social reforms, the easier it is for capitalism to retake them and the numbers that come to us as material gains as sparks toward revolution the harder it is for the capitalist to retake.
One only has to look at the sick coal industry (favorable to the capitalist) with past gains primarily through class struggle and compare it with other healthy capitalist industries (favorable to the workers) where gains were mainly reforms and realize the difference between the two. A comparison will show reforms are relinquished easier than the gains through class battles unless the vanguard’s right or wrong policy alters the problem.
 
The Communist Task
Can we, the Communists, lay down definite plans to prevent our action from following the reformist camp? We can lay down principles in general, but it is impossible to lay down a line of march that is fool-proof. Each concrete struggle must have its tactics formulated on the basis of Marxian analysis. A line of demarcation between reformist action (reforms) and revolutionary action can be made in every struggle but every developing struggle will have forces and action of both. It is up to the Communist to move these struggles out of the channels of REFORM into the channels of deeper class struggles. A simon-pure struggle (made in the office of the bureaucrats) is just as wrong (isolation) as to enter movements which are organizationally part of the enemy forces (Parliamentary action – charity organizations, etc.), the latter will not be isolation from numbers but will be isolation from the role of the Communist as the vanguard toward revolution.
Has not the Militant time and again pointed out through dozens of struggles, the action of the Stalinite Centrist and Lovestone Right wingers which was a reformist and not a Marxian action of class struggle? These are facts and correct demarcations between reforms and sparks, which the theses, in its formulation, does not live up to. Our relation to the U.S.S.R. is reform and to American imperialism it is revolution but the road to revolution does not lead through reforms.
 



CHICAGO. – The Oct. 18th conference of the Cook County Unemployment Councils, the third in three months, ended by laying the “base” for a fourth conference next month, electing delegates to call on city and county authorities to present demands, a committee for a Cook County Hunger March and a committee to line up preliminaries for the Nov. 7th march on Washington. The usual party and sympathetic element was in attendance and the usual bureaucratic methods and lack of Marxian program.
Comrade Curtis of the Left Opposition was elected on the credentials committee of five and when it came to the point of seating the three delegates from the League, Buckley, Curtis and Oehler, the party representative, Rybicki moved that they not be seated. Curtis spoke for the seating and to the surprise of the bureaucrats the vote was three to two in favor of comrade Curtis’ motion in the credential committee, one of the three being a party member who voted with Curtis and could not see why we could not be seated. After a long argument Rybicki finally “convinced” the other party member that he was “wrong” and he said, well what ever Rybicki says is correct. This gave the bureaucrats a majority.
In the meantime, comrade Oehler had obtained the floor for five minutes and dealt with the one point of adding the struggle for the shorter work day with the present two main demands of social insurance and immediate relief, concretizing it in the slogan of the six-hour day and the five day week. The delegates gave an excellent response, to these remarks, but Rybicki who had come out to caucus with the other bureaucrats to see what to do about the way things were drifting, came back to the credential committee and reported that the conference had hooted the “Trotsky delegate, Oehler” down. This was an attempt to weaken the resistance to his motion to oust us from the convention. Gebert, the D.O., took the floor after the League speaker and devoted fifteen minutes to slander and demagogy against the Left. The conference had started late and only several delegates had the floor for five minutes following and again went to reports of committees over the protest of many delegates.
The “majority” report of the credential committee was not to seat us. Comrade O’Hara, a Communist, but not a member of the party or the Left, being one of the members of the credential committee, representing a large unemployment council, took the floor to give a minority report. He was denied the right to present a minority report. All delegates were denied the right to speak on the motion presented by the “majority report”. It was railroaded through in the most brazen A.F.L. fashion. The bureaucrats feared a minority report, they feared discussion on the “Majority report” – they fear the Marxian position of the Left Opposition that smashed into their opportunist program.
In an uproar and protest from all parts of the floor and its usual counter-uproar of lesser bureaucrats hollering for the kicking and throwing out of the three delegates the will and desire of the Stalin bureaucrats overrode the interest of the workers by refusing to seat the Marxian wing of the Communist forces.
A motion to throw us out of the hall was not entertained by chairman Otto Wangerin. The committee on resolutions reported, presenting the draft program of the last conference for final corrections and adoptions. The amendments of the Left Opposition had been given to the committee but of course the resolutions committee said nothing on this.
The Chicago League continues its support of the Unemployment Councils and will fight for a correction and development of its program which at present has many opportunist points. Unemployment councils not being the Communist party cannot be expected to have a complete Communist program but unemployment councils under the leadership of the Communist party (and no one can question this) must have a correct Marxian program on what partial demands it takes up in the field of unemployment and must above all not have an adventurist or opportunist line. The Chicago League, true to the interest of the working class, can do nothing else than fight against the bureaucrats and their wrong line and for the unemployment councils.
 







Through the adhesion of Hugo Oehler to the platform of the Communist League of America (Opposition), the Left Opposition recruits one of the best types of organizers that the American Communist movement has yet developed. Comrade Oehler was the representative of the National Textile Workers Union in its organizing campaign in the South during the Gastonia struggle and thereafter. He was everywhere hailed as a courageous and clearheaded fighter and leader.
Hugo Oehler has held numerous posts in the Communist Party. He was organizer of the Kansas District of the Communist Party, and during the Colorado coal miners strike directed the Party’s work in the field. He is well known to all militants, class conscious workers and revolutionists in the West and South, as well as to the Party organization generally. Oehler has presented the statement in the current issue of the Militant to the Central Executive Committee of the Communist Party and to the District Committee in Chicago where he is at present working.





The pre-convention discussion of the Communist Party, the Thesis to the convention and the Comintern organization letter list the greatest number of shortcomings the Party has ever had presented to any of its conventions. A review of these documents will convince one at once that they are not shortcomings in the nature of a progressing party that is at a higher level but at a lower level in comparison with the past, especially in relation to the increasingly favorable objective situation. Bankruptcy of the Centrist Party Regime The Central Committee is presenting to the 7th convention a unanimous thesis and resolutions that have been printed in booklet form (after Bedacht’s trip) which means it is approved by our parent body in the International Office. This procedure, following the Comintern organization letter to the convention and the admitted mass of blunders, mistakes and shortcomings means




That our present leadership is not capable of drawing up an analysis of of the present situation.
That our international leadership does not trust this task to our American leadership.
That the delegates to the 7th Convention, are not trusted with this task.




A leadership not capable of drawing up its own analysis is not capable of leading the revolutionary party. A convention that does not protest this action is a strait-jacket convention and not a unity convention. Leadership of the masses cannot be appointed from the International office – it can only be obtained and held by actual leadership in theoretical and, practical problems facing the working class. Leadership in the Marxian sense cannot sprout from the top like the Peppers, Lovestones and the present incompetents. The thesis presented dealing with the shortcomings does not and cannot deal with their fundamental causes.
 
The Menace of Revisionism
The Manifesto of the Communist Opposition to the rank and file and the 7th Convention is a document that clears the way for the membership to a correct understanding. The Manifesto points out the roots of the present Party crisis, not only facing us in this country but facing our comrades in the other parties of our International. The revision of Marxism by the Stalin-Bucharin leadership has derailed the movement in the swamp of the non-Marxist, eclectic, utopian, reactionary theory of the “Building of Socialism in one country”, the colonial revolutionary policy and the tactics of the “third period”. Activity and more activity will not replace correct Marxist theory and these problems first brought up by the Russian Opposition, seemingly remote and of no concern to the class struggle in America are the determining causes of the present chaotic condition in an otherwise objectively favorable situation.
The Communist Party is the instrument of the working class used as the leader and organizer of the revolution for the overthrow of capitalism. The first duty of every Communist is the success cf the revolution and so long as the Party has a program based on Marxism there is an unbroken chain between the class, the Party and the success of the revolution. Just as soon as the leading individuals or groups in the Party revise Marxism and Leninism a danger of the elimination of the Party as the leader and organizer of the class is at hand unless we arc capable of defeating the revisionists. But if the revisionists are able to dominate, it spells ruin unless the membership liquidates such a leadership.
 
The Struggle of the Left Opposition
This was the case with the Second International when the revisionists dominated and eliminated it as the leader and organizer of the revolution. We saw the transformation of the Second International from an instrument for liberation to an instrument of suppression of the workers and peasants. The same process is at work in our International. Fortunately, however, for the proletariat we are living in a different historical period; this process is only in the beginning stage in our International; and lastly we have an International Opposition led by L.D. Trotsky that exposes the revision, explains the determining causes of the crisis and mobilizes the forces to win the International for the Marxian-Leninist path again.
We members of the Communist Party ask for an answer to this manifesto and for the readmittance of comrade Trotsky, and the Left Opposition into the Party. We do not ask for a religious campaign of “Loyalty to the C.I.” to take the place of objective consideration of these proposals. If the policies of the leadership is Marxian then there is no conflict between loyalty to the C.I. and loyalty to Marxism but when the present leadership revise Marxism and present theories that are non-Marxian-Leninist the membership must choose between loyalty to that leadership, and loyalty to Marxism. We stand or fall by Marxism and Dialectic Materialism and by now life itself has proven the correctness of the Left Opposition group as Marxism fighting revisionism. The readmittance of the Opposition to the International, regardless of how painful it is to some “leaders” is a necessary step to prepare the Party as the leader and organizer of the big class struggles we can expect in the present period in order that pressure of world capitalist economy can be relieved from the U.S.S.R. and the extension of the dictatorship of the proletariat over greater sections of the earth can be accomplished.
Our demands are:

The readmittance of the Communist Opposition and the adoption of the Marxian program of the Opposition.
 
Replace the present isolation tactics. with Leninist United Front tactics in trade union work and all other activity.
 
Eliminate mechanical control of auxiliary organisations and replace with control through Marxian policy.
 
Reject VERBAL transformation of defensive struggles and demonstrations into revolutionary upheavals.
 
Reject slogan of “Social Fascism” that renders aid to the reformists.
 
Reject “Third Period” centrist zig-zag course and replace with dialectical analysis and tactics.
 
Correct 7th Convention thesis on above points and other minor points following from these root causes.

Hugo Oehler
 



(Continued from Last Issue)
Success or failure of any struggle depends on how wide your first break is, and how fast you follow this up with additional attacks before the bosses can mobilize a counter attack. This is true in every stage of the development of the struggle. For example in Passaic, the first attack of the workers was followed up with not one but several victories before the bosses could begin an important counter-attack.
If our first attack is not broadened before the bosses answer, we are not so able to withstand these blows but if we make big inroads and then the bosses attack, it is not felt so easily and we can not only better withstand their blows but answer them much faster before the bosses can follow up.
Such was not our fortune in Gastonia. Our mass picketing was very good, but did not enable us to follow up this first point with anything of consequence. The bosses answered the first blow with the Loray Committee of 100, organized from overseers, thugs and superintendents, led by Major Bulwinkle of Loray Mill. To this was added wholesale arrests by the local police and the cavalry terror, the church and the local press. April 10th the cavalry was removed and 35 deputized American Legion men replaced them. In the meantime the National Textile Workers Union was doing its best to push ahead. Several hundred struck in Bessemer City several miles from Gastonia. The small force of organizers who had strike experience were pressed to handle this mass of determined but inexperienced workers.
 
The Strike in Full Swing
By April the 15th the strike was in full swing with the W.I.R, the I.L.D., and Communist youth handling the work. The use of police, militia, gunmen and press could be expected.
We did not have long to wait. On April 18, a bosses’ mob, under police and deputy protection wrecked the union office in a well-planned fashion. The demolishing of the W.I.R. supplies and the continual wholesale evictions, arrests and intimidations of strikers through the rest of April and in May showed us that the bosses were gaining in the counter attack.
In this whole period from the strike to the mob terror the spirit of the strike rose and repulsed each attack with sacrifice and determination but without effective counter-offense, entirely confined to counter-defense. In this period of attack on the workers we could have answered in a more positive way, if our leading force had been handled right.
Half the time Beal and the other leading comrades were sent back and forth from Elizabethton to Lexington, etc. hundreds of miles with most of those in the Gastonia area handicapped and those in New York ordering these drives as though they were sending some one from New York City to Passaic. Such a broadening out activity and especially in relation to A.F.L. activity must be carried on but not at the expense of our base and Southern center and that only further played into the hands of a powerful enemy attacking us on all sides in the Gastonia area.
Added to this improper draining of the field center was the sending of comrades such as Crouch and Pershing, etc., who may be able to function some places under proper leadership but who only “messed things up” in the strike area with bombastic disconnected “radicalism”.
This first mob action and police attacks were answered by rebuilding and continuing the work. Broken picket lines were reformed. Throughout the country the issue was raised for Gastonia and funds started to flow in to help. Mass meetings were held daily at the Union headquarters in Gastonia and workers for many miles around came in and asked for organizers for their mill towns. Hundreds were signed no into the Union from all parts of the area. The “unorganizable” were starting to organize.
This rebuilding and recruiting inspired new hope and the stubborn picket lines [stood] firm ranks. The union planned to follow up this drive with a new drive on [illegible] to close the mill. This belated attempt [became] known to the Committee of 100 before it materialized and the terror ,of the thugs increased with a plan of ending it all before the new drive would start.
The Company’s plan, like the union’s, fell short with the murderous raid of Chief Aderholt and his death through the workers’ self defense on June 7. The planned drive of the union was transformed into a counter attack of the law with the Committee of 100 to follow up and clean them out. The first part of this counter attack of the bosses’ legal troops was transformed into their defeat by the heroic action of the striking textile workers. The bosses force followed up the June 7th raid with terror for a week, wholesale arrest, intimidation, searching of homes, beatings, attempted lynching of Beal and others who were jailed.
With the entire force of active strikers and leaders arrested, held without right of bail, the police closed the destroyed tent colony and union headquarters and reaction and terror rode the county.
In this atmosphere came the national representatives of the W.I.R. and I.L.D. and although at first arrested and intimidated the W.I.R. took the lead and opened a new tent colony with the I.L.D. preparing for legal aid. This force brought new hope to the shattered and scattered forces of blacklisted, arrested, evicted and terrorized textile workers.
One of the outstanding weaknesses of our work brought to the surface by this period of reaction following June 7th was that all members recruited in the union were admitted through the Gastonia central office AND IN THIS WHOLE PERIOD NO MILL LOCALS HAD BEEN SET UP, yet we had plenty of material and time to do so. If a few mill locals had been set up the union would have been able to weather this storm in a far greater stable fashion and chaos would not have reigned. And instead of the auxiliary organizations reorganizing and laying a base they would have acted in a helpful secondary fashion and on the whole we would have been able to answer this with greater success.
The mill bosses through the control of Gaston County and the City of Gastonia government as well as the state government, lost no time and indicted 23 for murder – 16 for first degree murder.
The fact that the union did not answer this attack and indictment and replace Beal at once, lost our forces valuable time that as far as the Loray strike was concerned could not be made up.
The new force sent in over a month after this terror, July 12th, inherited the strike of Loray and Bessemer that weeks before had been settled as far as life and immediate demands were concerned but a strike that was still officially on. On top of this they inherited the bombastic action of the fly by night organizers sent in, and add to this, the loss of records and chaotic conditions of the union forces after this month period.
 



The T.U.U.L. drive in the South, starting in 1929 at the very inception of the “new turn” in the Communist Party has not yet been analyzed. Our articles on the South have dealt with tasks and later with shortcomings and “self criticism” but none have followed this to a logical conclusion and explained the basic causes of these shortcomings. With the majority of the American workers unorganized, the building of new unions is on the order of the day but this is not separate and apart from our work in reactionary unions to unite the broadest forces possible against the labor fakers, reformists and sectarians. Such a correct relationship of these forces to expose the reactionaries existed in several of our past campaigns as exemplified by Passaic and the Colorado coal strikes, both cases isolating the A.F.L. fakers and gaining trade union support. In the first case the gain was nationally for the Communist leadership and in the second case mainly in Colorado and Wyoming by Communist forces for the I.W.W. leadership.
Only by the correct disposition of our forces in the reactionary trade unions and the new unions will it be possible for us to defeat the treacherous bureaucrats and build our influence in the labor movement. Let us review the Gastonia struggle and the southern campaign to find the causes of our mistakes.
In the economic development of capitalist society ever so often culminating points are reached when the psychological reaction of the workers to those changes making for greater oppression one form or the other are transformed into class ideology of a rudimentary nature. This change due to the material transformation can be accelerated and definite organizational results obtained providing the vanguard of the workers, the Communist Party, is able to apply tactics and strategy based on a Marxian program for the concrete situation to crystallize the developing ideology to an organized class consciousness.
The stage of economic transformation in the West when the I.W.W. continued the traditions of the Western Federation, where the vanguard applied tactics with considerable success giving them a crystallizing of this changing ideology and an organizational base. The transformation in the South in the last several years is similar to the change in the West in the period spoken of, except (to our advantage) we are in a different stage of historical development. In the West at that period the vanguard was able to organize a considerable base but up to the present the vanguard has yet to accomplish this first task in the South.
A review of our activity in the South will throw light upon our success and failure that we may not repeat these blunders again. To begin with we must point out that our Southern campaign up to the present can register the following positive points:

We have brought for the first time in this section, the class issue into the struggle to advancing the workers’ conditions.
 
Through our Gastonia Campaign (only considering the Southern end of the campaign) we have agitationally though not organizationally, gained the wide support of American-born workers and cropper farmers to our broad struggle in spite of the rabid anti-Red campaign of the bosses.
 
We have proven agitationally to a wide section of the Negro masses, Southern and Northern, that the Communists are the leaders in the struggle of the Negro masses.
 
To a fair degree we consolidated the unity of black and white workers at each step of the struggle and were consequently considered by these workers as the “best fighters” and known to the bosses and their henchman as the “worse enemies.”

Since revolutionists don’t need self-praise (nor the present official Party campaign of mechanical self-criticism) we will deal with the problem of how the class [issues could] have been brought into the [struggle.]
In the beginning of our Southern work, before our forces were sent South the condition of the Gastonia area was in a state of tension without important open class conflicts. This period was a culminating point in the transformation of the new industrial South, dominating old forms of control and changing the “hill people” into machine automatons on a large scale.
Especially in the Textile section of the Southern industries was there a critical stage. A steady Southward shift of the cotton spinning section and an acute international textile crisis accelerated competition between the North and the South. On the other hand modern mills with machines of enormous output had to be kept moving if the rate of profit was to be kept up. These contradictory forces resulted in intensifying the stretch-out system, in wage reductions, worse company town conditions and general lowering of the standard of living with wide-spread unemployment, pellagra and chain gang victims. Men, women and children of American born stock were being driven into open revolt and organization against these conditions.
In this period when the Party should have sent forces South the Cannon-Foster group was fighting to correct the official American Party leadership, who had been given leadership on a platter by the Stalin-Bucharin regime. The Pepper-Lovestone group considered that this industrialization was to create a reservoir of reaction and that no work could be carried on now. The R.I.L.U. was the first to clamor for the new line that was soon to follow in the international movement but instead of a correction of the Right mistakes in relation to our trade union work and the United Front tactics a mechanical swing to the Left was taken.
After months of fooling away time comrade Beal was sent South in February 1929 inadequately supported one way or the other. In fact from that period up until the October 13th conference and today the decisive voting majority at the Center of the Communist Party did not know what it was all about and was often a brake instead of a help. The mechanical shift at the top in these hectic days for the Lovestoneites was no remedy, because such is never a remedy for anything except bureaucratic consolidation. Beal’s glowing reports of what really could be done in the South and the A.F.L. activity opened the eyes of more forces at the Center, some to reality but most of them to the possibilities of dashing spectacular “victories”.
More forces were sent South and the pivot point of activity was properly selected as Gastonia, the cotton spinning center with the Loray Mill as the pace setter. This pre-strike stake with the intense activity of a small force was entirely new to Southern conditions, but several comrades with Beal did excellent work under the circumstances.
The leading committee was committed to a “rolling, wave theory” which in practice relied too much on the spontaneity of the masses and spectacular dramatization and not sufficiently on preliminary organizational activity.
The A.F.L had already started their second drive since the war in the Southern textile field and were “coming in and taking over revolts of the workers” in Elizabethton, Greenville, Lexington, Ware Shoals, Marion, etc., trying to get any kind of agreement with the bosses, selling out and leaving if it became too hot, as they did in Ware Shoals and other places. The driving force of this campaign were the Musteites who as a new development at this stage stood in between the reactionaries and the best progressives who in the immediate past had supported the Left wing led by the Communists.
Our mechanical interpretation of the policy of building new unions and the rejection of the United Front policy as a swing away from the Right blunders of the past in the united front action put a taboo on all kinds of united fronts, if not in words then in deeds.
This resulted in our refusal to utilize throughout the country all possible forces, so badly needed in that concrete situation, against a powerful enemy that was concentrating all forces against us.
In the Loray Mill, where the National Textile Workers Union was concentrating its forces the company had increased the stretch-out and systematically, department by department, was reducing the workers’ wages. Five thousand workers was the full time capacity of the mill. Before the union was ready for the counter-attack the Manville Jencks, owners of Loray started discharging union members.
This precipitated the strike and over 2,500 quit work. This was inopportune for the union, for a little more time would have found them better situated. Mass picketing followed. A great number of these workers were in a strike for the first time and were new trade union recruits which meant that more emphasis should have been put on preliminary organisation work.
This premature forced break could have been overcome by the tried and tested tactic so well used in the Lawrence 1912 strike and many times since. The tactic of going from department to department at the inception of the strike in an organized planned manner – Strike! – Strike! and pulling switches, etc. This was not done. The failure at the start to close the mill pre-determined the tempo of the positive force and choked the lighting spirit of the workers on strike making a breach with those in the plant and enabling the bosses to play these two forces against each other to our disadvantage. Naturally, workers in the nearby mills did not gain the necessary inspiration from the strike, especially considering the training of these workers in any kind of class struggles.
(To Be Continued)
 



Part 1

Part 2

Part 3

Part 4
 



Those who hold the position that reformism must develop in the United States are wrong. Trotsky pointed out that America does not have to pass through a period of reformism but this does not mean America will not. When conditions cause a Leftward movement in America today both reform and revolution gain but the ratio depends to a large extent upon the tactics and strategy of the Communists.
Most likely a period of reform will develop but it will be distinguished from European reformism because historical conditions (decay of capitalism) will limit it to a short duration. Developing capitalism in the past could offer reforms through pressure of the workers and the reformist parties but in this period even American capitalism and its reformist parties have little of material value to offer the workers. Decadent capitalism, internationally characterized by keener competition, intensified contradictions, mass production, rationalisation, organic unemployment disintegration of the skilled strata, etc., are the objective conditions which narrow the material base of social reformism. But from this we cannot conclude, as the Stalinists do in their “third period” swing, that this proves the “fascization” of reformism [line missing] “socialist fascist” and that the road in America is a sharp line of demarcation of “class against class”, “revolutionary upsurges” and the radicalization is a continuous Leftward swing.
 
Reform Parties and Reform
Reform parties and reforms are two different things. Reform parties grow on reforms but the former can outlive the latter just like antiquated structures of the past exist today and will be carried over in the future. Their growth and living force depends upon material conditions but structures, customs and ideologies are used by reaction after the material conditions are swept away and before new conditions and new generations move on.
When Capitalism can not rule as a bourgeois republic it uses reform (Socialist, etc.,) as long as possible and when this is no longer possible, capitalism resorts to open dictatorship (Fascism). It is most likely, too, that American capitalism will try reform before using open dictatorship. In 1918, the German capitalists used the reformist parties and reforms to their advantage against the workers but in 1923 the material base for reforms in Germany was lacking and instead of reforms the workers were beaten down to a lower standard of living by a reform party without reforms. Today the new instrument of fascism is being shaped to take the helm in place of the reform party, the social Democracy, which must be discarded to fight the workers and the Communist vanguard.
In Russia in 1917 the breakdown of the economic system eliminated the material base for the reform party to carry out its reforms yet the reformist parties existed and thrived from February to October. The reformists without a material base were doing a good job for capitalism. They failed because of a Marxian party, the Bolsheviks, under the leadership of Lenin and Trotsky. Capitalist reforms as a material concession in Russia had reached an end with the breakdown of the system and these reforms could only be fulfilled through a transformation (revolution) with workers’ reforms under the Soviets. The fast tempo of the Russian reformists from February to October was a reflection of the fast tempo of social changes, but nevertheless, the reformist parties played their role in spite of the death of the material base.
When the objective conditions are favorable and reform wins, as in Germany in 1923, Great Britain 1925, and in the United States today – the lack of success on the part of the workers falls on the shoulders of the party which calls itself the vanguard, the Communist). Today, with objective conditions so favorable, greater responsibility falls upon the shoulders of the Communist Party and this means primarily on the Left Opposition. We cannot skip necessary evolutionary steps toward revolution but we can, as Marxists shorten
their duration and even alter their quality. Since the objective conditions favor us, the battle between reform and revolution now primarily rests upon a Marxian party of dialectic revolutionists, not only to explain correctly the conditions but to present the program, and the program of action to remake them, connecting today’s activity with our goal. The Communist can only be equal to this task by basing himself upon the program of the Left Opposition and we of the Left must intensify our activity and concretize our program.
 



On May 18, over 800 workers of the American Mills, No. 1 and 2 of Bessemer City, N.C., went out on strike against a 20 to 30 percent wage cut and the ruinous pace at which they are driven by the mill bosses. In flaring headlines, the Daily Worker immediately announced this defensive struggle as being “under the leadership of the National Textile Workers Union”. The next issue of the Worker however, meekly and obscurely informed us that “there is a danger of a repetition of the form of betrayal made famous in the Flint automobile strike, with misleaders seeking to betray the strike by waging an attack on the T.U.U.L. organization which has outlined a policy of struggle and spreading the strike.” On the third day, the Daily Worker declared even more humbly and more obscurely, that “it is not true, as previously stated that the N.T.W.U. is leading the strike.”
Leadership of strikes and other struggles is not won overnight, nor do betrayals take place with such startling and mechanical suddenness. Betrayals come “like lightning” only as culminating points of actions and tactics over a period of time, prepared in advance in a manner obvious to the militant elements (at least they should be obvious), and this is precisely what the Worker tries to cover up. To make it clear would be to expose the results of the official Party’s policy.
 
A Year Ago and Now
One year ago, we led the strike in Bessemer City at the same time that we led the Gastonia strike, and although the strike committee had misleaders and stool pigeons on it, our forces with correct tactics, were able to isolate them and gain the leadership of the strike. The Bessemer City strike, it is true, had largely been foreshadowed by the Gastonia strike but it was our tactics that carried us forward, and the July 28 Bessemer City conference, with a couple of hundred delegates and over 1,500 workers present demonstrated our progress. We had a union hall in Bessemer, held regular meetings, had two mill locals and two other groups in the first stages of mill locals. Bessemer City supported us through the overwhelming majority of the textile workers and the police were friendly just to the degree that they were former textile workers themselves and felt our strength and the solidity of the workers. (Bessemer City, by the way, was the home town of the martyred Ella May.)
From a condition of hegemony and undisputed leadership and with the possibilities greater and favorable objective factors, only one year passes for us to reach a point where our leadership is not only rejected, but organizers sent into the town are beaten up and almost lynched by hostile elements, who, consciously or not, play the game of the bosses and the Black Hundreds. Last year, when the Black Hundreds rode Gaston County we were able to hold our own in Bessemer City (which is six miles from Gastonia); today the tables are turned.
Not all of the bombastic phrase-mongering, and the self-praise so disgraceful in a revolutionist, not all the cheap journalistic talk about “Our Party being the only revolutionary leader of the mass struggles or the American workers”, can successfully conceal the lamentable failure of the Party bureaucrats and their policies. The Bessemer City strike, like the Flint, Michigan and Pittston strikes before it reveal the fact that the Party leadership, substituting phrases and ever-changing theses for solid, everyday preparatory work, is usually caught entirely unawares by struggles in precisely those localities and industries where it should have been decisively in the forefront and leadership.
Instead of this difficult work of persistent (and sometimes slow) foundation laying, the Party leaders follow the policy of making the membership drunk with intoxicating phrases about the “masses following our leadership by the million”, about “the crisis in American capitalism is finally breaking it down”, and similar blubber.
 
Result of Phrase Mongering
The result is that when a struggle does break out, the Party and the Left wing are frequently on the outside, estranged from the workers. This was true in the anthracite movement; and to cover up its own bankruptcy, the leadership followed its usual course of monstrous bluff to the effect: that the “N.M.U. was leading thousands of miners in a strike against unemployment”. The same thing held true in Flint. No preparations of a substantial, solid nature. The strike broke out. The customary concealment of impotence by loud shouting and bluff to the effect that the “Auto Workers Industrial Union is leading the Flint strikers” – until the ease with which the bosses’ agent, Comstock, sold out the workers put an end to the pitiful fairy tales of the Daily Worker. And now the Bessemer City strike in the heart of the Party’s former strength in the South, without the slightest Communist or Left wing influence on it. Here the attempt to bluff about “N.T.W.U. leadership” collapsed in two days, and the shamefaced denial had to be recorded quietly in the Party press.
The Party is entirely correct in pointing out that a leadership which rejects class struggle unionism and direction and Communist participation will run the strike to ground. The Party is similarly correct in fighting against the element in control of the strike and attempting to win the strikers to the National Textile Workers Union. But the Party methods are wrong and it is these that have given birth to the very forces they are fighting. To miss opportunities and fight with false exaggerated policies, is to play into the hands of the reactionary element who can then demagogically influence the workers against a proletarian outlook and method of struggle.
It must be repeated that Bessemer City is in the very heart of the Party’s most sensational struggle, of its fortress in the South. That it is now entirely out of the N.T.W.U.’s hand is an alarm signal for the Communist workers. The “third period” and its philosophy have already witnessed several strikes in this country: Illinois, Flint, Imperial Valley, Pittston, and now Bessemer City. They were indications of the better objective situation for the movement, and the incapacity of the Party leadership. The dumping of the “third period” and its philosophers is the preliminary condition to the progress of the revolutionary movement. Bessemer City shows us why.
 



With, the black hundreds in the saddle and our activity shifted to holding and reorganizing our forces for a comeback we started our new work. Secret work in the Gastonia area through mill locals and increased open work all over the South to hem in Gastonia and to narrow the circle and close in. All that was needed in the outer area was organization, for the sentiment for us was there in masses and our organizers and colonizers from the outer area all sent letters telling us they are behind us and to keep up the good work. Many new contacts were gained and work toward October 13 went ahead.
The newspapers predicted that our convention would now be a failure and the bosses openly declared that it would not be held. We decided it had to be held even if we had to move out of this area but a survey of our forces convinced us we could hold it in Charlotte as originally planned. The third trial was on and while the legal end was taking care of the trial the organizers were as busy as hell with the union work in the two Carolinas, Virginia, Tennessee and Georgia. Campaign after campaign was launched against us, one on the heel of the other so fast that it seemed like one continuation: red scare, Negro issue, revolution, etc., but this did not stop the work from progressing toward October 13.
Now to consider a few of the other issues for a while. As far as the national I.L.D. campaign by this time was concerned it was a flop. We had a direct issue, more important to the American workers than the Sacco-Vanzetti issue (as far as they were concerned). Such favorable situations no organization had faced for yearn and naturally half an effort would show some results but on the whole we saw failure. Why? This failure can be traced to the “third period” tactics and the “third period” tactics can be traced to Stalin revisionism of Marxism, of the most fundamental international issues and the elimination of the Opposition.
In correcting the Party policy of the Right wing Lovestone leadership of “marrying” all possible fakers in the A.F.L. and other working class organizations we “corrected” this by dumping overboard with the fakers all progressives and Left wingers and Leninist united front tactics and replaced them with “pure” united front tactics with ourselves. Paper conferences were held everywhere.
And the masses of other blunders and mistakes, a volume in itself, of all types of mistakes from important ones to little ones that amounted to setbacks were made by the incompetent leaders, Engdahl, Poyntz and Jakira. The field fraction pounded away at these errors, constantly, night and day, in every manner and form and found the leading committee at the center wanting because they were a hindrance instead of a help. I realize this now: That a Marxian Central Committee can correct this but a Central Committee made by a mechanical shift at the top replacing one variety of bureaucrats with another variety can only lead to further negative results.
In words the center accepted our program but in deeds – what follows shows the contradiction between the two. At this point serious minded comrades at the center (who were not decisive in determining actions instead of words from the center) laughed at my enthusiasm and told me that now since the spectacular, emotional part was over the bureaucrats would forget the south in deeds if not in words, and I would receive less support from now on than I had. This was my first trip to N.Y. with several more to follow on the same argument and I did not fully realize the truth of this statement until my last trip in December.
Yes, the spectacular end was over and the W.I.R. (Landy’s incompetence) “pulling stakes” with the Leaksville strike on was followed by other departments in deeds (but not in words) and a decline set in after the end of the trial. The objective factor was more favorable but our force was not taking advantage of this situation. Reports from our field organizers and especially comrade Amy Schechter proved the favorable situation our work had given us this far.
The October optimism of our many southern organizers and mill local officials with months of this inactivity was transformed into pessimism and our fraction of northern comrades was in a similar condition. The postponed national textile convention held in December in Paterson did not solve one of the basic problems of the south. In the meantime the A.F.L. was increasing its work and with the liberals and a section of the bosses was being used as a dam against our advance.
Another blunder following from the “Third Period” is the lumping of all outside the official Communist Party as Fascist or Social Fascist while life was proving the class struggle is not so mechanical and simple.
In the Atlanta case the Daily Worker had a scare headline telling how the A.F.L. official on the jury helped indict our comrades calling for the death penalty. But facts prove that Steve Nance, President of the Atlanta Federation of Trades, member of the Grand Jury that brought in the indictment was the only one who voted against the indictment. Later the Trades Assembly passed a resolution with only Secretary Marquardt of the State Federation and one other voting against the resolution calling for free speech for the Communists. This “third period tactic and misstatement played into the hands of these A.F.L. fakers as similar tactics play into the hands of Muste, Thomas, Howat, etc. Our plan is to defeat these labor lieutenants and not to strengthen them.
The Party Task in the South resolution to the 7th Convention of the C.P. says, “Our perspective must be for the defeat of the A.F.L. and its Muste wing in the mass industries of the south.” We must by all means defeat these fakers in the ranks of labor but to say this in harsh terms, that may denote our feelings, and to accomplish the task are two different things. The present tactics of the official party is strengthening the position of these fakers instead of weakening their control over the masses.
Not even a half-baked revolutionist will argue that the struggle is simply one of the capitalist against the workers. The problem in the concrete is more complicated in the divisions and the many antagonisms within the classes and between the classes. Success or failure in advancing our position in winning a strike or revolution depends upon how many of the antagonisms and divisions in the workers ranks can be eliminated for united action against the enemy in a favorable objective situation and how wide a breach we can make in the class enemies ranks, the unity of the first and the division of tine second spell success for us. But without a favorable objective situation we cannot speak of success.
In Marion for example, the Musteite wing of the A.F.L. first sent the striking workers back to work with a promise of a settlement that we know never did come, second, they did not force the mill owners to live up to the preliminary conditions pending settlement, third, sold these workers out after they were, back to work, and fourth, betrayed these workers to the strike against the sellout contract. Such action DeLeon and others pointed out before and it is not a new and exclusive development of the “Third Period”.
After all this and after the Marion massacre the Musteites still retained leadership and gained influence throughout the country. The southern fraction tried four times to break into Marion, but I realize now that each time our advance and attempt at united action against these fakers was shackled and we failed to gain our objective because this shackling from the top by “Third Period” tactics predetermined our united action from below. We were criticized four times by the center for these failures that can be traced back to them. Why not ask ourselves this: How can such brazen, betrayals be rewarded by greater influence of the Muste wing while our class struggle of Gastonia, which even our enemies admit was led by forces that cannot be bought out or run out (as is the case with the A.F.L.) have not been able to organize our influence from this struggle which was on a much higher class plane?
You cannot answer this on the basis of capitalist reaction and the necessary “smallness” of the revolutionary forces until we are at a higher stage of the class struggle or in power, because the question is not the organization of the majority of workers under reactionary leadership or revolutionary leadership but the organization of a goodly section of the forces either reactionary or revolutionary in the struggles and strikes. We must also not forget we are in the “Third Period” with “revolutionary upsurge”. Facts prove that with proper tactics the revolutionary movement can consolidate its influence organizationally, as it has done in the past. In other words, our tactics have not only weakened our own forces but at our expense have rendered aid to these very enemies we talk so much about. We do not expect to build POWERFUL REVOLUTIONARY INDUSTRIAL unions in a few weeks’ work, overshadowing the few million membership of the A.F.L. but we can expect to build a substantial influence and organization in the labor movement under our leadership with correct tactics.
 



By the time the new forces had arrived, July 12th, Dunne, Wagenknecht, Drew, Martin and others had started the work of reorganizing and preparing the ground for the defense of our leaders in jail. The worst of the reaction had subsided and the new cycle was well on its way. This followed the indictments and called for organization around this issue. Our main office had been moved to Charlotte, a larger town some thirty miles from Gastonia. We collected the scattered forces, issued dues cards to new members and started collecting initiation from new members and dues from old ones. The Bessemer City and Gastonia meetings were enlarged and spread over the entire area to every mill town, step by step in an organized fashion. Organizational work of establishing mill locals was started. Our first objective was a conference at Bessemer City July 28, a day before the opening of the trial.
We readily realized that the technical situation of the N.T.W.U. was a handicap, that our National Office was in a bad shape – a reflection already of the new line of mechanical swing from the reactionary unions to new unions. According to our constitution all applications must be sent to N.Y. from the South and they made out dues cards and mailed them back. In stable, well-functioning locals this may work – but not in company mill towns where all mail is the first pick of the bosses and, more important, when we were in the middle of a drive, recruiting new members by the hundreds, who prized the dues book more than anything and a drive among new recruits to union organization of any kind. Why the force before us allowed this method to continue and hamper their work I do not understand. We found over 500 dues books piled up at our Charlotte office and hundreds of disgusted workers because they waited so long for a book and did not get any. In normal times the delay would be too much for such drives. We soon put an end to this method.
The Bessemer City Conference rolled around and showed:

We had the textile workers of the whole area behind us with a couple of hundred delegates, mainly from the Gastonia area and over 1,500 workers attending.
 
The delegation, all American born workers accepted our program unanimously through policy and not mechanical control.
 
The Southern fraction failed to obtain any Negro delegates to the convention, even after some were elected.

The parade in Gastonia that the center informed us to call off for fear of a riot was agreed to by us, but I had been the last one to accept it and as far as my knowledge goes the prisoners were the first to protest the idea of the parade.
Following the Bessemer City successful conference came a change of venue to Charlotte for August 26th. The Bessemer conference had instructed all members to be present in court Monday morning and the hot day found our forces well represented in Gastonia that whole day and a packed courtroom mostly of textile workers in their working clothes.
The unions and other organizations cooperating intensified our work in the coming weeks and the union picnic of August 25th at Mt. Holly was jointly with the preliminary I.L.D. conference a day before the second trial. We progressed in the following activity. Plans were wall under way for the Charlotte October 12-13 convention of the newly organized district as the outgrowth of the Bessemer conference. Our literature covered the whole field and the South. The Labor Defender and the Daily Worker played an invaluable role. The youth organizers from the North were pressed into union work to such a degree that their own field was neglected. They made excellent fighters. Mass union meeting and local union meetings, closed and open were held in all mill towns, we had three to four in progress each night. The number of mill locals increased with our work.
By this time the slogan of frame-up was changed to self-defense and I supported Dunne on this. In the field, covering meetings every day, meetings of determined workers who were only able to hold these meetings each time we first organised a force strong enough to let the boss know he had better not attack us; and with defense committees organized around each meeting I was carried away with the concrete situation as others of the Southern fraction were.
The right of self-defense was a living reality with us and without it our organizers were the dead force. However, the the situation in the field and the slogan as a national one to rally broad masses of all shades of political beliefs in the workers’ camp for the one big issue was against this frame up and the self-defense issue should have nationally been a secondary issue regardless of what the reality of our concrete meetings were. This is not an excuse for me – just facts – but does not justify the position. More harmful than this was the I.L.D. “united front” campaign we will deal with later.
The Mt. Holly picnic was a huge success and the second trial ended with a mistrial. A retrospection will show we followed up the attacks of the bosses’ first degree charge with not one victory but a series of victories and consolidated our forces in this area and extended agitationally in many other centers of the South.
By the end of August the leading field fraction committee could feel increased action and plans against us, a preparation of the bosses for a drive on us. Our feeling was based on daily observation and reports from the field. The full fraction was put on a military base to the dislike and protest of several of the fraction members who joked about it. We prepared according to conditions and on September 9th, Saturday afternoon a mob of several hundred, overseers, bosses and part of the committee of 100 included with the “law’s” protection, with rifles, clubs and blackjacks assembled at a meeting place in South Gastonia, chased all comers away and attacked a speaker’s car and beat up the occupants. It was the beginning of the open drive on us. The speakers were lucky to get out with such little damage.
This brought home a warning and the reality of the situation to the rest of the comrades. We prepared to answer this with a mass meeting there, our regular Saturday one the next week and with a week’s mobilization for it. Monday the mistrial brought the second trial to an end and that night the black hundreds rode led by Bulwinkle and Solicitor Carpenter, swept three counties, raided three offices, looked everywhere for all organizers they could lay hand on, destroyed records they could find and kidnapped Wells, Saylors and Lell and were not fortunate in obtaining the others or our main records due mainly to our early preparations and possibly to luck.
Our mass meetings were stopped except in Charlotte where the first one held after the raids shows the workers 100 per cent behind us and a good defense corps ready for anything. While the black hundreds had free reign for the following period we were daily going to mill locals in the area and setting up an underground apparatus. The fact that we had over two dozen mill locals, functioning well for such workers new at organization, saved the day and laid the basis for our comeback and also prevented the black hundreds from driving us out of the whole area. The secret mill local meetings were the reasons for the mob follow up in small bands. They aimed to stop them, to get the speakers and organizers, break up the work for October 12-13 and defeat our work for the next trial. They succeeded in taking Cleo Tessener, our King Mt. organizer out on the night of September 18.
Fair progress under these difficult conditions was being made for the Saturday counter-attack of our forces. Each night textile workers from locals in the area took turns and sacrificed the night as guards near the jail in Charlotte where our comrades were prisoners to prevent another attempt to lynch them. The action of the police in the immediate proceeding period proved not to us, who were already convinced, but to the textile workers that they could not be depended upon and this law was the bosses’ law and not our law.
Our progress for Saturday received a big set back on September 12 when the Charlotte police raided our organizers’ house one block from the jail, took our weapons and ammunition of defense, arrested comrade Saul, Martin and five others and charged them with “attempt to overthrow the government of N.C.” This charge did not get to first base but it had its desired effect of disorganizing our force and taking our defense weapons while the black hundreds were arming everyday for Saturday.
From the governor to the policeman the “law and order” program was a policy of hands off the bosses’ black hundreds and search and seizure of the textile workers old rusty hunting guns. The policy was in well oiled shape Saturday when the bands of the bosses black hundreds of overseers, foremen, hired gunmen and reactionary organization forces rode every road in and around Gastonia in high powered cars with guns held high. In every mill town they dispersed the textile workers headed for So. Gastonia when possible. This culminated in the murder of Ella May, a murder committed by the mill owners, their police, the Governor’s force and their thugs to carry out the work. The other organizers who took part in the Saturday attempt to get to So. Gastonia ended with their narrow escape.
 



The unemployment situation in this, period of depression following the period of overproduction and crisis of American capitalism brings forth a problem of greater magnitude than the unemployment accompanying the classical crisis of capitalism in its growth stage. A permanent army of unemployed due to the machine development and rationalization, aggravated by the crisis, swelling the numbers of the unemployed to over seven millions. Unemployment is the most pressing immediate problem of the American, workers and every class conscious organization, reform group and the capitalist vanguard is vitally concerned with its solution; the working class with one aim and the capitalist class with the opposite aim.
The aim of the workers vanguard is to utilize this issue to strengthen the position of the working class and consolidate the ideological change taking place in the ranks of the workers. The aim of the capitalist class is to stem the tide, throw out enough crumbs to prevent this ideological crystallization and maintain their tottering equilibrium a little longer.
Not only can the two main contending classes use this issue to strengthen their position but the reformist and revolutionary wings of the working class movement are now in battle for a position in the American working class which will be an important victory in the immediate future and a big factor in determining the strength and duration of reformism in America. Therefore, tactics not only against the capitalist but especially against the reformist wing are vital problems in the unemployment activity of the revolutionary movement.
 
The Program of the Official Party
All the class conscious organizations are reaping some benefit from the favorable objective situation in spite of the fact that none of them has a concrete program for unemployment. The Communist Party, as the main organized force of these organizations, has done the most in this field and has a concrete program. But what kind of a concrete program, is another question.
Parties that only present an abstract program for the unemployed cannot be criticized in the same light the Communist Party must be. The Party at least attempts to solve the problem. It is its “Third Period” antics and non-Marxian analysis that causes all the trouble.
When the crisis began the Party issued the slogan of “Work or Wages”. After the 7th Convention, when the crisis has deepened and is going deeper it shifted the emphasis to the Social Insurance Bill. The political analysis of the Party informs us, through the 7th Convention thesis, that we are in a period of revolutionary upsurge in America and yet this seventh convention gave birth to the Social Insurance Bill as the main activity in a period of “revolutionary upsurge”.
The struggle for social insurance and the unemployment councils are elementary activities to mobilize all workers possible in order to use this mass against capitalism today and to win the most advanced section of this mass to our Party. The “revolutionary unions” of the T.U.U.L., on the other hand, represent the most advanced section. To tie the unemployed councils organizationally to the tail of the T.U.U.L. is to cut off our advance. The Party must be the driving force and the T.U.U.L. must be the most active factor for organizing these unemployed but to apply the separate front in place of the united front, and mechanical control in place of control through Marxian policy, is fundamentally wrong.
 
The “Social Insurance Bill”
A struggle for social insurance is correct, but to direct our main energy in this field in the manner of the Party, means creating parliamentary illusions. Communist participation in elections does not guarantee revolutionary political action instead of parliamentary action. A struggle for social insurance does not mean the main weight should be placed on a BILL, on the contrary the main emphasis should be placed on the industrial end with proper political coordination. This would easily enable us to draw a clear line of demarcation between our struggle for social insurance and that of the reformist and capitalist but at present the only distinction the Party speakers can find to prove that our bill is “revolutionary” is that we advocate $25.00 and they advocate $5.00. To compare our bill with “Roosevelt’s Bill” in order to denote the revolutionary content of our social insurance struggle is another step in the swamp.
A struggle against unemployment must have the main emphasis on the field of struggle rather than in Congress and this activity (trade union, unemployment councils, shop committees, mass literature distribution of elementary educational value) should be coordinated with the parliamentary (elections, etc.) in order to strengthen our entire activity instead of arming the “industrial actionist” on the one hand and the reformist on the other by stressing a Congressional BILL.
 
The United Front
This struggle against unemployment of millions of workers who are just becoming class conscious, with only a small section of this ideology crystallized, cannot be even started unless the Leninist UNITED FRONT is applied. The Party started at the beginning of the crisis with pure separate fronts and after the convention only gave lip service to the united front in a couple of half-hearted articles in the Daily Worker and Labor Unity. A united front with all the organizations of the workers will enable us to gain and to expose the reformist. The reformist and trade union fakers have made this a big issue and our tactics are strengthening them. We need tactics that will strip these fakers before the eyes of the workers proving that their fight for unemployment is in name only.
The struggle for shorter hours is more important in content than a struggle for a social insurance bill. The main emphasis must fall on shorter hours. Such a struggle, like the 1830 struggle for the ten hour day and the 1886 struggle for the eight hour day are political struggles of basic working class content which is the distinction between revolutionary political actjon and “pure” parliamentary action. Not the slogan for the seven hour day but the slogan for the 6 hour day and five day week is what is needed.
Abstract propaganda for the Soviet Union means nothing to the average American worker who is separating himself from the capitalist and reformist. The sympathizer of the movement will be patient with any amount you give him, but we cannot base our propaganda on the circle we have already won. The slogan demanding credits to the Soviet Union is a concrete method of gaining the support of the workers. In the basic industries, those which produce the means of production which the Soviet Union needs and is buying, is where we can come to the American worker with a “Soviet issue” that means more than abstract support through convictions of a few based on scientific understanding. The approach should be through the bread and butter angle. It will tear down the walls of prejudice to enable us to present a scientific understanding to unbiased minds. And one may mention that credits to the Soviet Union is a burning issue with the plan of socialist construction.
The depression is growing deeper and this winter the conditions of the workers will be worse. Defensive struggle will reach a higher plane. There is still time for the Party and the revolutionary forces really to work out a concrete program of action for the unemployment situation and for the Party to shift from its reformist tendencies of main emphasis on a BILL to revolutionary political action.
 



(continued from last issue)
The question of the Labor Party must be considered within the framework of our general program of parliamentary action. If we hold to the theory that we can vote the capitalists out of office then a Labor Party may be the ideal instrument to sneak up on the capitalists. But since this is the height of folly the Labor Party falls from grace. On the other hand, it is not difficult for the ultra-lefts who swing to the other extreme and refuse to participate in parliamentary action, to dismiss the Labor Party with one stroke of the pen.
The revolutionary Marxists utilized parliamentary action only as an auxiliary activity and to win backward layers of the masses in ;he process of exposing the enemy and their agents in elections, etc. Because we work in reactionary unions and help build trade unions of the workers, some draw the conclusions that we can help build a Labor Party. But there is no comparison between the elementary union organizations on the economic field and the Labor Party on the political field. It is important to obtain a proper relationship between the elementary economic organizations of the class which are the instruments for immediate demands and the political party of the class.
The political party is the instrument of the vanguard and its main objective is the struggle for power. Only a revolutionary Marxian party can lead the masses and fulfill this purpose. A Labor Party can only be an instrument of reform.
 
Reforms and Immediate Demands
The question of a Labor Party is bound up with the question of immediate demands and reforms. Let us consider the question of reforms.
All working class organizations claiming to fight for the class have stumbled on this problem to a greater or lesser degree. Outstanding in the Marxian camp are DeLeon and the S.L.P., which, unable to find a way out, just threw the whole question of immediate demands overboard and denied it all except in the trade unions. But since practical needs of the class today are material things and not ghosts their denial was to no avail. The P.P., to this day, is following the footsteps of the S.L.P., on this vital class question. Both of these organizations have taken a negative position while the S.P., swinging to the opposite direction, has transformed every struggle for immediate demands into reforms of the worst kind. In the Communist currents, sad to say, we find them handling the question with kid gloves.
We Marxists cannot borrow many dictionary words and use them to define things and conditions in the class struggle. The word reform is one such word.
Is there any difference in the material gains or practical needs of the day for our class “given” by the bosses or their labor leaders or won by our class in struggle? To every Marxist, we know there is a fundamental difference for our class position. Only by understanding the class forces and causes for the way our class receives these material gains from “day to day” can we (after explaining) use the word “reform” in a “revolutionary sense”. This understanding enables us to label the kind of material gain to denote reformist or revolutionary action in the struggle for immediate demands.
If the practical needs of the day are “given” by the bosses or their government they are reforms; if they come from the bosses’ labor leaders, trade union or political, they are social reforms and if these gains are won by our class in struggle led by its vanguard they are sparks for revolution. Practical needs of the day for our class cannot be abstracted from the class struggle and the organizational and ideological position of the class. If we could abstract these immediate demands or gains from the position of battle of the class forces we could say all these galas are reforms. But such an abstraction is false while other abstractions, such as are explained in Capital are not false.
We know that reforms or social reforms do not come from the big kind hearts of the bosses and their flunkeys. We know they are granted from above because the class pressure from below compels them to relinquish this material gain for our class in order to stem the tide and check the growing opposition. It is more profitable to “kill with kindness” than to kill through white terror, providing the position of the bosses enables them to carry out the former. The degree of class pressure determines, in the majority of cases, if the practical needs will be direct from the bosses or from their flunkeys or from the class itself through correct leadership. Reforms can be said to result from class pressure but class pressure without or with wrong pressure of the class vanguard means a disproportion in the relation of class and party.
The growth and decay stage of capitalism will cause a big variance in this disproportion. In the growth stage of capitalism, the objective factors favor the capitalist and reforms while the decay stage gives the objective factors to the revolutionist to a far greater degree. This brings to the fore the subjective factor, the vanguard as the vital determining factor of the problem as Trotsky points out, not only in revolutions but also in the struggle for immediate demands.
The degree of class pressure does not always determine the success of reformism, as the above will indicate. The stage of capitalism we live in as well as its ebbs and flows, and also its uneven capitalist development, is no abstraction in the class struggle. In the growth stage of capitalism, crumbs in response to class pressure were the least evil for the bosses, because the very expansion and new markets more than made up for the loss. In the decay stage reforms are bitter concessions from the capitalist, knit to a higher degree not only to the class pressure but more so to the policies of the vanguard.
If capitalism grants reforms (beats us to our point of advantage) this has its ideological influence upon our class or section of the class as well as a negative organizational result, scattering our forces and at the same time driving these class forces into some form of capitalist, controlled organization.
Such prevents the crystallization of our class ideology and unless the vanguard is wide awake and capable we lose even the possibility of retrenching ourselves for the next struggle. In this sense, as a class problem and not as an abstract material gain our class, which only learns by experience, has lost by the bosses’ coup and with it the vanguard loses.
With the capitalist coup in reforms, the class line re-forms with the bosses at a more advantageous position than before. A material gain given by capitalism, as a reform is just so much labor power (controlled by capitalism) spent as it would be spent on the battlefield in destruction of the enemy forces by shells and ammunition. But the comparison does not hold water. Because a material gain even in relation to the capitalist is just so much spent, while in relation to the workers it is a material gain. Let us see. If the vanguard of the workers moves up and intrenches the class behind the material gain (reform and not a spark) it is already a NEW PROBLEM and especially a totally different struggle. If the capitalists try to retake what they gave, and not what we won, it is no longer a question of reform in the sense of immediate demand (offensive struggle) but a problem of defensive struggles of our class. How many material gains (regardless of how they came) were retaken and are being retaken by the capitalist in the present crisis? Any thinking worker can answer this fairly well. In this case if the vanguard does not measure up to standards we can say, the greater the number of these gains through reforms and social reforms, the easier it is for capitalism to retake them and those that come to us as material gains as sparks toward revolution, the harder it is for the capitalist to retake.
One only has to look at the sick coal industry (favorable to the capitalist) with past gains primarily through class struggle and compare it with other healthy capitalist industries (favorable to the workers) where gains were mainly reforms and realize the difference between the two. A comparison will show reforms are relinquished easier than the gains through class battles unless the vanguard’s right or wrong policy alters the problem.
Can we lay down definite plans to prevent our action from following the reformist camp? We can lay down principles in general, but it is impossible to lay down a line of march that is fool-proof. Each concrete struggle must have its tactics formulated on the basis of Marxian analysis. A line of demarcation between reformist action (reforms) and revolutionary action can be made in every struggle but every developing struggle will have forces and action of both. It is up to the Marxists to move these struggles out of the channels of REFORM into the channels of deeper class struggles. A simon-pure struggle (made in the office of the bureaucrats) is just as wrong (isolation) as to enter movements which are organizationally part of the enemy forces (Parliamentary action – charity organizations, etc.) – the latter will not be isolation from numbers but will be isolation from the role of the Marxists as the vanguard of the revolution.
 



The post-war period has witnessed the rise of a permanent army of millions of unemployed workers in the leading capitalist nations. One after the other, these countries have been forced to adopt some form of unemployed and social insurance. The last to even consider, let alone adopt an unemployed insurance plan, is the United States. Although unemployment for the last four years has fluctuated around 16 million, the States and the Federal Government and the bosses have tried to keep unemployed relief on the basis of charity. They have attempted to ignore it as a social problem.
But the prolonged crisis, the failure of all relief measures, the failure to stimulate industry through government subsidy and the increased mass pressure of the working class has at last forced the capitalists and their government, to consider the question of unemployment insurance. They hope to give as few crumbs as possible, accompanied with a press campaign that creates the impression that Social Security is at hand.
If concessions must be given – then give a fake unemployment insurance plan. That seems to he the slogan. The bosses hope, thereby, to hold off more important concessions, such as the six-hour day and the five-day week with no reduction in pay.
 
They Call It Insurance
The various plans of the bosses and their government revolve around bills which, when passed mean nothing to the workers. These bills have long waiting periods, short periods in which the relief is given, small and inadequate amounts of benefits with discriminating clauses, to be administered by the bosses, with many of the working class excluded, and funds to be obtained through a tax on the workers or the employers and the employees. Relief in name, but not in fact!
A few of the many plans are the Wisconsin Act, the Bill proposed by the N.Y. State Federation of Labor, the William Green Plan, the Wagner-Lewis Bill, the Roosevelt Plan and the Lundeen Bill.
With the exception of the Lundeen Bill, the plans are attempts to sidetrack real unemployment insurance. The Wisconsin and Wagner-Lewis Plan and the William Green Plan endeavor to obtain the funds from the employers, but these bills have so many clauses that nullify the better sections that they are inadequate to say the least. All three bills exclude many classes of workers. The Wisconsin plan is for industrial workers only. All three plans have long periods of waiting, clauses that can be used by the bosses to discriminate against the workers, short periods of unemployed benefits, benefits that don’t equal the present relief rates in some of the leading cities, etc. Even less can be said for the N.Y. State Federation of Labor Plan.
 
Roosevelt’s “Plan”
The Roosevelt plan, presented in speeches by the President in the first period of this session of Congress, calls for inadequate relief to be paid by the tax on employers and employees, with state rights to decide if the employees pay the full amount, with long periods of waiting, short periods of benefits and the other fake ideas embodied in all of these plans in one form or the other.
 
Not Central Issue
The workers unemployment insurance bill presented by Lundeen, now listed as HR 2827 has been used by the C.P. Unemployment Councils as the central and practically sole demand. And therein the Councils have made a great mistake.
To direct the energies of the masses into a Bill, however good, is to give up the real battlefield of the unemployed – which must center around immediate relief, and the reduction of hours.
The unemployment insurance activity must be an auxiliary and not the central rallying slogan. It must, not be a slogan of a Bill, but on the other hand, it, cannot be mere abstract propaganda for unemployment insurance. Abstract unemployment insurance propaganda at this stage plays into the hands of the capitalists and their government in putting across their fake plans.
A definite plan of the workers like the Workers Bill must be counterposed to the bosses but this cannot be the central activity of the working class in the unemployed field.
Workers security cannot be obtained under capitalism. However, we must counterpose a workers plan to the Social Security plan for the bosses. This revolves around the five point program of: Immediate relief, social insurance, work relief, the thirty-hour week, and long term credits to the Soviet Union, with special emphasis on immediate relief struggles and the thirty-hour week in industry and on work relief jobs.
 



Part 1

Part 2
 



Leftward-moving workers who have broken or are in the process of breaking with the past are looking for weapons of struggle to the left of the Democratic and Republican parties.
Reform and utopian movements and middle class movements as well as fascist movements are springing up and taking root in the minds of the discontented masses who know by hard experience that something is wrong.
Every prolonged depression in the past increased the political activity of the working class. Reform and utopian movements sprung up on the heels of economic and social dislocation. These movements were washed away with the first signs of the return to prosperity. But the present crisis continues. Government and private measures to Stimulate business fail. The condition of the working class becomes worse and discontent increases. Hoover’s promises could not be realized and Roosevelt’s “plans” for the forgotten man are more and more seen as plans for the “forgotten” financiers and industrialists.
In this fermentation the slogan of the Labor Party is brought forward again. As yet it has not taken root in any substantial section of the working class nor has a crystallization taken place. However, the new opportunist right turn of the Communist International and its sections and the issuing of the instructions for a Labor Party campaign bring the subject to the fore for clarification.
 
Labor Parties and Reform
In the period of capitalist development, the Labor Party took root in European countries and played its role as the handmaid of reforms, as the concession for class peace through the policy of class collaboration with the capitalist overlords. These reformist labor movements took on different, forms in various nations all the way from Labor Parties based upon collective membership through trade unions and other workers’ organizations to the Social Democratic movements of individual membership. In the prewar period they constituted the progressive and liberal opposition parties championing the cause of labor, humanity and what not. In the post-war period these parties became the left covering of the capitalist governments for the reorganization of Europe and for the prevention of the extension of the October revolution. They were labor governments in name but capitalist dictatorships in reality. Since the rise of Hitler and fascism in Europe this has become plain for everyone to see.
 
Capitalist Decay
But the post-war period revealed another striking fact in regard to the Labor parties and the parties of reform.
Developing capitalism could grant reforms, and such were granted to the degree of the pressure of the working class, and the labor leaders of the reactionary trade union movement and the labor party movement held them up us special concessions these “leaders” had obtained “for” the working class. But the post-war period marked a deepening of the decay and decline of capitalism. Many of the leading capitalist nations were in no position to grant, further reforms. Instead the very life of the different capitalist, nations after the war period demanded that they reduce and take away concessions from the workers, in order to compete with imperialist, powers on the world market for capital investments, commodities and raw material.
Every concession wrung from the capitalists in this stage rests upon an entirely different basis than the previous reforms. The reforms in the period of capitalist growth were used to bribe a part of the working class to enable the capitalists to have a free hand against the majority of the working class and the colonial people. The most outstanding representative of reform during this period was the Second International.
 
Reform Base Disappearing
The economic base of reform parties has been wiped out by the conditions of capitalist decline. But it was not a uniform process which accomplished this condition. In America the whole process lagged behind European developments. The permanent miserable conditions confronting the American workers since the beginning of the present, crisis were at far deeper levels in Europe even before the first, world war.
The elimination of the economic base of reform parties did not mean the immediate liquidation of these parties. The parties had developed into complex systems and definite parts of the superstructure of capitalism whoso organizational and ideological .structure could not be killed so easily. Even after their economic base was lacking these reformist parties served as the instruments to save European capitalism from the proletarian revolutions. “New” reforms were the price to be paid by the capitalists as the “lesser evil” to maintain power. Developments have shown that such concessions, especially since Hitler seized power, can be wiped out with the stroke of a pen.
The sweep of developing American capitalism enabled her to build a whole network of special means of bribery without the aid of a large layer of labor agents within the workers’ ranks. While a relatively small number of skilled workers was placed on a high level, the masses of American workers, the oppressed races and foreign born workers within the country, and the colonial people, paid the hand of robbers super profits. This was not a difficult problem for the American capitalists due to the country’s natural resources and high degree of exploitation of labor.
The millions of American workers were unorganized and labor’s participation in politics was confined to the two old parties, while social-reformism flourished in Europe it was not even budding in America. It bloomed and withered in Europe before its American counterpart had a chance to walk upright.
The radical political movement of American origin was first a land reform movement in the forties of the last century, next an agrarian movement of the eighties, to be followed by a more confused and heterogeneous agrarian movement in the first part of this century. The urban middle class that was beaten back by monopoly capitalism joined forces with it and produced the various hybrid movements such as the Farmer-Labor parties and the LaFollette movement.
(This article will be continued in the next issue of the New Militant.)
 

