

Thanks to George Orwell, 1984 promises to be a good year for those of us who pay for the groceries by teaching literature. The usual disabling sense you have of toiling away pointlessly on the remotest fringes of the superstructure isn’t much relieved by the fact that 1984 is the eightieth anniversary of the publication of Henry James’s The Golden Bowl or the centenary of the first performance of Ibsen’s The Wild Duck – nobody is going to stick either of those texts on T-shirts or try to squeeze them for a bit of reactionary juice in the editorial column of the Daily Express. But Nineteen Eighty-Four is a different matter: it’s not one of those works which survive simply by courtesy of the syllabuses in institutions of higher education, where literature is used to polish up the sensibilities of those of the middle classes who weren’t any good at science at school. Nineteen Eighty-Four still lives close to the centre of our society and its culture, as the last few months of bombardment, from beer adverts to sensitive profiles on BBC2, will have reminded everyone.
And yet, for all that Orwell and his work loom large in people’s awareness, he remains curiously difficult to focus in political terms. For example: central to my own move out of a sort of Oxfam liberalism towards socialist ideas was being caught up the cruder processes of imperialism in Nigeria in the 1960s, but a small, important part of that move too was reading and being inflamed by Homage to Catalonia. On the other hand, one of the reasons why I was stuck with Oxfam liberalism when I ought to have been old enough to know better was a vague but persistent memory of a 1950s TV production of Nineteen Eighty-Four. This bolted into place in my mind all those concepts – Thought Police, Big Brother is Watching You, Newspeak and so on – that the dominant ideology used and still uses as crippling shorthand for anything mildly to the left of the Monday Club. I suspect these experiences aren’t untypical: Orwell seems at one moment to be an odd sort of socialist who doles out half-bricks for right-wing hacks to throw at us, and then, at another, essentially an old Etonian ex-policeman who nonetheless inadvertently wrote things that can substantially undermine some of the assumptions of British capitalism.
To some extent, which of these two Orwells you accept as the ‘true’ one is a function of who you talk to, the books you’ve read, the programmes you see. He himself is long dead and his books are simply inert lumps of wood-pulp on the shelves: they only come to life and have meaning when they are picked up and perused and re-produced by readers who construct and re-construct the work themselves, partly, it is true, out of the materials the text supplies but partly too with their own resources and conditioning. All texts are in this sense co-authored by readers – in Marxist terms, their production is only completed in their consumption. But the possibilities of that reproduction are not limitless: Macbeth isn’t about Nottingham Forest, and Capital can’t be used by Tories to justify closing hospitals.
Texts, in other words, set material limits to the ways they can be read and the tasks they can perform, but for some texts – and Nineteen Eighty-Four is clearly one of them – those limits are broad and a range of conflicting readings and uses is possible. Where politics and political criticism can intervene, rather than simply leaving it to the dominant forces in the society to impose a particular way of seeing and understanding a book through, say, the packaging of a Penguin edition, characteristic O-Level questions, the specific interpretation in a TV version and so on. Intervention of this sort is above all worth making in the case of Nineteen Eighty-Four because it has become one of the ideological touchstones of Western society right from its first appearance in 1949 when it was US and London Evening Standard Book-of-the-Month Club choice and was thus at once installed at a level of public awareness far beyond the run-of-the-mill novel. So, in the US and Britain, it sold over 400,000 copies in the first year and has sold massively ever since: ten million copies in English alone, millions more in its translation into 23 languages, 26 Penguin re-prints since 1954. Nineteen Eighty-Four is a text that has formed and this year above all is being energetically used to form the way enormous masses of people see themselves, their world and its possibilities.
The ideological importance of the book is evident in the fact that, right from the start, attempts were made to hijack its meanings as hostages for reactionary politics. At its most glaring, this also involved efforts to doctor the text in order to make it easier to swallow: thus, the publishers of the US Book-of-the-Month Club edition wanted to chop off the long extract from Goldstein’s The Theory and Practice of Oligarchical Collectivism and the Appendix on the principles of Newspeak, but Orwell successfully resisted this operation. But he could do little – beyond the odd gesture like refusing to give the Time-Life correspondent an interview – to influence the thrust of the publicity that at once surrounded the book and sought to dress it up not only as an anti-Communist pamphlet but also as an attack on the Labour Government. (‘Many readers in England,’ Life insinuated, ‘will find that his book reinforces a growing suspicion that some of the British Laborites revel in austerity and would love to preserve it.’ [1]) It was this sort of press-ganging of the novel to serve right-wing interests that drove Orwell, ill though he was at the time, to make two prompt moves to rescue the book and shove it along the lines that he himself wanted. Nineteen Eighty Four went on sale in London on 8 June 1949 and in New York on 13 June: on 15 June Orwell released a press statement through his publisher Fred Warburg (a statement whose fuller implications I will return to later on):
It has been suggested by some of the reviewers of Nineteen Eighty-Four that it is the author’s 6ew that this, or something like this, is what will happen inside the next forty years in the Western world. This is not correct. I think that, Nineteen Eighty-Four could happen. This is the direction in which the world is going and the trend lies deep in the political, social and economic foundations of the contemporary world situation.
Specifically the danger lies in the structure imposed on Socialist and Liberal capitalist communities by the necessity to prepare for total war with the USSR and the new weapons, of which of course the atomic bomb is the most powerful and the most publicised. But danger lies also in the acceptance of a totalitarian outlook by intellectuals of all colours. The moral to be drawn from this dangerous nightmare situation is a simple one: ‘Don’t let it happen. It depends on you.’ George Orwell assumes that if such societies as he describes in Nineteen Eighty-Four come into being there will be several super states. This is fully dealt with in the relevant chapters of Nineteen Eighty-Four. It is also discussed from a different angle by James Burnham in The Managerial Revolution. These super states will naturally be in opposition to each other or (a novel point) will pretend to be much more in opposition than in fact they are. Two of the principal super states will obviously be the Anglo-American world and Eurasia. If these two great blocks line up as moral enemies it is ob6ous that the Anglo-Americans will not take the name of their opponents and will not dramatise themselves on the scene of history as Communists. Thus they will have to find a new name for themselves. The name suggested in Nineteen Eighty-Four is of course Ingsoc, but in practice a wide range of choices is open. In the USA the phrase ‘Americanism’ or ‘hundred per cent Americanism’ is suitable and the qualifying adjectiv is as totalitarian as anyone could wish.
If there is a failure of nerve and the Labour Party breaks down in its attempts to deal with the hard problems with which it will be faced, tougher types than the present Labour leaders will inevitably take over, drawn probably from the ranks of the Left, but not sharing the Liberal aspirations of those now in power. Members of the present British government, from Mr Attlee and Sir Stafford Cripps down to Aneurin Bevan, will never willingly sell the pass to the enemy, and in general the older men, nurtured in a Liberal tradition, are safe, but the younger generation is suspect and the seeds of totalitarian thought are probably widespread among them. It is invidious to mention names, but everyone could without difficulty think for himself of prominent English and American personalities whom the cap would fit. [2]
The next day, 16 June, he wrote to Francis A. Henson, an official of the US United Auto Workers, who had been tempted to recommend the book to his members but was disturbed by its warm reception in the conservative press:
My recent novel is NOT intended as an attack on Socialism or on the British Labour Party (of which I am a supporter) but as a show-up of the perversions to which a centralised economy is liable and which have been already partly realised in Communism and Fascism. I do not believe that the kind of society I describe necessarily will arrive, but I believe (allowing of course for the fact that the book is a satire) that something resembling it could arrive. I believe also that totalitarian ideas have taken root in the minds of intellectuals everywhere, and I have tried to draw these ideas out to their logical consequences. The scene of the book is laid in Britain in order to emphasise that the English-speaking races are not innately better than anyone else and that totalitarianism, if not fought against, could triumph anywhere. [3]
This battle for the text’s meaning has gone on more or less ever since, in some years declining into the odd gentle academic skirmish but in others and above all in this one flaring up into a full-scale blitzkrieg involving ideological troops as diverse as sloganeers for Heineken ads, Morning Star reporters and Margaret Thatcher’s speechwriters. What I’d like to do in the rest of the article is to look first of all at the material Orwell supplies in Nineteen Eighty-Four and then at some of the ways that material has been commandeered by Right and Left since 1949. In so doing I hope to arrive at an answer to the main question that the text raises for Marxists today, namely, what do we do with it? Do we slide past in embarrassed silence, wishing 1985 would hurry up and we could get shot of the bloody thing? Do we actively combat it as a pernicious book with a pernicious impact? Or is it a text that every revolutionary needs to absorb and learn from to make sure that, when the time does come, this time we get it right?
 
II
Orwell had had trouble finding a publisher for Animal Farm in 1944 and 1945. Its transparently veiled attacks at Stalinism weren’t obviously popular at a time when, in Victor Gollancz’s words, the Russians ‘had just saved our necks at Stalingrad’. But four years or so later there were to be no such problems with Nineteen Eighty-Four. When Fred Warburg of Secker & Warburg first read the manuscript in December 1948 it was only a few months before the founding of NATO and the consequent cementing into position of Cold War attitudes. He reacted to the text with delight:
The political system which prevails is Ingsoc English Socialism. This I take to be a deliberate and sadistic attack on socialism and socialist parties generally. It seems to indicate a final breach between Orwell and Socialism, not the socialism of equality and human brotherhood which dearly Orwell no longer expects from socialist parties, but the socialism of marxism and the managerial revolution. 1984 is among other things an attack on Burnham’s managerialism; and it is worth a cool million votes to the Conservative Party; it is imaginable that it might have a preface by Winston Churchill after whom its hero is named. 1984 should be published as soon as possible, in June 1949.
He went on to note that, when Winston Smith is reading Goldstein’s political testament to Julia, she falls asleep – ‘a typical Orwellism ... (Women aren’t intelligent in Orwell’s world.)’ [4] Orwell’s biographer Bernard Crick tries to brush this verdict aside, but re-reading the book last week I could see why Warburg took it as fairly straight Tory propaganda and sexist to boot. After all, to see the persistent use by the Right of the book and its terms over the last 35 years as simply a giant capitalist media swindle is to offer the standard sort of Bennite response which absolves you from any more searching and critical examination of the politics involved. It seems to me undeniable that in various ways – in the way it is structured, in the values it enacts and in its significant silences – Nineteen Eighty-Four is in the main a reactionary book.
For example, it is reactionary in the literal sense in that, at the height of his rebellion – the meeting at O’Brien’s flat in Part 2 – Smith turns down an invitation to drink either to ‘humanity’ or the ‘future’ and toasts instead ‘the past’ [5], and that is an attitude that the text structurally reinforces. Smith’s work at the Ministry of Truth is concerned solely with the past and with altering it to suit the Party line, and so his gestures of rebellion and temptations towards it are limited to preser6ng bits of the past that the Party would like destroyed. For the future he has little regard because of a concomitant conviction, which the narrat4e 6ndicates, that resistance must be ineffective and change impossible. The plot therefore enacts the politics of apathetic miserabilism adequately mirrored in the knowing cynicism of its own repeated jingle – ‘Under the spreading chestnut tree / I sold you and you sold me.’ It is a reactionary view of life that reaches down into and generates even small details of the work. For instance, Smith’s frequent dreams are not deployed in any intellectually reputable way but rather in the most infantile and superstitious terms: they are prophecies of future events (of making love to Julia in the Golden Country, of meeting O’Brien in ‘the place where there is no darkness’) and thus further underpin the text’s dismal conviction that the future is not ours to make but is all mysteriously mapped out for us. It is of course for precisely this reason that right-wing and fascist journals tend to carry lots of adverts for clairvoyants and astrologers, as indeed Orwell himself pointed out in an earlier and wiser work. [6]
This glum conception is given space to stand up and move about in the book because other things are suppressed or squeezed aside. The most notorious of these is the working class, the ‘proles’ in the Party’s contemptuous term which the text never effectively challenges. The proles are an unappetising lump. The only ones who emerge briefly out of the lump and into contact with Smith turn out to be a whore and a half-wit he meets in a pub. Sometimes they are 6ewed with a sort of condescending Dickensian smirk, a source of comic relief – the prole woman, for example, who shouts ‘they didn’t oughter of showed it’ at the cinema in the first chapter. More often, as Raymond Williams has pointed out [7], they are seen, in the same revealing but disgraceful metaphor that is central to Animal Farm, as animals, a different species from normal humanity. They are ‘like a horse shaking off flies’ (p. 59), ‘like the ant’ (p. 78), ‘like birds’ (p. 175). Like a lot of animals, they have physical strengths and capacities that inspire what the novel calls ‘mystical reverence’ (p. 175) in the human onlooker, but like animals they are in the end stupid. ‘The woman down there had no mind, she had only strong arms, a warm heart, and a fertile belly’ (p. 175). Hence, above all, like animals they can have no political sense, no ability to look at their own experience and extrapolate the theory that might inform resistance:
Within twenty years at the most, he reflected, the huge and simple question, ‘Was life better before the Revolution than it is now?’ would have ceased once and for all to be answerable. But in effect it was unanswerable even now, since the few scattered survivors from the ancient world were incapable of comparing one age with another. They remembered a million useless things, a quarrel with a workmate, a hunt for a lost bicycle pump, the expression on a long-dead sister’s face, the swirls of dust on a windy morning seventy years ago: but all the relevant facts were outside the range of their viion. They were like the ant, which can see small objects but not large ones (pp. 77–78).
There are, of course, massive problems in marrying socialist theory with working-class consciousness, as every Marxist is painfully aware. But in order to construct this grotesque notion of a whole class congenitally incapable of any kind of political sense, Orwell was forced quite simply to distort and to distort in ways that he had practised in The Road to Wigan Pier, as Peter Sedgwick noted: ‘He is insistent in Wigan Pier that he has never come across any worker with an intellectual grasp of Socialism; yet his diary for the journey makes it clear that he was totally dependent for his contacts and introductions upon Socialist workers with a CP, ILP or NUWM background.’ [8]
Granted that distortion, that notion of a class disqualified by its very constitution as a class from meaningful political awareness or activity, the book’s repeated refrain – ‘if there is a hope it lies in the proles’ – is no more than the weary gesture of a fading faith which the narrative carefully fails to sustain. How, in Nineteen Eighty-Four, is production organised? What are the factories like? What sort of working conditions obtain in them? Are there trade unions? What do they do? All these are basic questions that a socialist should attempt to answer first in describing any type of society, but about all of them Nineteen Eighty-Four is quite silent – necessarily so, because to answer them would disrupt the text’s fiction of a class whose minds are mainly filled with ‘films, football, beer, and, above all, gambling’ (p. 60). And it won’t do to protest that these are only the views of one alienated character, the middle-class Winston Smith, rather than the author George Orwell, because the text quite deliberately refuses to offer any reason for rubbing out this caricature and so ends by ostentatiously framing it.
What that framing means for the novel as a whole is sourly familiar. In the absence of any confidence in working-class acti6ty or politics, the door is wide open to a sort of saloon-bar knowingness, the comfortably cynical sense that because it’s all a racket you’re absolved from doing anything. Thus all opposition is a swindle – The Brotherhood probably doesn’t exist, O’Brien writes Goldstein’s book and anyway it doesn’t matter because in the end everyone betrays everyone else. If, as most readers and commentators feel, Goldstein is substantially based on Trotsky, then the text at this point drifts beyond mere distortion in to unforgivable slander.
That drift is accelerated by the novel’s view of women, like the working class oppressed and therefore, for socialists, a potential source of resistance and change. But the women in Nineteen Eighty-Four are constructed along the traditional lines of conservative, male fiction. All of them, from a major figure like Julia down to Smith’s mother and sister and the whore he uses, are present not in their own right but rather as aids to defining and developing the central male. Thus, in order to allude to three of them in the last sentence, I was forced to describe them in terms of their relationship to Smith because those are the only terms the text supplies. Even the fourth, Julia, is not sufficiently focussed to be given a surname, an omission that implies her essentially tri6al status for all the space she occupies in Nineteen Eighty-Four. Both central figures loathe women (Smith ‘disliked nearly all women’ (p. 12) and Julia exclaims: ‘How I hate women!’ (p. 106) and the text provides no way for us to wriggle past these feelings and see them as alienated illusions. Part One Chapter 6 depicts women in general as a frigid lot who enthusiastically collude with the Party’s efforts to impose mass chastity; if one woman in particular – Julia – breaks through that imposition then all her rebellion brings is the downfall of the male protagonist.
So it is that, once again, by distortion and by silence the reader is routed away from the springs of action and the sources of hope and down the cul-de-sac of Nineteen Eighty-Four’s stony pessimism. It seems to me no defence to claim that argument along these lines misses the point, that Nineteen Eighty-Four is meant to be a caution about what could happen rather than a rendering of what will be. For if the text sets out to cancel and deny what are for socialists precisely the means by which the text’s dire dreams of the future can be prevented, then we are left with nothing but that same feeling of being drawn unavoidably towards Room 101 that Smith has right from the start. Nineteen Eighty-Four is, sure enough, a warning about the future but at the same time it seeks to throttle the only forces that might stop the warning being realised. It thus reiterates the depressing paradigm of all Orwell’s novels – the hero/heroine who rebels but whose rebellion always fails because of the invincible forces ranged against it and the ine6table feebleness of revolt.
 
III
If the account of Nineteen Eighty-Four given in the last section were the whole truth about the book then we could ignore it as an odd bit of 1940s right-wing graffiti, a mediation in the imaginative terms of fiction of the terrors that haunted the editorial columns of the Daily Telegraph. But Nineteen Eighty-Four is more than that, which is part of the reason why it has lasted while those editorials are long forgotten. The text I have described is in a variety of places split and disrupted by other, profounder ways of seeing, by attempts to wrest the novel form round so that it can deal con6ncingly with the post-1945 world.
An example: within weeks of the destruction of Hiroshima and Nagasaki Orwell wrote an article called You and the Atom Bomb for Tribune which aims to think through the political implications of the new weapon. He sees it as ‘likelier to put an end to large-scale wars at the cost of prolonging indefinitely a “peace that is no peace”’ and thus develops a theory of ‘a permanent state of “cold war”’ – the earliest use of the latter phrase I have come across. [9] In the same article he indicates the need to work out ‘the kind of world-view, the kind of beliefs and the social structure’ that such a cold war would generate. The point is that at that time, the autumn of 1945, plans for Nineteen Eighty-Four has been working in his mind for a couple of years and within a few months he started writing it. So it is possible to see Orwell in Nineteen Eighty-Four filling the gap that the Tribune article had detected and conceptualising in fuller terms the new nuclear/Cold War world. Certainly, while he was redrafting the novel in the latter half of 1948 references to atomic war abound in other things he wrote at the time – in, for example, such diverse places as a July–September Adelphi review of Osbert Sitwell’s Great Morning, in letters written on 29 October and 15 November to Julian Symons and Anthony Powell respectively and in an Observer review of T.S. Eliot’s Notes towards the Definition of Culture published on 28 November. Hence Orwell’s basis for Nineteen Eighty-Four is a society warped and constricted by a major atomic war sometime in the 1950s and there are frequent references to that war in the book (see, for example, pp. 29, 153 and 157).
We may not have had that type of war but we have had Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and some of Orwell’s speculations about the political shape of a post-nuclear society still hold and are in some ways enduringly sharp. He sees quite rightly that the world will be di6ded into mass4e, competing power blocks (the novel was finished a few months before the formation of NATO) even if their precise terms are not Orwell’s. Moreover, he knows that such blocks will first redefine Britain as Airstrip One – and with well over a hundred US bases and facilities in this country in 1984 that is at one level perfectly accurate. And second he perceives that the prime function of those blocks is not war against each other but against their own peoples. War or the threat of war provides both the atmosphere and the justification for a variety of government strategies – encroachment on civil liberties, manic surveillance of the population, a climate of fear and jingoism that makes mild dissent seem gross treachery and so on – strategies mainly designed to disarm and destroy internal opposition rather than external enemy.
Orwell realised that the conventions of the traditional novel were disablingly inarticulate when speaking to this new order so that in Nineteen Eighty-Four he splits and breaks apart those conventions. To take a typical instance: it is a standard device in liberal novels that address themselves to a society in crisis to depict suffering and exploitation in moved and moving terms but then slip past the disruptive political implications of that vision into personal relationships that are miraculously not blocked by the mess and that allow hero and heroine to escape into a concluding and blandly happy marriage. Dickens’s Bleak House is the great, flawed model for that type of text. Orwell sets up that device, equips Smith and Julia with the relationship that represents salvation for many protagonists in the Victorian novel (‘that was the force that would tear the Party to pieces,’ thinks Smith as he makes love to Julia for the first time) – and then writes out its failure. People may believe, in a standard ideological formulation, that the personal, the private, is somehow different and can be salvaged from the public, the political, but it is part of Nineteen Eighty-Four’s purpose to show that such a distinction doesn’t work in lived, analysed experience. In this Orwell is particularly astute: by incorporating a fully described personal relationship at the centre of his text he breaks with a philistine old Left that would angrily dismiss that concern as bourgeois; but at the same time he structures the plot to deny what we might now call a facile sixties radicalism that felt that somehow you could fuck your way to freedom.
Nineteen Eighty-Four also redesigns the shape of the traditional novel with its Newspeak Appendix and its long extract from Goldstein’s book. By integrating linguistic theory and political essay into his fictional text Orwell shoves it out of the special category of ‘Literature’ – where, as I shall show in Section 4, it can be tamely neutered within the terms of literary critical analysis – into a much broader and more awkward category of ‘writing’, where it gets slippery and harder to contain. Hence the Book-of-the-Month Club’s bid to remove these passages is no surprise. The insistences in The Principles of Newspeak – namely, that since we think in and through language then to change the language is to change people, their perceptions and their capacities – ruptures one of the premises of traditional literary culture which posits an unchanging human nature that great works timelessly explore and reveal. The new world that Orwell wants to nail down demands the new forms of writing that in Nineteen Eighty-Four he supplies.
It is tempting at this stage to go a step further and place Nineteen Eighty-Four alongside the Preface to the Ukrainian edition of Animal Farm which Orwell wrote in March 1947 when he was half way through the first draft of Nineteen Eighty-Four. In that preface Orwell contends: ‘for the past ten years I have been convinced that the destruction of the Soviet myth was essential if we wanted a revival of the Socialist movement.’ [10] If we take that contention along with his As I Please column in Tribune where, from December 1943 to February 1945, he tries patiently to work out a socialist position that sharply differentiates itself both from the Soviet Union on the one hand and Tory Red-bashing on the other [11], then it might be possible to see Nineteen Eighty-Four as a forerunner to developments in the decade after Orwell’s death in 1950. Then at last a space was blasted open for a revolutionary socialism that had no truck with Stalinism and thus was able to take firm root in that space.
But if there are highly creditable lines of vision in Nineteen Eighty-Four that point that way there are others, as I argued in Section 2, that look in contradictory and less reputable directions. The Orwell who wrote Nineteen Eighty-Four was beginning to be a wealthy man as the royalties for Animal Farm began to flow in and this edged him into the routine concerns and acti6ties and assumptions of the rich. While he worked on his last novel he made plans for his adopted son’s private schooling and in the week that it was published he had his accountants toiling on a scheme to turn himself into a Limited Company to avoid tax.
It is out of that context that we need to go back to Orwell’s press release about Nineteen Eighty-Four already quoted in Section I. There he fears that if ‘the Labour Party breaks down in its attempts to deal with the hard problems with which it will be faced, tougher types than the present Labour leaders will ine6tably take over, drawn probably from the ranks of the Left ...’ This younger generation ‘is suspect and the seeds of totalitarian thought are probably widespread among them.’ It is a position with which we have since become numbly familiar: the major threat to liberty is not, say, the swinish power of American imperialism, the callous operations of multinational corporations and international finance, the brute politics of the British ruling class and its organ the Tory Party; it is, apparently, the tiny little factions who now and then pop up in the Labour Party cherishing illusions about its potential as an agent of revolutionary change. If Orwell in the week after the publication of Nineteen Eighty-Four tried to steer the book in any direction it was down a path that is now (thanks to the tireless work of Sun scribblers and SDP publicists) a six-lane motorway leading straight to the dimmest sort of reaction.
 
IV
Granted then an author driving his text along that route and a publisher con6nced, as we’ve already seen, that the book was worth ‘a cool million votes to the Conservative Party’, the fact that for more than a generation Nineteen Eighty-Four has functioned as what Isaac Deutscher called ‘an ideological super-weapon in the Cold War’ [12] is only to be expected. Even defiantly radical cultural artefacts have in that time run the risk of being chewed up by the dominant ideology and its bodies, swallowed and absorbed, before being pushed out to consumers as another piece of crap retailing at £5.99 a go – the sixties alone was knee-deep in that sort of sewage. A novel with what I have argued is the contradictory politics of Nineteen Eighty-Four has been similarly digested, although sometimes as I shall show bits have been spat out to make mastication easier.
The regime in Nineteen Eighty-Four ‘calls itself and is generally called throughout the book “Ingsoc”; in Oldspeak, “English Socialism”’, as Conor Cruise O’Brien loudly reminded Observer readers recently [13], and this is only one fact about it which makes it a serviceable truncheon for beating Reds over the skull with. Thus at one moment Peter Kellner can blast away at the Militant Tendency in the New Statesman (7 October 1983, p. 7) under the headline The Left retreats, but the doublethink lingers on, while at another the Daily Mail (28 December 1983, p. 6) can pepper Andropov from its editorial columns with some judiciously selected phrases from the novel.
This routine journalistic work has been both echoed and informed by right-wing academic scholarship. At the rough end of the trade a Fascist like Wyndham Lewis could praise Nineteen Eighty-Four as ‘a first-rate political document’ which ‘led the wavering lefties out of the pink mists of Left Land into clear daylight.’ [14] The more refined end sometimes needs, in ways pioneered by the Ministry of Truth itself, to rewrite Orwell a bit in order to make him fit for their purpose. Thus, one of his best-known claims, made in his 1946 essay Why I Write is: ‘Every line of serious work that I have written since 1936 has been written, directly or indirectly against totalitarianism and for democratic Socialism, as I understand it.’ John Wain, speaking on Radio 4’s Kaleidoscope on 19 November 1983, outrageously rephrased this ‘... against totalitarianism and for liberal democracy.’ None of the Orwell experts gathered for discussion challenged this tampering which made it much easier for the rest of the programme to dress him up as an Alliance thinker born half a century too soon.
The Right, then, has two standard strategies for using Nineteen Eighty-Four: pulling lumps out of the book and throwing them at socialists or, where that proves difficult, reconstructing Orwell and dropping the awkward parts down the memory hole. These strategies can then be reinforced by turning him into a kind of secular saint. This is a move much favoured by liberal ideologues and it aims to block any normal criticism of him as a man embedded in particular social and historical contexts with certain limitations and blind spots connected to those contexts. Instead it transforms him into a latter-day evangelist, a seer who detects abiding truths in a blindingly clear, plain man style that it would be sacrilegious to challenge. So ideas that proceed from and feed back into a specific politics can be passed off instead as Transcendental Truths about Humanity. For example, Lionel Trilling, the spokesman for a generation of American liberals, praised Orwell in his 1949 review of Nineteen Eighty-Four for his ‘moral centrality’ and ‘old, simple, belittled virtue.’ [15] The whiff of incense about these phrases had become overpowering by 1952, right from Trilling’s title for an article (George Orwell and the Politics of Truth) down to its portentous conclusion: ‘He was a virtuous man.’ [16] Virtuous man he may indeed have been, prompt to help old ladies down from trees, but the point is that sentences like that are designed to evoke a pious faith that excommunicates rigorous critical examination. Decked out in this way with a harp and a halo he becomes a handy figure to recruit for your side. Hence a hawker for the SDP like Peter Jenkins will first of all genuflect in front of St George (‘Orwell was writing about the England he knew, his fastidious nostrils as alert as always to the smells of working-class life, the proles of 1984 not very different from the proletariat of the thirties’) and then try to fob him off as a prophet on the brink of launching the Social Democrats a generation before the almost equally holy Shirley Williams: ‘He was perhaps on the verge of asking the question of whether the two words “democracy” and “Socialism” could be hyphenated as simply and as blithely as the English liked to suppose.’ [17] (Note, by the way, the craven ‘perhaps’ in that sentence, levered in as an escape route  in case anyone scoffs at the sheer silliness of the speculation.)
Journalism of this type depends to some extent on the punters having read the book in the first place, and where a lot of people do that is in schools and colleges of various kinds. There the text comes to students tightly wrapped in literary criticism and they are ill-advised to try to slash open that particular parcel because at the end of their course is usually an examination paper that will work only within its dimensions. The effect of those dimensions, as I suggested in Section 3, is to deftly remove the text’s politics altogether – not an easy task with a book like Nineteen Eighty-Four which is, in a sense, all politics – but necessary if it is to be cut down to the sort of shape and size it needs to have if it is to be compared and contrasted with, say, Trollope’s Barchester Towers or Arnold Bennett’s The Old Wives’ Tale in an essay.
The politics, however, bulk so large that it is difficult to ignore them altogether, and hence the strategy here is to suggest that ‘politics’ and ‘the social’ introduced into ‘Literature’ is a defilement which marks the writer’s failure as an artist. Thus, students taking Honour Moderations at Oxford University in 1973 were invited to discuss the following proposition: ‘Candour, decency, commonsense and moral fervour: these are Orwell’s strengths as a social critic, but the weaknesses of his novels reveal how much more than this is required for successful art.’ Students looking up this past paper nowadays and scratching their heads for a way to answer it might turn to the New Pelican Guide to English Literature: Volume 8: The Present, a standard critical text for undergraduates. There D.S. Savage, who has held clerical positions with Christian Aid and the Anglican Pacifist Fellowship, will tell them stoutly that a ‘numbed ambivalence of feeling worked in the young Eric Blair towards the erasure of all sane and sound values, beginning with his religion’, so that his ‘new-found political faith, not being grounded in any prior religious or ethical principle ... takes a much over-simplified view of the nature of man and of social institutions.’ This ‘lack of a core of personal integrity in Orwell’, this ‘unhappy psychological condition’, all ‘detracts from the novel’s artistic worth.’ [18] Apparently, Eric, you needed to spend more time of your knees with the catechism and less on your feet fighting in Spain if you were ever going to produce High Art.
The problem with this sort of nonsense is that it can provoke students who haven’t been brought up properly to answer back, so a safer tactic when confronted with the awkward politics of Nineteen Eighty-Four is to politely ignore them and hope no one will notice. This seems to be the dominant approach in teaching O-level students, to judge from three of the guides that many of them turn to in moments of panic, namely Coles Notes, York Notes and Brodie’s Notes.
None of these guides have the names of their authors on the spine or cover, which gives them that bogus air of impartiality that the similarly anonymous news bulletins of BBC and ITN seek to achieve. What they do in general is to scurry past rebarbative terms like ‘capitalism’ and ‘atom bombs’ which are scattered through the novel and make for the safe, banal ground of traditional literary discourse. There we find that Orwell, apparently, gives a ‘satisfying sense of shape in Nineteen Eighty-Four’ [19] (though sadly what that shape is – hexagonal? rhomboidal? – isn’t illustrated). Soon discussion settles reverently at the feet of the Holy Trinity of English Literature – plot, character and symbolism – where all texts are brought for their last judgement. Here it emerges that dust symbolism is a big issue in Nineteen Eighty-Four
[20], although it’s ‘Winston’s development as a character which forms the book’s chief interest.’ [21] This in turn raises nice nutty queries like: ‘Was Orwell unable to draw rounded characters in any number in this novel?’ [22] We can all sit and chew away at that for hours, secure in the knowledge that there is no answer to this sort of question and even if there were it wouldn’t matter a bear’s belch in the real world anyway.
A couple of years in this cramping brain-rot sets the students neatly up for the kind of examination questions they will face: ‘Winston has been described as the only fully developed character in Nineteen Eighty-Four. Do you agree with this view, and, if so, does it constitute a weakness in the novel?’ ‘Consider the effectiveness of Orwell’s use of symbolism in Nineteen Eighty-Four.’ ‘Do Winston’s dreams reveal his character?’ ‘Describe the plot structure of the novel and its functions.’ ‘Is Orwell’s style appropriate to the subject matter in Nineteen Eighty-Four?’ [23] And so on. The point about all of these questions is that they are in fact pointless: students are being in6ted to process a highly ideological text through a set of grinders that mince up its overt politics and reduce the lot to bland, grey pap which people in even partial possession of their senses wouldn’t swallow if they didn’t need the qualifications which passing it will bring.
 
V
Since 1949, then, the Right has used the novel either as an armoury of crude weapons which can be snatched up and fired at passing socialists or, where that has proved precarious, as one more harmless aesthetic object in the Timeless Tapestry of Our Heritage as Britons. The Left, by contrast, has tended to approach the book in more complex and, unsurprisingly, more intelligent ways.
For supporters of the Labour Party the text has proved extremely awkward from the moment that Orwell’s press release made it clear that the Party’s Left was his prime target. Indeed, the book itself makes that sufficiently obvious, as Diana Trilling, reviewing it for The Nation on 25 June 1949, noted with embarrassment. ‘Mr Orwell’, she wrote, ‘is fantasying the fate not of an already established dictatorship like that of Russia but also that of Labor England’ and this is ‘surely from any immediate political point of view unfortunate.’
For the centre of the Labour Party this is by no means unfortunate and from that position Nineteen Eighty-Four has been a powerful cultural rifle to be trained on its own obstreperous Left whenever they poke their heads above the parapet. A leading marksman here is undoubtedly Bernard Crick, author of the first full scale biography of Orwell and both presenter and programme consultant for the substantial Arena portrait of Orwell televised from 29 December 1983 to 4 January 1984. Crick’s policy is to ward off Marxists trying to get their hands on Orwell (or, in his own words, to ‘defend him against extreme interpretations’) and to maintain his status as a scourge of the Left against irritated socialists trying to undermine it. Thus, for example, he has dismissed Raymond Williams’s book on Orwell as the ‘apogee ... of “Orwell-bashing” by intellectuals who feel that home truths are not welcome and that only the other side should be got at.’ [24]
In order to use Nineteen Eighty-Four and Orwell in this way as a stout bulwark against the Left, Crick was forced to make his biography of Orwell, a curiously lopsided book. In it he tries to prise Nineteen Eighty-Four free of any sort of determining, informing, limiting or distorting context – Orwell’s severe TB, perhaps, or his nightmare memories of the horrors of preparatory schooling – in order to turn it into a timeless and hence endlessly re-usable fable. So it is quite possible to read George Orwell: A Life without being very aware of, say, the Slump, Stalin’s purges, the decisive moments in the Spanish Civil War and the Second World War, the General Election of 1945 – without being aware, in other words, of that history that shaped Orwell’s life and provided the agenda for his work.
But it is the Communist Party more than the Labour Left that has over the years been most attacked with the catchphrases and the values that Nineteen Eighty-Four articulated, and here the response has been instructive. Like the stopped clock that is at least right twice a day even if it is wrong the rest of the time, Stalinist criticism of Nineteen Eighty-Four has on occasion quite rightly laid into what is the most distasteful aspect of the book for anyone without a warped mind. ‘“People are no damn good” – that is precisely the message of this plodding tale,’ complained an early reviewer in the New York Masses and Mainstream, so that the novel’s effect was to frighten ‘any belief in change and progress ... out of people.’ [25] I. Anisimov, writing in Pravda on 12 May 1950 made the same point, seeing in Orwell’s text his ‘contempt for people ... his aim of slandering man.’ Developing this line in the January 1956 Marxist Quarterly, James Walsh looked at Orwell’s dumb and beery proles and saw them as ‘an insult to the countless thousands of people who perce4ed what the Nazis were about, refused to be bought or tortured into submission and gave their lives in the defence of humanity.’
Why a man who was himself wounded in the fight against Fascism should offer this insult has been suggested by a major Communist Party theoretician A.L. Morton. In The Matter of Britain (London 1966) he argues that Orwell’s novel, like Huxley’s Brave New World, marks an end to the long tradition of bourgeois humanism and speaks instead out of the irrational fears of a class without a future. The problem with an explanation of this sort is that it begs more questions than it answers, and why it does so becomes clearer if we look at Morton’s The English Utopia (London 1952). Here, in the first, 1952 edition of the book he sees
Nineteen Eighty-Four as ‘the last word to date in counter-revolutionary apologetics,’ playing on the ‘lowest fears and prejudices engendered by bourgeois society in dissolution.’
Orwell is castigated for his ‘determination to resist the “actual realisation" of Utopia’ which apparently is proceeding apace in Russia, as Morton proves with a stirring quote from Professor Bernal on irrigation and afforestation therein.
Routine enough CP stuff for 1952, of course, but the scandal is that Lawrence and Wishart’s 1969 edition of Morton’s book reprints this argument without alteration. The Twentieth Party Congress and Khrushchev’s speech to it may have indicated that there had been the odd hiccup on the way to the ‘actual realisation’ of Utopia, but none of these mere facts are allowed to sully the rigour and purity of Morton’s original thesis. It is precisely Orwell’s experience of the actual operations of Stalinism, in Barcelona above all, that turned him into a committed anti-Communist at the very same time as that Spanish struggle led him to write that ‘I have seen wonderful things and at last really believe in Socialism, which I never did before.’ [26] His subsequent work is constructed deliberately around these two positions – coruscating gloom about the power and influence of Stalinism, and the search for a Socialist politics beyond its reach -as a reading of, say Animal Farm or his Tribune columns will show.
The failure of Communist Party thinkers to address themselves fully and honestly to those positions reveals itself in a variety of ways. At a tri6al level, it comes through in a simple failure to read the book properly. Thus, Morton thinks that Newspeak is called ‘DoubleTalk’ [27] and Samuel Sillen, author of the Masses and Mainstream review, reckons that Smith gets shot in the end. More common is the way Orwell’s precise stance is vaporised so that he can be lumped in with Life, vicars, Reader’s Digest and distinct officer material as just one more hysterical reactionary. [28] The most recent variant of this tactic is to drop his politics down the memory hole and substitute someone else’s reconstruction of them which can be destroyed with a lot less bother. So Andy Croft, writing in the Morning Star on 3 January 1984, hacks not at Orwell’s ideas but at Paul Johnson’s version of them, which is a bit like claiming that Mary Shelley was a Wally after seeing Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein.
 
VI
If Orwell was looking, then, for a non-Communist Left, what has that non-Communist Left done when it found him? At first, it welcomed him astutely, and Philip Rahv’s notice of Nineteen Eighty-Four in the American Partisan Review for July 1949 is a model of its kind. Rahv is alert to the text’s potential as an ‘antidote’ to the sheer nastiness of Stalinism but has sufficient literary and political commonsense to be aware also of the book’s limitations. So it is that he is able to see that the novel in part fails on its own terms – as a realist text – because of its assumptions that, in 1984, a depoliticised proletariat would be largely left to their own de6ces, sufficiently self-oppressed not to need any very rigorous attention from the law, telescreens or the Thought Police. The fact of course is that it is precisely there that the sort of regime Orwell imagines is most and not least tyrannical, as the workers of East Berlin and Budapest and Gdansk and a hundred other places know to their cost.
The other great reading of Nineteen Eighty-Four in this tradition is Isaac Deutscher’s 1955 essay Nineteen Eighty-Four: The Mysticism of Cruelty that I mentioned earlier. Deutscher’s politics lets him actually see the book and its author in ways that others don’t – Communists can’t even get the plot right and liberals usually have their heads bowed in reverence so they don’t look the author squarely in the face. Deutscher confronts Nineteen Eighty-Four with two-eyed clarity, describing, on the one hand, the book’s brute power deri6ng from Orwell’s ‘honourable obsession’ with the Purges, but insisting too on how that power sometimes backfires, sometimes is muffled and deflected by the convulsive fears of its Cold War context that both used and infused the book.
Elsewhere on the Left the text has provoked an understandable indecision. Peter Sedgwick provocatively titled a two-part article for International Socialism, June–July 1969, George Orwell: International Socialist? but the first part never mentioned Nineteen Eighty-Four and the second part never appeared, probably answering Sedgwick’s own question.
Indecision is even more marked in the case of Raymond Williams, the major literary critic in this country who has for more than forty years conducted a convoluted dalliance with Marxism, an uncommitted commitment that each of his books redefines and readjusts. An early work like Culture and Society, completed in 1956, was able to look at the contradictions in Nineteen Eighty-Four – for example, Orwell’s sympathy with a working class whom he nonetheless denigrates – in fairly temperate terms, but in Orwell written fourteen years later the same valid point is made in much more trenchant language. By the time we come to Politics and Letters in 1979 he is prompted by his New Left Review questioners to admit to an even sharper hostility. He finds Nineteen Eighty-Four ‘intolerable ... profoundly offensive’ (p. 390) and concludes ‘I cannot bear much of it now ... I cannot read him now.’ (pp. 391–2). But it is depressing to find this shift eventually fetching up in Farringdon Road. On 3 January 1984 under a Morning Star banner headline George Orwell in Thatcher’s 1984 – which side would he take?, Williams, in an article called The vital factor left out of 1984, lets his justifiable anger at aspects of the novel be used in a quite disgraceful cause. The article is silent on those things that once Williams was rightly eloquent about – things like Orwell’s embittering experience of Stalinism in Spain which, as Williams noted in 1970, ‘left a scar which was never likely to heal. One would think the worse of him, indeed, if it had ever healed.’ [29] Such silences enable the article to take its place in a transparent effort by the Morning Star to wave an inconvenient critic aside. An accompanying article by Andy Croft concludes: ‘He was a mistake, was Orwell.’
 
VII
So what do we do with this ‘mistake’? Do we ‘consign Orwell to the dustbin of history’ as a brisk Stalinist demanded in the New Statesman recently, or has Nineteen Eighty-Four a valid contribution still to make in informing Marxist theory and practice? Do we, to return to the questions posed in Section I, recruit, contest or ignore this book?
Answers to that clutch of queries will come if we look squarely at the full range of the text and its values, its strengths, its ambiguities and its silences, as Isaac Deutscher above all does. Once it is seen whole in this way then we are in a position to dismantle, say, a Daily Mail editorial raiding a bit of the text for the terms of a cheap insult or the Reader’s Digest’s attempt to boil it all down to 25 pages of Redbaiting, as was done in 1949. We are also in a position to begin to understand the political difficulties which then, in literary terms, make it such a contradictory text.
We can start to understand those difficulties by returning the text to the full context of its making that Crick’s biography suppresses. The Orwell who came to write Nineteen Eighty-Four was, at first glance, a man of immensely varied experience. He had moved through early grounding in the process of the British ruling class (schooling at Eton, five years in the Indian Imperial Police) into the respectable squalor of life amongst the lower middle classes (spells as a bookshop assistant and private tutor) down to the bottom of the social scrap heap (his time as a tramp in the thirties). But, for a socialist writer, a disabling gap in this range is experience of the life of industrial workers, and The Road to Wigan Pier is in part a record of his crabbed, unsatisfactory effort at bridging it.
Moreover, the historical context of that life widens this gap even further. Briefly, Orwell seems to have begun his shift to the Left by resigning from the Indian Imperial Police in the same autumn of 1927 as Trotsky was expelled from the Communist Party of the Soviet Union; he arrived fully and enthusiastically at socialism (‘I ... at last really believe in Socialism ...’) in the same year of 1937 that the Moscow trials purged the last of the old Bolsheviks; and he died in 1950, three years before Stalin. In other words his career as a socialist writer coincides quite precisely with a generation of defeat for revolutionary socialism and his last novel is appallingly disfigured by that fact.
Alternative hopes, the glimmers of future possibilities within that generation were not things that, during the writing of Nineteen Eighty-Four, Orwell was in touch with. Indeed, stuck on the island of Jura four and a half miles from the nearest road for most of it, he was not in touch with anything much beyond the odd gannet. Of course, if you are some sort of pious fraud scanning the eternal verities as glimpsed through your own navel that kind of isolation from the distraction of mere people is probably necessary; but for socialist writing it is deadly because it means a removal from those sources of strength or information or inspiration that such writing needs if it is to stand up and fight in an era of defeat rather than flop down and be drowned under powerful mainstream habits and conceptions. For a socialist writer of Orwell’s type – instinctively gloomy and, by the time he produced Nineteen Eighty-Four, harried by the depressing effects of TB – such ivigorating contact was doubly necessary. He had found it for six months in Spain when his service, with the POUM militia and with a working class in revolutionary struggle filled the gap in his experience and provided not just the material for Homage to Catalonia but its spirit and life as well. His sense of losing hold of that inspiration, of its being swamped on his return to England under a sludge of cricket headlines, news of Royal weddings and men in bowler hats, comes through in the famous last paragraphs of Homage to Catalonia, half lament for the springs of action he is lea6ng behind, half cosy regression to the soporific culture of the home counties.
Back inside that culture he searched for the kind of white heat he had found in Spanish politics that had fired Homage to Catalonia, a book whose honourable failure to connect with any formation in British culture at the time is best illustrated by the fact that only 900 of its tiny first print of 1,500 copies were sold. That search led him briefly into the ILP and informed much of his work for Tribune in the 1940s. It also prompted him to take an occasionally sympathetic 6ew of Trotskyism. ‘Gollancz won’t have any more to do with me now I am a Trotskyist,’ he noted sardonically on his return from Spain, ‘but of course we are all Trotskyists nowadays.’ [30] Early in 1946, a few months before he started writing Nineteen Eighty-Four, he co-signed a letter to the press demanding that the Gestapo records in the hands of the Allies be combed for final exoneration of Trotsky from those charges of secret collaboration with the Nazis made at the Moscow Trials in 1936 and 1937. In that same spring he was in touch with Victor Serge, then in Mexico, and passed on to Fred Warburg Trotsky’s Life of Stalin and the manuscript of Serge’s memoirs with a strong recommendation to publish. [31]
But British Trotskyism in the 1940s was an invisible faction and Orwell never found the effective political group that could have given his commitment the focus that he found exhilaratingly with the POUM in Spain – his main political work at the time of writing Nineteen Eighty-Four was with the Freedom Defence Committee, an essentially liberal breakaway movement from the then Stalinist-influenced NCCL. The result was a politics that evolved haphazardly and in his own terms, always liable to be gusted along by the Cold War hurricane that was blowing full blast by the time the novel was finished. It is a politics whose resulting muddle is best characterised in Peter Sedgwick’s article as a mixture of ‘uncomplicated crypto-Marxist economic analysis’ along with ‘programmatic and tactical apathy which is still compatible with conventional reformism.’ Conventional reformism, of course, formed the government in 1949 and by 1949 it had run out of ideas as the Tories started gearing themselves for thirteen years of rule. In the absence of a coherent Marxist position from which to view this conjuncture Orwell is left with not a lot beyond the violent anti-Communism he had brought home from Spain, a necessary stance in 1937 but one which, twelve years later, could with one or two rough adjustments be promptly slotted into the dominant ideology. Not just Book-of-the-Month, more like Bible-for-a-Generation.
We can deplore the novel’s scriptural status and the swindles I have outlined earlier that helped to create it, but the fact remains that it is the text itself and not the ideologues who interpret it that supplies the raw material for that kind of function. A more honest approach is to read Nineteen Eighty-Four as a guide to what can happen to a potentially revolutionary politics at a time when it thrashes around in despair looking for and failing to find a base. Out of that mess Orwell through Goldstein’s eyes surveys the twentieth century with knowing cynicism:
Socialism, a theory which appeared in the early nineteenth century and was the last link in a chain of thought stretching back to the slave rebellions of antiquity, was still deeply infected by the Utopianism of past ages. But in each variant of Socialism that appeared from about 1900 onwards the aim of establishing liberty and equality was more and more openly abandoned. [32]
But we still have access to another Orwell, an earlier Orwell not blundering in detached fantasy in that way but one whose work was motivated and informed by participation in actual battles for socialism. It is the Orwell of Homage to Catalonia. If Nineteen Eighty-Four proceeds out of gaps and silences in British politics, then some of the motivation for filling those gaps and making those silences speak can be found in Homage to Catalonia. It is an awkward book; it has moments of revolutionary romanticism that can make you wince; and it ends in angry defeat. But it is a book mined out of and forged by real experience of working-class struggle that can show up the glum speculations of Nineteen Eighty-Four for the barren spectres that they are:
... when one came straight from England the aspect of Barcelona was something startling and overwhelming. It was the first time that I had ever been in a town where the working class was in the saddle. Practically every building of any size had been seized by the workers and was draped with red flags or with the red and black flag of the Anarchists: every wall was scrawled with the hammer and sickle and with the initials of the revolutionary parties: almost every church had been gutted and its images burnt. Churches here and there were being systematically demolished by gangs of workmen. Every shop and café had an inscription saying that it had been collectivised; even the bootblacks had been collectivised and their boxes painted red and black. Waiters and shop-walkers looked you in the face and treated you as an equal ... And it was the aspect of the crowds that was the queerest of all. In outward appearance it was a town in which the wealthy classes had practically ceased to exist. Except for a small number of women and foreigners there were no “well-dressed” people at all. Practically everyone wore rough working-class clothes, or blue overalls, or some variant of the militia uniform. All this was queer and moving. There was much in it that I did not understand, in some ways I did not even like it, but I recognised it immediately as a state of affairs worth fighting for. [33]
It is still worth fighting for, and anyone demoralised by Hate Week and its celebration of Nineteen Eighty-Four in 1984 could start dismantling that mood with Homage to Catalonia.

Notes
1. Quoted in Irving Howe (ed.), Nineteen Eighty-Four: Text. Sources, Criticism, New York 1963, p. 211.
2. Quoted in Bernard Crick, George Orwell: A Life, London 1980, p. 359.
3. Sonia Orwell & Ian Angus (eds.), The Collected Essays, Journalism and Letters of George Orwell (hereafter CEJL), Volume IV, London 1968, p. 502.
4. Fred Warburg, All Authors Are Equal, London 1973, p. 103. Warburg’s anxiety to publish a book worth in his view ‘a cool million votes to the Conservative Party’ as soon as possible is explained by the fact that a General Election was due in a year or so and was in fact held eight months after the novel came out.
5. George Orwell, Nineteen Eighty-Four, Harmondsworth 1954, p. 144. All subsequent references to the text are to this standard Penguin edition.
6. W.B. Yeats, CEJL, II, p. 275.
7. Orwell, London 1971, p. 78.
8. George Orwell: International Socialist?, International Socialism, June–July 1969.
9. CEJL, IV, pp. 9–10.
10. CEJL, III, p. 405.
11. I have argued the case for this claim in more detail in Orwell and Tribune, Literature & History, 6 : 2 Autumn 1980.
12. Isaac Deutscher, Nineteen Eighty-Four: The Mysticism of Cruelty, Heretics & Renegades, London 1955, p. 35.
13. Observer, 8 January 1984, p. 9.
14. Wyndham Lewis, Climax & Change, in Samuel Hynes (ed.), Twentieth Century Interpretations of Nineteen Eighty-Four, New Jersey 1971, pp. 106–7.
15. Ibid., p. 24.
16. George Orwell & The Politics of Truth, in Raymond Williams (ed.), George Orwell: A Collection of Critical Essays, New Jersey 1974, p. 64.
17. Guardian, 28 December 1983, p. 11.
18. D.S. Savage, The fatalism of George Orwell, in Boris Ford (ed.). The New Pelican Guide to English Literature: Volume 8: The Present, Harmondsworth 1983, pp. 133–142.
19. Brodie’s Notes on George Orwell’s Nineteen Eighty-Four, London 1977, p. 20.
20. Ibid., p. 29.
21. York Notes on George Orwell, Nineteen Eighty-Four, Beirut 1983, p. 39.
22. Brodie, p. 32.
23. All questions from Brodie, p. 90, and from Orwell: Nineteen Eighty-Four Notes: Coles Editorial Board, Toronto 1982, pp. 81ff.
24. Times Literary Supplement, 3 June 1977.
25. Samuel Sillen, Masses and Mainstream, New York, August 1949.
26. CEJL, I, p. 269.
27. The English Utopia, London 1969, p. 273.
28. See Sillen, Anisimov and Walsh, op. cit., for examples of this technique.
29. Orwell, p. 59.
30. CEJL, I, p. 289.
31. CEJL, IV, pp. 115–6, 121 & 194–6.
32. Nineteen Eighty-Four, p. 163.
33. Homage to Catalonia, Harmondsworth 1962, pp. 8–9.
 



Writing this article isn’t easy. It’s bad enough to be given the same title that one of my heroes, William Morris, first used. But what’s worse is to be forced by that title to write about myself. I had a nice middle class education and so was taught never to use ‘I’ in an essay.
It didn’t take me long to realise that this was a device for stopping you reflecting on and learning from your own experience. It created a large space in your brain for teachers to fill by tipping in the assorted load of Tory prejudice, tepid religion and vacuous nationalism otherwise known as 1960s A-Level syllabuses. But that realisation didn’t altogether remove the inhibition about using ‘I’.
Indeed it was reinforced many years later when I was in a fiercely radical discussion group and ventured a remark about something that had happened to me. I was told off for mere anecdotalism and sternly directed to stick to class analysis.
But, as Marx put it, ‘all mysteries which lead theory to mysticism find their rational solution in human practice and the comprehension of this practice.’ And so, in the belief that you can learn a lot by reflecting on what’s happened to you, your own practice, here goes.
When I left university I signed up for a year with VSO – Voluntary Service Overseas – an organisation that sends graduates to work in various underdeveloped or, more accurately, over-exploited parts of the world. I was a liberal – I’m afraid there were a lot of us about in the early 1960s – and I thought I would spend a year Doing Good. So it was that I wound up teaching English in a spectacularly sweaty corner of the tropical rainforest in eastern Nigeria a year before it became the breakaway state of Biafra (but that’s another story).
A few months there blew away most of my liberal illusions, and because the rainforest and I didn’t get on very well, replaced them with what looked like a fairly lurid tropical skin disease. I took myself off smartly to the local mission hospital where the symptoms disappeared in a couple of days.
But in those couple of days an eight year old boy arrived in the bed beside me.
The nurse told me that there wasn’t much they could do for him. A wound not properly treated for want of a few pence worth of medical supplies had gone gangrenous and, by the time his mother brought him in from the bush to the mission hospital, all they could do was give him a bed to die in. I never even found out his name. Next day I left to go back to my job and he left in a blanket to be buried.
As I was driven back to the school where I worked, we passed the Shell compound – the estate where the expatriate executives and professionals who worked for Shell lived and directed its massive oil operations in the Niger delta. At that moment it could only seem obscene. On the one hand, an eight year old life ended for want of some clean water and some elastoplast, and on the other what looked like a Surrey suburb was dumped in the middle of the bush. Behind the security fences lawns were mowed, sprinklers played and sun loungers were unfolded as all the wealth of the nation was literally and metaphorically sucked out of the very ground. I got back to my school, where incidentally we had no running water and no electricity, and I was just incoherently angry. Something, somehow, somewhere was wrong, and Doing Good wasn’t going to change it.
It is embarrassing to write about this now. I had, as I mentioned, a nice middle class education, so it took something as dramatic as a dead child to begin to blow up all the ramparts, barriers, trenches and minefields that they lay in your brain to deny entry to any real perceptions of the way the world actually works. For most people that happens on the first day in school or their first day at work; time, money and privilege were spent making me slower to catch on than most people.
So when I came back to England I screwed up my courage and decided to become a class traitor and vote Labour. But then the seamen went on strike and the prime minister, Harold Wilson, tore into them with the full backing of the Daily Mail.
Ideologically undeveloped as I was, I knew at least that it was a mark of common decency, never mind socialism, to support workers in struggle against their employers – it was how you signified that you were a normal human being rather than a small beast that lived under a stone. It seemed clear, then, that this socialism meant more than voting Labour once every five years and letting Harold get on with it.
Lots of things, good, bad and indifferent, have happened in the 30 years since then to change my sense of what socialism is about, but at the bottom of it all still lies a nameless child dying of poverty in a wealthy world. If that seems sentimental then perhaps we should turn to Robert Tressell. He put roughly the same idea in much starker terms in his wonderful novel The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists. ‘Every man who is not helping to bring about a better state of affairs for the future is helping to perpetuate the present misery, and is therefore the enemy of his own children.’
 



Nineteen ninety six is the year the liberal middle classes finally went off William Morris. They may have been happy enough to have his fabrics in their living rooms but this year, prompted by the commemorations surrounding the centenary of his death, they have had a closer look at the man and his politics. They don’t like what they see. ‘He was not just a wallpaper designer, but a revolutionary socialist – a combination that might have been the invention of a satirist,’ sneered Deyan Sudjic in the Guardian. [1] In a word, keep the wallpaper but for God’s sake skip the socialism, a position pioneered by the Labour Party some time ago. Tim Hilton issued a stern warning to readers of the Independent on Sunday that ‘his politics are not only irrelevant but objectionable’. [2] Deyan Sudjic spelt out that warning: ‘Morris can be seen as an inspiration … for the Khmer Rouge ... He was no totalitarian, but in the Phnom Penh of Year Zero, there is a hideous echo of News From Nowhere.’ The least I can do for Morris in his centenary year is to dispose of this sort of contemptuous incomprehension and try to tell the truth about News From Nowhere. I am going to focus on just that one text and its context. My account, therefore, fits inside the longer view of Morris’s whole life and work offered by Hassan Mahamdallie in the previous issue of this journal.
 
Morris and the anarchists
The obvious place to start looking for that truth is the novel’s opening paragraphs and it also happens to be the best place to understand the point and the politics of Morris’s text. An unnamed narrator describes a brisk discussion about ‘what would happen on the Morrow of the Revolution’ at a meeting of the executive committee of Morris’s party, the Socialist League:
There were six persons present, and consequently six sections of the party were represented, four of which had strong but divergent anarchist opinions. One of the sections, says our friend, a man whom he knows very well indeed, sat almost silent at the beginning of the discussion, but at last got drawn into it, and finished by roaring out very loud, and damning all the rest for fools.
’One of the sections’ is in effect Morris himself, who on his way home after the meeting:
...found himself musing on the subject-matter of discussion, but still discontentedly and unhappily. ‘If I could but see a day of it,’ he said to himself; ‘if I could but see it!’ [3]
The novel that follows is just that – an attempt to ‘see a day of it’ and describe life in a comfortably post-revolutionary society. Because most of us nowadays read the novel in a modern edition, such as the Penguin I am quoting from, it is easy to lose sight of the explosive nature of this beginning. News From Nowhere first appeared, not in a floppy paperback with an inoffensive picture on the front cover, but serialised in Commonweal. Commonweal, as the subtitle on the front page insisted, was ‘The Official Journal of the Socialist League’; it was the League’s eight page weekly paper and Morris was its editor. When he had taken on that post with Edward Aveling as his co-editor, they had accepted that they were ‘acting as delegates of the Socialist League, and under its direct control’. This was publicly stated on the first page of the (then monthly) first edition back in February 1885.
In that context, the opening paragraphs of News From Nowhere read very differently. Morris ran them on the front page of Commonweal on 11 January 1890 as a blast, a prolonged ‘roaring out very loud’ at the ‘fools’ with their ‘strong but divergent anarchist opinions’ who by that date controlled the party, the paper and its editor, William Morris. True, each week the paper ran a formal disclaimer on its centre page to the effect that:
The Commonweal is the official organ of the Socialist League; but unless definitely so announced by the editors, no article is to be taken as expressing in more than a general way the views of the League as a body. [4]
But these opening paragraphs of News From Nowhere are not even in ‘a general way the views of the League as a body’ but rather a furious challenge to that body and the shambles it was becoming. It was a challenge that got Morris the sack as editor within four months and before his serial was half finished, although such was his drawing power for the paper that the serial ran through to its conclusion on 4 October 1890.
What I want to argue, then, is that News From Nowhere is best understood as Morris’s impassioned argument with the political direction being taken by his party. It was an argument conducted in the party’s paper and through his novel which that paper serialised. On the one hand, for five years he had expressed his socialism through his commitment to the Socialist League, worked for them, learnt from them. On the other, he was now taking on the anarchists who dominated its executive. It was out of that dialectical tension, at once blindly infuriating and yet massively stimulating, that News From Nowhere was made and shaped.
The story of the anarchist takeover of the Socialist League has been told often enough. [5] Briefly, the Socialist League’s insistence on a revolutionary rather than a parliamentary road to socialism came to a head at the party’s Third Annual Conference on 29 May 1887. That position, part of its original 1884 constitution, was challenged by a motion from the Croydon branch which demanded: ‘Its [the Socialist League’s] objects shall be sought to be obtained by every available means, parliamentary or otherwise.’ The motion was withdrawn and the attempt to change the party’s direction failed again at the Fourth Annual Conference in 1888. In the wake of those decisions, many of the party’s leading members – Eleanor Marx, Edward Aveling, Belfort Bax – drifted away.
Morris supported the constitution that he had helped to write, yet he fought hard but unsuccessfully to avoid a split. On 23 February 1887, before the Third Conference, he had noted in his diary: ‘I may as well state here that my intention is if possible to prevent the quarrel coming to a head between the two sections – parliamentary and anti-parliamentary – and which are pretty much commensurate with the collectivists and anarchists.’ As the split became inevitable, he noted glumly in the same diary a few weeks later on 30 March: ‘Whatever happens, I fear however that as an organisation we shall come to nothing’. [6]
News From Nowhere ran as a weekly serial in Commonweal from 11 January 1890 to 4 October 1890. It runs across that split as it worked its way through the party and its paper and hence the novel inevitably becomes a part of that ragged, rending process, at times contesting the split, at times contributing to it, but always driving towards Morris’s vision of revolutionary socialism and the steps needed to achieve it. I would like to look first at these political struggles as they raged unevenly around the novel and then move on to examine the way they help to structure the text itself.
It was in the last quarter of the 19th century that anarchism had its most profound impact on British political life. Because it centres on the needs and desires of individuals, anarchism is instinctively hostile to any form of centralised authority. This in turn tends to condemn it to a flashy, fragmented and impotent existence on the margins of political life, a wonderful source of libertarian slogans yet hopeless as a focus for effective joint action. But it was precisely that impotence that an international conference of anarchist groups, the International Revolutionary Congress held in London in July 1881, sought to overcome. The conference was impatient with the inevitably slow, tedious and often apparently fruitless work of socialist education. It cut short that dull plod with a slogan – ‘Propaganda by deed’. Propaganda by deed aimed to galvanise and inspire oppressed masses wearied by radical rhetoric that left the world unchanged and the rich unmoved. The slogan certainly inspired a series of bombings and assassinations across European cities for the rest of the century which certainly changed the world and moved the rich – but in wholly reactionary ways. For now all that lay in the future. In 1881 one of the participants at Congress, where the new slogan, Propaganda by deed, was adopted, was a young man called Frank Kitz. In 1885 Kitz joined the Socialist League and it was Kitz who, with David Nicoll, took over as joint editor of Commonweal when Morris was removed in May 1890. [7]
As those who had attempted to shift the Socialist League towards parliamentary politics drifted away in the wake of their defeats at the 1887 and 1888 party conferences, Morris realised that the remaining revolutionary socialists like himself would have to confront anarchist politics if the Socialist League was not to end up as a straightforwardly anarchist party. He said as much to fellow party member Bruce Glasier in the wake of the decisions at the 1888 conference:
We have got rid of the parliamentarians, and now our anarchist friends will want to drive the team. However, we have the Council and the Commonweal safe with us for at least a twelve month, and that is something to be thankful for. [8]
He set about thwarting their attempt to drive the team with a letter that he wrote to Commonweal and printed on 18 May 1889. It started with a deliberately unsettling insistence: ‘I call myself a communist and have no wish to qualify that word by joining any other to it.’ That implicit attack on anarchism became explicit as the letter proceeded:
If freedom from authority means the assertion of the advisability or possibility of an individual man doing what he pleases always and under all circumstances, this is an absolute negation of society, and makes communism as the highest expression of society impossible; and when you begin to qualify this assertion of the right to do as you please by adding ‘as long as you don’t interfere with other people’s rights to do the same’, the exercise of some kind of authority becomes necessary.
The language here is calculatedly extreme – ‘doing what he pleases always and under all circumstances … an absolute negation of society ... makes communism … impossible’. Morris is plainly trying to provoke a fight with the anarchists in and around the party, and he soon had several takers. All tried to respond to the question of authority and how it should be exercised in a pre-revolutionary party and a post-revolutionary society. J. Armsden, writing to Commonweal on 1 June 1889, flatly denied ‘any necessity for authority’, a denial repeated by an anarchist, who wrote on 22 June: ‘I should deny the necessity for the exercise of authority … free association is the only guarantee of the due observance of our equal liberty.’ The same issue of Commonweal included a letter from H. Davis, elected that same month to the Council of the Socialist League at its Fifth Annual Conference. Davis picked up Morris’s opening challenge (’I call myself a communist and have no wish to qualify that word by joining any other to it’) and responded directly: ‘I, on the other hand, call myself an anarchist-communist, and have no wish to separate the two words.’ Morris’s challenge on the question of authority was not answered with careful consideration and substantiated rebuttal. Davis simply swept past it on the momentum of rhetorical assertions: ‘I will admit of no compulsion of man over man ... The anarchist seek [sic] freedom through individual liberty by affirming the sovereignty of the individual.’
What we have here is a small part of the debate between revolutionary socialists and anarchists that sounded across the paper in the following months. The notices that the paper carried every week on its back page are particularly revealing. Frequently a column listing a series of books and pamphlets by Morris for sale stood side by side with an advertisement for Freiheit, ‘International Organ of the German-speaking Anarchists’, available from the Commonweal office, or for La Revolte, ‘Organe Communiste-Anarchiste’. [9] On 7 June 1890, after Morris had lost the editorship but while he was still writing for the paper, Commonweal ran a note welcoming the appearance of a new paper, The Anarchist Labour Leaf, launched by the East London Communist-Anarchist Group. In one of those small but significant flickers familiar then and since to close readers of the left press, the paper’s weekly round up of strike news, always headlined The Labour Struggle, was retitled on 19 July 1890 The Labour Revolt.
As factions battled for control of the paper, the erratic swings of David Nicoll, one of its most frequent contributors, seem to me to be particularly revealing. Described by Thompson as ‘a highly-strung and unstable intellectual’, [10] he and Frank Kitz took over from Morris as editors of Commonweal at the end of May 1890. By 6 September, with the News From Nowhere serial still running, he appeared to be pushing the paper in uninhibitedly anarchist directions. That week he led with his own article, Why we Do Not Believe in Parliamentary Action and followed it directly with Part 3 of Revolutionary Government by the most famous anarchist of the lot, Peter Kropotkin. Yet the following week, in the 13 September edition, Nicoll published a letter from himself, challenging Kropotkin’s assumptions and asking a series of basic questions. ‘What will the anarchists do’, he demanded, if after a successful revolution, ‘provisions run short? Who is to direct the men … to get the supplies of food?’ Two weeks later, on 27 September, Nicoll went after the anarchists again in a piece entitled An Anarchist Paper on the Socialist Movement, defending the role of revolutionary socialists in the dock strike against criticism in the anarchist paper La Revolte. Yet Nicoll it was who eventually and effectively sank the paper in April 1892 when he ran an article titled Are These Men Fit to Live? This was directed at the judges responsible for sentencing a group of anarchists to ten years penal servitude for planning bombings. The article did no discernible damage to the judges but quickly earned Nicoll a 16 month sentence for incitement to murder. [11]
Before things fell apart to that extent, Morris had tried to hold the centre of the party together. Even after his removal from the editorship of Commonweal in May 1890, he was prepared to argue for his own and his party’s politics in the paper. The very next week, in an article headed Anti-Parliamentary, he explained and defended the Socialist League’s position on abstention from parliamentary elections. The aim of parliament, he insisted, is ‘the upholding of privilege; the society of rich and poor’; it was therefore ‘a hopeless enterprise’ to try to ‘jockey parliament into socialism’. He concluded by recommending socialists to direct their energy to ‘strengthen your own organisations’. [12]
A road to socialism that is neither parliamentary nor anarchist may be familiar enough to readers of this journal, but it was not one that was readily available in the 19th century. Morris wore himself out helping to lay its foundations.
 
News From Nowhere and Commonweal
In the light of these facts about Commonweal, its politics and its struggles, I think we can begin to make much clearer sense of News From Nowhere, its strengths and its silences. An enormous source of power that flowed very directly from the novel’s serialisation in the paper is surely that Morris was able to write a novel without compromises. News From Nowhere is a book that talks directly about socialism and about how to achieve it, which is what readers of Commonweal wanted to know about. Its pages are not clogged with the sugary pap demanded by middle class publishers devising inoffensive leisure products for alienated readers. Morris was thus able to write what one critic has called an anti-novel, [13] as he himself makes clear through one of his characters, Ellen. She looks back dismissively on the claims of 19th century realist fiction:
As for your books, they were well enough for times when intelligent people had but little else in which they could take pleasure, and when their needs must supplement the sordid miseries of their own lives with imaginations of the lives of other people. But I say flatly that in spite of all their cleverness and vigour, and capacity for story telling, there is something loathsome about them. Some of them, indeed, do here and there show some feeling for those whom the history-books call ‘poor’, and of the misery of whose lives we have some inkling; but presently they give it up, and towards the end of the story we must be contented to see the hero and heroine living happily in an island of bliss on other people’s troubles; and that after a long series of sham troubles (or mostly sham) of their own making, illustrated by dreary introspective nonsense about their feelings and aspirations, and all the rest of it; while the world must even then have gone on its way, and dug and sewed and baked and built and carpentered round these useless animals. [14]
As that long last sentence unfolds, Morris veers from irritated splutter (’all the rest of it’) to calculated offence to the tastes and expectations of standard novel readers (’dreary introspective nonsense about … feelings’). The people who paid a penny for Commonweal at street corner meetings, at demonstrations and on picket lines were looking for a story that spoke directly to their anger, desires and hopes, that spoke about how one day people would fight for and win a better world for themselves and their children. News From Nowhere was written for those people. It was not written for standard issue 19th century novel readers anxious for tales of moral crises over breaches of good manners or minute fluctuations in the finely tuned, narrowly directed sensibilities of the upper middle classes and those frantic to join them. And it was certainly not written for 20th century Guardian journalists.
And another thing – publication in Commonweal allowed Morris to focus his story sharply, secure in the knowledge that issues inevitably marginalised by that sharp focus were clarified by their coverage elsewhere in the paper. Thus, for example, one of the great strengths of Commonweal was its resolute internationalism. The Socialist League’s Statement of Principles, which ran on the back page of the paper nearly every week, insisted:
This revolutionary socialism must be international. The change which would put an end to the struggle between man and man, would destroy it also between nation and nation. One harmonious system of federation throughout the whole of civilisation would take the place of the old destructive rivalries. There would be no great centres breeding race hatred and commercial jealousy. [15]
That internationalist commitment informed the paper. Every week the centre page carried a list of publications received; on 21 June 1890, for example, 51 journals are listed from, amongst others, Italy, the US, Sweden, Cuba, Germany and Argentina. Those papers provided the basis for an International News column that was a regular feature and carried items from places as far apart as Australia, Denmark, Russia and Southern Africa. In the spring of 1890, while News From Nowhere was running at the front of the paper, the middle pages carried regular reports from Morris’s daughter May on the strike fund set up by the Socialist League to assist French blanket weavers in Cours. [16]
In that context it is therefore quite wrong to criticise Morris as some have done [17] for confining his text to England and failing to address the issue of world revolution. News From Nowhere is about the local unfolding of a struggle that was comprehensively dealt with in the rest of the paper. Morris used his serial to work out in detail what socialism might mean for Clara, Dick and Ellen in London while other pages in Commonweal complemented that with news of the struggle for socialism in New York, Melbourne and Havana.
And that wasn’t all. The class struggle politics of the Socialist League and its paper gave Morris the support and the context to develop his vision of socialism in News From Nowhere in ways quite impossible in a novel prepared for conventional publishing by a conventional publisher. In particular, it encouraged him to expand his attack on those dilute notions of socialism then associated with Fabianism which in turn were to become central to the thinking of the Labour Party as it took root in the next decade. A fortnight after News From Nowhere started running in Commonweal, Morris contributed to the paper a long review of Fabian Essays in Socialism. His review of a volume which, as he noted, included designs by his daughter May, was conducted with his habitual kindliness; it could be obtained post free from Commonweal offices and, ‘I assume that all socialists will read it.’ However, the review is also marked by his habitual honesty; the Fabian ‘theory of tactics’ – in essence, the ‘rollicking opportunism’ of Sidney Webb – is a ‘disastrous move.’ At its core is ‘the parliamentary struggle which we do not believe in’. [18] From there it is only a short step to News From Nowhere’s famous vision of the Houses of Parliament in the future being used as a storage place for manure. [19] But, more extensively, his critique of Fabianism in this 25 January review provides the basis for the novel’s longest chapter, Chapter XVII, which appeared four months later. It ran for five numbers of Commonweal from 17 May to 14 June and described in careful detail the process of arriving at socialism not through parliament but as the result of a raggedly escalating process of unemployment, demonstrations, ruling class reaction, general strike and civil war.
In short, Morris centres on what Commonweal was focused on. As well as special articles on particular strikes, it ran a weekly column headed The Labour Struggle, a roundup of news covering every major and minor dispute. Morris chimed in with this coverage, for example with an article on 22 March 1890 headed The Great Coal Strike, that insisted, ‘It is a battle, not a mere business dispute.’ Or again six weeks later on 3 May, in a front page piece headed Labour Day, he noted a ‘growing comprehension of socialism … underlying all the strikes which have lately taken place, and which has been quite different to that of the strikes of the decade before the revival of socialism in this country.’ In tandem with Commonweal, Morris worked out week by week a theory of the transition to socialism based on the industrial struggles of the late 19th century and one of the functions of News From Nowhere was to see that transition enacted in the 20th century. [20]
But inevitably, as he wrote his way towards a vision of socialism in News From Nowhere through the medium of Commonweal, he also shared some of the limitations of the Socialist League and its paper. For all the sane, brave things about sexuality and its expression in Chapter IX, Concerning Love, most modern readers find the book’s views on gender and on women’s roles uselessly dated. [21] Jan Marsh in particular has written sharply but sympathetically on that subject and I don’t need to add to what she has to say here. [22]
From the Manifesto of the Socialist League that Morris helped to draft and that was carried on the front page of the first edition of Commonweal in February 1885, to the Statement of Principles that ran on the back page every week, the Socialist League offered a relentless and welcome insistence on class and class issues whose downside was that its rare pronouncements on sexual politics were depressingly conventional. That conventionality pervades News From Nowhere and is only partly redeemed by characters like Ellen, who seems to spring from sectors of Morris’s imagination that escaped political conditioning. The other exception, Philippa the headstone carver who appears briefly in Chapter XXVI is, significantly enough, an afterthought, not part of the original serial and only added when it was revised to become a book.
But it is around the issue of anarchism, as I have already suggested, that News From Nowhere offers the most consistent challenge to the way the Socialist League was developing. The novel describes in detail the process by which a class rides the uneven momentum of history as it is in part carried and in part struggles together towards power with no assistance anywhere from heroic bomb throwers and their ‘propaganda by deed’. Once in power, Chapter XIV explains how democratic control is exercised in a small socialist community. The anarchist alternative, ‘to wit, that every man should be quite independent of every other, and that thus the tyranny of society should be abolished’, is simply dismissed by the narrator and one of the protagonists as they ‘burst out laughing very heartily’ at the mere idea. [23]
 
From the kingdom of necessity to the kingdom of freedom
I have tried to argue that News From Nowhere is a dialectical novel, a text produced by the creative tensions between Morris, the Socialist League which he was on the point of leaving, and Commonweal, the paper which serialised his story but whose editorship he lost while the serial was still running. To some extent those tensions obviously drove Morris to set the novel far in the future, well away from the sectarian strife of the present, as he himself makes clear in the opening paragraphs. Yet he is also doing much more than that. In 1892, two years after the serialisation of News From Nowhere, Edward Aveling, formerly co-editor of Commonweal with Morris, published the first English translation of what was to become a classic Marxist text, Engels’ Socialism, Utopian and Scientific (originally published in French in 1880). Engels himself was a regular contributor to Commonweal; in Socialism, Utopian and Scientific he writes of humanity’s ascent from prehistory, the present, into the beginnings of real human history, the communist future:
Man’s own social organisation, hitherto confronting him as a necessity imposed by nature and history, now becomes the result of his own free action. The extraneous objective forces that have hitherto governed history pass under the control of man himself. Only from that time will man himself, more and more consciously, make his own history – only from that time will the social causes set in movement by him have ... the results intended by him. It is the ascent of man from the kingdom of necessity to the kingdom of freedom. [24]
That is surely the context in which to read News From Nowhere, as the first fully human novel, a first story about people as they can and will be, liberated from all the alienation, reification, exploitation and complex varieties of crap that fill the pages of 19th century fiction, the fiction of prehistory. That is the way to read Morris’s novel, a pioneering attempt to imagine the lives of the first free human beings, rather than to go searching as some have done for comically irrelevant parallels with The Wind in the Willows or Walter Scott. [25]
And seeing it in that way helps us to avoid another fallacy about Morris. This, with a sad shake of the head, insists that because of his revolutionary purism he failed to attach himself to the way the world in general and British socialism in particular was going. [26] Within a decade there were Labour MPs and within a generation there was a Labour government. Morris’s utterly intransigent version of revolutionary Marxism has meant that he and his novel have always been marginal to those developments. Simply, he got it wrong; there was no successful socialist revolution in 1952, as News From Nowhere claims.
As I started writing this, Tony Blair was in New York, reassuring Wall Street bankers that the next Labour government would make no difference to them and their investments and their profits. In terms of electoral politics, that was of course an entirely sensible thing to do. If the next Labour government is not to be promptly derailed the way previous ones have been by the movements of global capital, then the more reassurances Tony Blair can give to Wall Street the better. But it surely also proves that, even if Morris got it wrong in the short run, he was right in the long run and there really is no parliamentary road to Clause Four, never mind to socialism.
Of course, the easy cynical answer to that is to say that in the long run we’re all dead. Well, yes and no. You’re dead, I’m dead, but humanity isn’t dead; the dream of human liberation doesn’t die. And the longer we go on without reaching that dream, the more important it becomes to get it right whenever the chance to realise it presents itself. We don’t have many better maps for finding that dream than News From Nowhere.

Notes
1. The Guardian, 3 May 1996, p. 6.
2. Independent on Sunday, magazine section, 5 May 1996, p. 21.
3. C. Wilmer (ed.), William Morris: News from Nowhere and other Writings (Harmondsworth 1993), pp. 43–44. I have used this edition throughout simply because it is the most readily available. However, like all 20th century editions of News From Nowhere, it is based on the revised edition of the novel that Morris prepared for its first appearance as a book, published in Boston in 1890 and in London in 1891 by Reeves & Turner. There are important differences between these two editions which have been detailed by A. MacDonald, The Revision of News From Nowhere, Journal of the William Morris Society, 3:2, Summer 1976. But these differences do not affect my argument and I have therefore used the Penguin edition because it is the most convenient for readers.
4. See, for example, that same edition of Commonweal, 11 January 1890, p. 12.
5. The rest of this paragraph is based on those accounts I have found most useful: Y. Kapp, Eleanor Marx: The Crowded Years 1884–1898 (London 1976), E.P. Thompson, William Morris: Romantic to Revolutionary (London 1977), and the Introduction to N. Salmon (ed.), William Morris: Political Writings – Contributions to Justice and Commonweal 1883–1890 (Bristol 1994).
6. F. Boos (ed.), William Morris’s Socialist Diary (London 1985), pp. 37 and 46.
7. Details here from H. Oliver, The International Anarchist Movement in Late Victorian London (London 1983). My thanks to David Nash for drawing my attention to this book, a mine of information on its subject.
8. E.P. Thompson, op. cit., p. 509.
9. See, for example, Commonweal, 8 March 1890, p. 80; 22 March 1890, p. 96; and 5 April 1890, p. 112.
10. E.P. Thompson, op. cit., p. 508.
11. For details, see H. Oliver, op. cit., ch. 4.
12. Commonweal, 7 June 1890, pp. 180–181.
13. See P. Brantlinger, News from Nowhere: Morris’s Socialist Anti-Novel, Victorian Studies, XIX, September 1975.
14. News From Nowhere, op. cit., pp. 175–176.
15. This is taken from the Statement of Principles on the back page of Commonweal, 15 March 1890. Very occasionally pressure on space seems to have led to its disappearance in a given week – see, for example, 5 July and 27 September 1890.
16. See, for example, Commonweal, 22 March and 10 May 1890.
17. See, for example, J. Crump, How the Change Came: News from Nowhere and Revolution, in S. Coleman and P. O’Sullivan (eds.), William Morris and News from Nowhere: A Vision for Our Time (Bideford 1990).
18. Commonweal, 25 January 1890, p. 28.
19. News From Nowhere, p. 69.
20. I am aware that most historians regard the Socialist League, like the Social Democratic Federation, as disastrously underestimating the political importance of New Unionism and the rise in strike action of the late 19th century – see, for example, H. Collins, The Marxism of the Social Democratic Federation, in A. Briggs and J. Saville (eds.), Essays in Labour History 1886–1923 (London, 1971). This may have been true in practice but is certainly not borne out by my reading of Commonweal. Engels noted this contradiction between theory and practice when he complained in a letter to Sorge dated 19 April 1890 about the Socialist League’s penchant for ‘making phrases and otherwise doing nothing’.
21. A significant recent exception is F. MacCarthy, William Morris: A Life for Our Time (London 1994). She finds Nowhere ‘a place of real sexual equality’ (p588). She also persistently misnames one of the novel’s main characters, Dick, as Robert and probably needs to read the book again.
22. See her Jane and May Morris: A Biographical Story (London 1986), and in particular her piece in Coleman and O’Sullivan, op. cit.
23. News From Nowhere, p. 120.
24. F. Engels, Socialism, Utopian and Scientific, in Marx, Engels, Lenin, Four Classic Texts on the Principles of Socialism (London 1960), p. 144. This seems to me a simpler and more accurate way of describing the relationship between Engels’ text and Morris’s than the rather tangled argument about the two books that Thompson conducts with Abensour in E.P. Thompson, op. cit., pp. 787–791.
25. See, respectively, Wilmer, p. xxxvi, and J. Redmond (ed.), William Morris: News from Nowhere (London 1970), p. xiii.
26. See for example E.P. Thompson, op. cit., Part III, Chs. 5 and 6 in particular.
 



The First Day on the Somme
Martin Middlebrook

The Nuremburg Raid
Martin Middlebrook
Fontana, £1.50 each, paperbacks.
These superb but disappointing books deal with just one day in the First World War and one in the Second.
The first covers the opening day of the Battle of the Somme: 1 July 1916, the day that saw the largest casualties in British military history. Infantrymen were ordered to walk towards German trenches which contained approximately a thousand machine-gun posts. By midnight, 21,392 lay dead, 35,493 were wounded and 585 were prisoners – losses in less than fifteen hours that add up to more than all British casualties in the Crimean War, the Boer War and the Korean War put together.
The second book describes another appalling episode, this time in the Second World War – the Nuremburg raid on the night of 30 March 1944. 782 bombers took off for Nuremburg; 95 were shot down and 10 crash landed. Bomber Command lost 545 men killed and 159 taken prisoner, its worst night of the war.
What’s chilling about all this carnage is that, as some of our readers will perhaps be aware, there hasn’t been a revolution in this country since, so that the power structures, the kind of thinking that made horror of this sort possible, remain in control. The grandson of the divisional commander on the Somme who wouldn’t issue his men with steel helmets because he thought it would make them go soft is, perhaps, a company director today. The mentality that gave Haig, Commander-in-Chief at the Somme, an earldom and £100,000 after the war and the infantrymen a bob a day during it still rules in the Treasury.
I said at the start that the books were superb but disappointing. They’re disappointing in the way that, they fall into the rut of so much British historiography: massive, painstaking, impressive accumulation of facts but little idea what to make of those facts. If you want to know where Private Dick King, ex-Yorkshire miner, was at 7.28 a.m. on 1 July 1916, or where Flight Sergeant Tom Hall was at 00.45 on 31 March 1944, these books will tell you.
But if you want to know, in any broad sense, why they and their colleagues were there, getting killed, and how perhaps we could stop it happening again, these books won’t tell you. Not so much because they don’t give the answers but because they don’t even get into the position where such questions might be asked.
The books survey meticulously the heaps of corpses but are not inspired to question or challenge anything – not even the unspeakable Haig or ‘Butcher’ Harris, the Rhodesian C-in-C of Bomber Command, much less the entire system which could throw up such men and place them in control.
So both books fall back again and again on the word ‘tragedy’ in describing events. Not so much an analysis but rather a word that papers use to cover the absence of analysis.


 



Paul Nash: The Menin Road, 1918 [1]



Yet for all that the books are superb – superb in the evidence they assemble. Martin Middlebrook talked to a staggering 526 British and 20 German soldiers who fought on the first day on the Somme. He interviewed 380 men and women who were involved in the Nuremburg raid in one way or another.
The result is a mass of comments and memories, useful not just for the professional historian, but deeply moving for the general reader. Mr Middlebrook may not be disposed to ask very radical questions himself but we are all in his debt for the record he has provided of the bitterness, the insight and the experience of the people caught up in these shambles. I make no apologies for closing by quoting from them at length. They are the best things in the books. They brought a lump to my throat and they still ring with warning, wisdom and anger for the present generation:
The date 1 July is engraved deep in our hearts, along with the faces of our pals ... We were two years in the making and ten minutes in the destroying. (Private A.V. Pearson)
More than anything I hated to see war-crippled men standing in the gutter selling matches. We had been promised a land fit for heroes; it took a hero to live in it. I’d never fight for my country again. (Private F.W.A. Turner)
When I was out of work, I had to go before a Means Test Panel. There was a very fat lady on the Panel, cuddling a Pekinese on her lap. She said, “We’ve all got to pull our belts in a hole or two these days.” I was fed up and told her, “Your words belie your appearance. That bloody dog’s had more to eat today than I’ve had.” There was a lot of argument and it ended in a row. My chair went over; papers and inkwells went flying and the dog was yapping and squealing. I was charged with common assault and got three months in Wormwood Scrubs. (Private G. Kidd)
One universal question which I have never seen answered: two or three million pounds a day for the 1914-1918 war, yet no monies were forthcoming to put industry on its feet on our return from that war. Many’s the time I’ve gone to bed, after a day of ‘tramp, tramp’ looking for work, on a cup of cocoa and a pennyworth of chips between us; I would lay puzzling why, why, after all we had gone through in the service of our country, we have to suffer such poverty, willing to work at anything but no work to be had. I only had two Christmases at work between 1919 and 1939. (Private C.A. Turner)
 



Kilroy is Here
Gordon Willis
Pluto Press £1.30 paperback
Kilroy is Here amounts in effect to two short stories. The first is about Dunkelman who wakes up one morning to find an aspidistra growing out of his back. The second is about Kilroy who works on a rubbish dump till he gets concreted over by his boss and set up in the town square as a statue symbolising Triumph and Hope.
You soon grasp the point of Dunkelman’s aspidistra. It suggests anything any of us have that sets us apart and makes abnormal, capitalist society regard us as queer, whether it’s Marxist politics, homosexual tendencies or a cheery hatred of the Queen Mother. Dunkelman struggles grotesquely with the dilemma of either hiding his aspidistra and so playing a hypocritical role or revealing it honestly and so accepting the identity of a freak. It’s a familiar kind of dilemma that Gordon Willis unravels in nightmarish terms.
The Kilroy story ranges wider and raises a whole series of issues from the way workers can be conned into oppressing each other on to the battle for women’s liberation up to the nature of advertising and the media in a society of spectacle. But to set the themes down in that bald way is to distort the book completely, for its strength lies in its ability to take hold of crucial if mundane political problems, transform them and pitch them back at us in the bitterly disturbed shapes that a stimulated imagination can create.
All of which puts Gordon Willis a long way from the dead conventions of socialist realism. The work feels fresh, though its origins are clearly in the tradition which has the techniques of Kafka’s Metamorphosis and The Trial at its base. Marxists have at times been a bit hard on the Kafkaesque. Here’s Howard Fast, writing in 1950:
‘Very near the top of what I have in the past rather indelicately called the “cultural dung heap of reaction” sits Franz Kafka, one of the major Olympians in that curious shrine the so-called “new critics” and their Trotskyite colleagues have erected.’
Stalinist hostility of this kind to modernism in all its forms points of course to the Six-Heroic-Tractor-Drivers-in-the-Virgin-Lands type of novel as the model for all aspiring progressive writers. (That Fast himself wrote much better novels than the model suggests is just more evidence of the chasm between theory and practice that is the norm for Stalinists.)
The model had two components: first it defined the function of the Stalinist writer as a sort of Butlins Redcoat, someone whose job it was to convince the rest that they were all having a bloody good time in Uncle Joe’s Holiday Camp.
And secondly it involved in artistic terms the comprehensive denial of working class experience that also underlay the political structures of Stalinism. Work in a complex industrial system is not heroic, fulfilling and ennobling; it’s a bore and a grind and something no one in his right mind does for five minutes longer than economic pressures dictate. To anyone who’s done time in a factory that’s not news, but it’s a truism that middle-class Marxists, in an understandable but emotionally soggy siding with ‘the workers’ have sometimes lost sight of.
Gordon Willis, far from losing sight of this, makes a novel out of it. Kilroy hops around a scrap heap performing random, absurd tasks on the orders of his boss and the borough surveyor. It’s an acute vision of the devastating waste of capitalist society – waste not just in terms of the smashed washing machines, abandoned vans and evil-smelling oil drums that litter the dump but waste too in terms of people’s lives and people’s labour spent in endless, urgent, busy work that exhausts and leads nowhere.
As a map of our times, and a map with one or two signposts towards the way out and even the way forward, Kilroy is well worth a read.



Myths of Power: A Marxist Study of the Brontes
Terry Eagleton
Macmillan, £6.95.
THE BRONTE sisters wrote most of their novels during the Hungry Forties, some of the most disturbed years in European history. While Charlotte was writing The Professor and Jane Eyre in 1845-7, a million of her father’s Irish countrymen and women were being murdered by that cheery operation of capitalist economics called famine. In 1847, as Emily’s Wuthering Heights was running off the presses, the US Consul in Amsterdam surveyed riots in Glasgow, peasant unrest in Russia, serf risings in Austria and civil war in Switzerland and wrote to his government that
‘the present crisis is so deeply interwoven in the events of the present period that it is but the commencement of that great Revolution which ... sooner or later is to dissolve the present constitution of things.’
The lid blew off France in 1848, Marx and Engels published The Communist Manifesto and Anne finished The Tenant of Wildfell Hall just as a giant Chartist march, carrying a petition with two million signatures, was turned away from a parliament elected by well under a million men.
What you make of these coinciding events depends on who you are. Most literary critics don’t make anything of them at all. The Brontes are ‘beyond time and space, immortal, primeval and elemental’, one of them claims, which sounds alright as a prayer, I suppose, but isn’t much use in understanding what goes on in their novels. Marxists have in the past over-reacted against rubbish of that sort. In 1947, David Wilson argued that in Wuthering Heights, for example, Heathcliff equals the workers of the 1840s, Catherine is the liberal bourgeoisie and the novel is a parable about the class struggle.
Terry Eagleton’s Myths of Power enters this debate and tries to rescue the Brontes from mystified pieties on the one hand and crude reductions on the other. He starts with an acute definition of the sisters’ position:
‘They were, to begin with, placed at a painfully ambiguous point in the social structure, as the daughters of a clergyman with the inferior status of ‘perpetual curate’ who had thrust his way up from poverty; they strove as a family to maintain reasonably “genteel” standards in a traditionally rough-and-ready environment. They were, moreover, socially insecure women – members of a cruelly oppressed group whose victimised condition reflected a more widespread exploitation. And they were educated women, trapped in an almost intolerable deadlock between culture and economics-between imaginative aspiration and the cold truth of a society which could use them merely as ‘higher’servants. They were isolated educated women, socially and geographically remote from a world with which they nonetheless maintained close intellectual touch, and so driven back on themselves in solitary emotional hungering.’
Eagleton then moves on to show how these factors helped shape the novels and their form and gave them both insight and limitation.
Myths of Power is an important book because Terry Eagleton is a Marxist literary critic of a kind rare in Britain. There are plenty of fat, sad men around prepared to lecture at the drop of a hat and a 30 guinea cheque on ‘How I risked all to subscribe to the Left Book Club in 1937 but have since found true peace in the arms of my good lady wife and transcendental meditation.’ There are also a few earnest figures beavering away in obscurity on where Georg Lukacs got it all wrong about the later novels of Conrad Meyer. Terry Eagleton is none of these but is rather a man active in the day-to-day work of socialist politics and organisation and a man prepared to write with the sense that work creates about authors people actually read – Shakespeare, Dickens, the Brontes, Graham Greene, Orwell. This gives his books both a genuine authority and a real vulnerability – vulnerability, for example, to the kind of thin, personal and essentially mindless attacks of which Philip Toynbee’s recent review of Myths of Power in the Observer is a particularly good, or, rather, particularly bad instance.
Myths of Power isn’t an easy read and if there is a criticism of it it is that Eagleton’s expression seems to be taking on a density that wasn’t there in earlier books like Exiles and Emigrés and that does at times make understanding difficult. But it’s still a must for anyone interested in coming to terms with the Brontes. If that doesn’t include you at least make sure your library orders it; there’s always the chance that a couple of bright kids working on their A-Levels will stumble across it and have their well-trained young minds productively messed up.
A last thought. There are 138 pages of text and the book costs £6.95. The author probably realises with some gloom that that works out at about a bob a page and effectively excludes some people he might have hoped to reach. This is known amongst publishers as the combined effects of soaring labour costs, the rising price of raw materials, Arab blackmail and Wedgwood Benn. It’s also known as a bloody rip-off.
 



Mayakovsky and His Circle
Viktor Shklovsky, translated and edited by Lily Feiler
Pluto Press, £4.50 hardback, £2.00 paperback.
WHY DOES most left-wing literature look very boring? Open yesterday’s Red Weekly or today’s Morning Star and a glance at the centre-page spread can bring that same stark sense of incipient coma that you normally associate with watching Crossroads or Churchill’s People for twenty minutes.
On my desk is a copy of Lenin’s On Literature and Art. It’s a great book but it’s printed by Progress Publishers of Moscow. That means the usual Progress format – a dust-jacket the colour of dead porridge and a lay-out to match. About the only other literature that looks as energetically repulsive is the rack of damp pamphlets plugging Christianity and bad causes that you find at the back of empty churches.
This is a pity. Our ideas are better than right-wing ones and I see no reason why they shouldn’t look better too. Maybe the left in the past felt that beauty was a bit limp-wristed and bourgeois and so set out to be ugly and virtuous.
I mention these things because there are welcome signs that Pluto is breaking out of this dull bind. Viktor Shklovsky’s Mayakovsky and His Circle is a magnificently made book: an eye-catching cover, vivid titles, readable print and so on. Peripheral virtues, you may feel; but if they tempt a few people to pick the thing up in a bookshop, buy it and read it then it’s a small victory for us. Well done, Pluto.
If you’re tempted to buy it too, what sort of read are you in for? Shklovsky says:
‘What I’m writing is neither memoirs nor a research paper. There’s no system, and the writer will not be described exhaustively, and his biography will not be written by me.’
What he offers instead is a kind of prose poem – at times lyrical, at times disjointed, at times superb, at times opaque. It tells you little about the history or the sociology of its subject (though the editor Lily Feiler makes a good stab at that with very full and useful notes). What it conveys instead is the feel of a group and a period, the feel of how it was to live and write in Russia in the decades before and after the Revolution.
Mayakovsky himself is a fascinating and complex figure – youthful rebel and poseur, Futurist poet and Communist militant, despairing suicide. ‘Nonsensical, stupid, sheer stupidity and affectation’ wrote Lenin in 1921 on seeing Mayakovsky’s poem 150,000,000, but later, after discussions with art students, he learned to respect the poet. Trotsky grunted about Mayakovsky’s ‘Bohemian nihilism’ but in 1924 spent long sections of Literature and Revolution in admiring analysis of his work.
But by the end of the 1920s this sort of free, vigorous and invigorating debate had gone dead in the Soviet Union. On 9 April 1930, the journal Press and Revolution tried to print a greeting to Mayakovsky from the editors. It was cut out on the orders of Khalatov, Head of the State Publishing House. Five days later Mayakovsky shot himself. In his pocket was his last poem. He wrote:



As they say, that’s the end of the story,
The boat of love has smashed against life’s reefs.



Five years later, for reasons best known to himself, Stalin changed his mind and decided one morning that Mayakovsky had been ‘the best, the most talented poet of the Soviet epoch’, so in 1940 Shklovsky was able to write this book.
Into it he poured all his personal memories of Mayakovsky and his circle and all the contending circles in the explosive literary and artistic developments around the years of the Revolution. The book is a montage of snapshots. There’s the first conference of the OPOYAZ group of poets in the bitter winter of 1915: ‘We used books to make a fire but it was cold and Pyast kept his feet in the oven.’ There’s Mayakovsky in 1919 designing propaganda posters by the dozen during the Civil War and doing them flat on his belly because the cheap stoves filled the top half of his office with smoke and fumes. There’s the neighbour who refused Mayakovsky the loan of his razor because he claimed he’d be using it himself for a long, long time. ‘I understand,’ answered Mayakovsky, ‘you are shaving an elephant.’ And so on.
Mayakovsky and His Circle is rambling, insightful, trivial, anecdotal, moving and worthwhile, often all on the same page. It’s everything an academic textbook is not. It’s not a full account of writers and the Russian Revolution, but if you want one writer’s angle on the joy and the terror and the futility and the cold and the splendour of revolution then read it.
 

Paul O'Flinn: Them and Us in Literature (4. Sex, the Milkman and Lenin)


O’Flinn Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Them and Us

Paul O’Flinn
Them and Us in Literature

4. Sex, the Milkman and Lenin

“The book deals,” said the Attorney-General, “with what everybody will recognize as an unsavoury subject – gratification of sexual appetite.” [1]
E.M. Forster died in 1970 and two years later a selection of his work called The Life to Come and Other Stories was published. One of the stories is called What Does it Matter? and the title, points to the idea that runs through the whole book. This is Forster’s picture of official life in Britain, from the church through the schools, the magistrates, the police right down to your local doctor, all lined up in rows saying “No!” Behind them people are furtively and cheerfully saying “What does it matter?” and snatching sexual pleasure together in spite of that massive “No!”
Take, for example, the longest story in the book called The Other Boat. In this Lionel March, an Army officer, breaks away from his education in sexual frigidity and finds in a homosexual affair what Forster calls “luxury, gaiety, kindness, unusualness and delicacy that did not exclude brutal pleasure”. To arrive at this Lionel has to grow beyond his lopsided upbringing. He remembers:
he hadn’t been so much bothered by sex as were some of them. He hadn’t had the time, what with his soldiering duties and his obligations at home as eldest son; and the doc said an occasional wet dream was nothing to worry about. Don’t sleep on your back, though. On this simple routine he had proceeded since puberty. [2]
This simple routine is of course the dismal equipment with which generations of people in this country were supplied to meet the splendour of their own sexuality.
Obviously, sex is an essential human instinct – without it the species would die. But as soon as you start to talk about it and about the forms it takes you move away from the universal towards the specific, the social. In other words, when you start to talk about sexual practices and beliefs in, say, Britain, you bump up against the central fact of British life, namely class divisions.
There’s a good instance of this in Forster’s diary. He wrote that what he wanted was “to love a strong young man of the lower classes, and be loved by him, and even hurt by him. That’s my ticket.” On the face of it this is perhaps a surprising statement to come from a quiet Cambridge don with a large private income. Yet if we look at his fiction we find that he almost never shows people finding sexual happiness within their own circle. Again and again characters have to reach out far beyond their British middle-class setting to find a partner.
In Maurice, as we’ve already seen, the lovers are a Cambridge graduate and a gamekeeper. The same sort of pattern repeats itself in many of the short stories in the Life to Come collection. In Doctor Woolacott it’s a squire and a farmhand. In The Obelisk it’s a suburban housewife and a sailor. In The Life to Come it’s a vicar and an African chief. In Arthur Snatchfold it’s Sir Richard Conway and the milkman. In The Other Boat, it’s Lionel March and a character his brother officers, with customary sensitivity, describe as “a wog”.
You might be tempted to write all this off as one of Forster’s quirks, part. of the price he had to pay for all the disadvantages of a British ruling class upbringing. But once you start looking around at other writers you find that the set-up repeats itself too frequently to have anything to do with Forster’s personality. Fantasising about an escape from the drawing room and Conservative Party fetes into the brutal; sweaty arms of foreigners and/or the working classes fills the fiction that the middle classes have consumed for a century and more.
Victorian pornography, for example, was aimed exclusively at the well-to-do and is full of dreams of this sort. Open Henry Spencer Ashbee’s Index of Forbidden Books at random and instances of this are everywhere. Here’s how he summarises the plot of a typical piece called Eveline: or, The Amours and Adventures of a Lady of Fashion published in London around 1840:
Eveline, or Evelina, a young lady of good family, daughter of Sir John C—, allows herself to be deflowered by her father’s valet on board the packet while crossing to France. She afterwards passes into the arms of her different pages, one a negro, into those of her father’s coachman, with whom she knows her mother to be intimate, of her own brother and father, both of whom she, as it were, seduces. She assumes male attire, and parades the streets of Paris by night in search of adventures; grants her favours to a shoemaker, to a whole bevy of coachmen, etc.; and she fights a duel. On principle, she never allows any man of birth to enjoy her.
The association of sex and abroad is the basis of the appeal of E.M.Hull’s novel The Sheik, a bestseller that came out in 1919. When it was filmed it gave Rudolf Valentino his most famous part. Diana Mayo the British heroine is kidnapped by Sheik Ahmed Ben Hassan, taken off to his harem and raped more or less nightly. In the end, though; she Falls In Love with him, so that makes it alright. As Vogue once insisted:
There are few Vogue readers who have never harboured a slinking desire to be thrown across the saddle of a plunging white stallion, galloped to a palmy oasis and stuffed with dates in a striped silk prison by swarthy warriors. [3]
Quite, madam.
The same sort of dream is also there in two things D.H.Lawrence wrote in 1926, the year of the General Strike. The difference is that Lawrence is aware as the editors of Vogue are not that the dream is connected to the emotional emptiness of the British ruling classes and he writes out of that sense. In The Virgin and the Gipsy, the virgin Yvette is hard and restless in her rectory home of crossword puzzles, Horlicks and degenerated comfort. She’s warmed into life by a gipsy with the “curious dark, suave purity of all his body ... purity like a living sneer.”
In the other work, The First Lady Chatterley (the first draft of Lady Chatterley’s Lover), Lady Constance’s husband Sir Clifford is paralysed below the waist from a war wound. Lawrence intends this to stand for the sexual paralysis of a whole class. Lady Constance runs from this frigidity into the bed of the gamekeeper, Parkin. By the end of the novel Parkin has left the Chatterleys to become a factory worker and secretary of the “Communist league” in Sheffield. Constance decides to follow him there because
there came a breath of fresh air with him, and a breath of fresh life. My lady’s fucker, as he called himself so savagely! How he had hated her for not taking him full seriously in his manly fucking! Ah well! The future was still to hand! [4]
Enough examples. From Victorian pornography up through Vogue and Valentino to the art of Forster and Lawrence, the message seems to be the same. It concerns the British middle classes, whose views can be summarised as follows. “We in the middle classes have managed to get the sex thing in its place and under control, thank God. Sex, anyway, is basically unBritish – an unsavoury subject, as the Attorney-General once noted. Of course, there’s a lot of it goes on amongst foreigners, who can’t be expected to know any better, and amongst the working classes – but they’re sub-human and therefore scarcely British anyway. These people have beastly thoughts and do beastly things and so breed like rabbits, as Sir Keith Joseph has proved. Give them half a chance and they’re all at it – whilst we attend to the nation’s business. If we didn’t it’s a well known fact that the country would pretty soon go to the dogs.”
The problem is that the sex thing does rear its ugly head from time to time, so that when the British middle classes want to have a quiet think about it they are straightaway forced out of their board rooms and bored rooms. Perhaps by the Mediterranean, in a gamekeeper’s hut, at the harem, in Paris, there’s a milkman, a sheik, a sailor, a gipsy who can supply what’s missing from their own hysterical, comfortable, empty lives? Maybe down behind a factory in Sheffield or over there, under the palm trees; people are making love unafraid, without their fathers and Our Father standing behind them with a Bible and a big stick, without Mrs Whitehouse getting ready to throw a bucket of water? There’s no hope of thrills on the 8.43 into Waterloo because most of them read the Daily Telegraph and vote Tory, but maybe next summer in Majorca ...? Or, to use the terms of 1984, we in the middle classes are all paid-up members of the Anti-Sex league, but we’re aware that down amongst the proles the dirty, fascinating little secret still survives.
Knockabout aside, I think there is a real significance in all this. It points to a dim sense, smothered deep in bourgeois hearts, that they don’t live in the best of all possible worlds; that the society they sing the National Anthem. about and praise at Rotary Club lunches is in important ways twisted and inhuman; that somewhere else, in a caravan or beyond Calais, people could and do live finer, gentler, happier, sexier lives. We mustn’t laugh at these damp and unpatriotic little dreams. The fact that they exist at all is a tribute to the power of human sensuality to survive generations of Christianity and public schools.
Perhaps, you may say, all this is out of date. We now live, it says here in the newspaper, in a permissive society. Apparently this means that Naughty Nights in a Nunnery is being held over for another week at your local Odeon and tomorrow the Mirror will show you a naked nipple. What all that has to do with human freedom is obscure, though it is true that they couldn’t have got away with it twenty years ago. But it’s more accurate to see part of its source in the changing needs of capitalism, constantly and feverishly revolutionising itself in order to survive, though an equally important part lies in other factors like the development of reliable methods of birth control, a generation of post-war prosperity and so on.
Capitalism must go on expanding and finding fresh markets or else it begins to collapse in on itself and die. In the past this drove it to colonise and exploit Asia, Africa, the world. That business complete, it hunts for new areas to seize, turn into a product and re-sell and it’s come up with sex. (“Okay, they buy plenty of Coca Cola in Kuwait now, but maybe they’ll buy breasts in Burnley? We can’t sell any more Weetabix in West Africa, the market’s flooded, but maybe they’ll pay a lot for nudes in Nebraska?”)
Sections of the ruling class led by Lord Longford are upset about this shift and protest, but other sections are making far too much money out of it for their protests to be taken very seriously. Socialists, of course, take no sides in this squabble. We reject both the traditions of middle-class puritanism on the one hand and the plastic pseudo-sex of Men Only on the other. The former was and remains repressive, the latter is a straightforward rip-off.
What socialists offer instead is perhaps less clear, though there have been attempts to suggest what a genuinely liberated sexuality might mean. One of the best and briefest indications of this is in a letter dated 17 January 1915, that Lenin wrote to Inessa Armand. He comments on her plans for a pamphlet for working-class women as follows:
Dear Friend,
I very much advise you to write the plan of the pamphlet in as much detail as possible. Otherwise too much is unclear.
One opinion I must express here and now:
I advise you to throw out altogether number 3 – the “demand (women’s) for freedom of love”.
That is not really a proletarian but a bourgeois demand.
After all, what do you understand by that phrase? What can be understood by it?

Freedom from material (financial) calculations in affairs of love?
The same, from material worries?
From religious prejudices?
From prohibitions by Papa, etc.?
From the prejudices of “society”?
From the narrow circumstances of one’s environment (peasant or petty-bourgeois or bourgeois intellectual)?
From the fetters of the law, the courts and the police?
From the serious element in love?
From child-birth?
Freedom of adultery? Etc.

I have enumerated many shades (not all, of course). You have in mind, of course, not Nos. 8-10, but either Nos. 1-7 or something similar to Nos. 1-7.
But then for Nos. 1-7 you must choose a different wording, because freedom of love does not express this idea exactly.
And the public, the readers of the pamphlet, will inevitably understand by “freedom of love”, in general, something like Nos. 8-10, even without your wishing it.
Just because in modern society the most talkative, noisy and “top-prominent” classes understand by “freedom of love” Nos. 8-10, just for that very reason this is not a proletarian but a bourgeois demand.
For the proletariat Nos. 1-2 are the most important, and then Nos. 1-7, and those, in face, are not “freedom of love”.
The thing is not what you subjectively “mean” by this. The thing is the objective logic of class relations in affairs of love.



 


Friendly shake hands!
V.I. [5]



The letter is brief and therefore, as Lenin admits, leaves many questions untouched. Moreover, what were progressive demands for working class women in Czarist Russia arguably fall short of the full needs of men and women here and now. But one way of arriving at a correct sense of those needs might be to take Lenin’s letter step by step, see what it still has to offer and see where its demands need changing.

Notes
1. Daily Sketch, quoted in Michael Bateman (ed.), This England, Penguin 1969, p.29.
2. The Life to Come and Other Stories, London 1972, pp.192-3.
3. Quoted in This England, p.117.
4. The First Lady Chatterley, Penguin 1973, p.253.
5. Lenin, On Literature and Art, Moscow 1967, pp.196-7.
 
Top of the page

Last updated on 14 March 2010



Paul O'Flinn: Them and Us in Literature (8. Hands, Knees and a Book by Dickens)


O’Flinn Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Them and Us

Paul O’Flinn
Them and Us in Literature

8. Hands, Knees and a Book by Dickens
or
Remember You’re a Womble!

The fact that you’re reading this means that you’re human and that in turn means that you’ve got a brain, eyes, hands, legs, sexual organs and so on. They make up the full you. It’s subversive to realise how often society has tried to deny or twist or split up that fullness in its own interests. Under capitalism, for example, complex human beings developing all their capacities don’t fit in at all well. The system’s not designed for them or their comfort, any more than a factory bench or a typist’s stool is designed for the comfort of the worker sitting on it. To fit in happily you shouldn’t be a man or a woman but some sort of Womble – tame, hard working and only half human.
Literature has often recorded attempts by employers to produce a race of uncomplaining Wombles. In 1854, for instance. Dickens called Manchester Coketown and described it and its people this way in Chapter 10 of his novel Hard Times:
In the hardest working part of Coketown; in the innermost fortifications of that ugly citadel, where Nature was as strongly bricked out as killing airs and gases were bricked in; at the heart of the labyrinth of narrow courts upon courts, and close streets upon streets, which had come into existence piecemeal, every piece in a violent hurry for some one man’s purpose, and the whole an unnatural family, shouldering, and trampling, and pressing one another to death; in the last close nook of this great exhausted receiver, where the chimneys, for want of air to make a draught, were built in an immense variety of stunted and crooked shapes, as though every house put out a sign of the kind of people who might be expected to be born in it; among the multitude of Coketown, generically called “the Hands”, – a race who would have found more favour with some people, if Providence had seen fit to make them only hands, or, like the lower creatures of the seashore, only hands and stomachs – lived a certain Stephen Blackpool, forty years of age.
Stephen looked older, but he had had a hard life. It is said that every life has its roses and thorns; there seemed, however, to have been a misadventure or mistake in Stephen’s case, whereby somebody else had become possessed of his roses, and he had become possessed of the same somebody else’s thorns in addition to his own. He had known, to use his own words, a peck of trouble. He was usually called Old Stephen, in a kind of rough homage to the fact.
A rather stooping man, with a knitted brow, a pondering expression of face, and a hard-looking head sufficiently capacious, on which his iron-grey hair lay long and thin, Old Stephen might have passed for a particularly intelligent man in his condition. Yet he was not. He took no place among those remarkable “Hands”, who, piecing together their broken intervals of leisure through many years, had mastered difficult sciences, and acquired a knowledge of most unlikely things. He held no station among the Hands who could make speeches and carry on debates. Thousands of his compeers could talk mach better than he, at any time. He was a good power-loom weaver, and a man of perfect integrity.
What bosses – or “some people” as Dickens calls them in that first paragraph – need are Stephen’s hands, the hands that work the power-loom and make a profit for the man who owns it. “Hand”, of course, was and still remains in many places the common term for a factory worker. It’s how he’s defined. His eyes don’t matter – what use are they anyway when all that surrounds him is the ugliness of Coketown that Dickens lays out here. Better that he shouldn’t see these things – really see them for what they are. His mind doesn’t matter either – it might give him ideas above his station and anyway you couldn’t make money out of it in those days.
Stephen wanders through Hard Times in a puzzled haze, aware that something is wrong but unable to focus it, unable to find words for it so that he can begin to attack it. His catchphrase is “’Tis a muddle” – a muddle whose roots are hidden from him so that he refuses to join the union. In the end he drops absurdly to his death down a disused pitshaft. He’s one of the very. first industrial workers to appear at the centre of an English novel and, significantly, one of the first anti-heroes – a brief, shabby; confused life and a violent, accidental death, a man robbed of his birthright but unable to name the thief.
If it suited employers to hire hands only rather than eyes and minds as well, then clearly education could be a threat to them – for it might develop the eyes to see and the minds to understand what struck Stephen Blackpool as an incomprehensible muddle. The employers arid their representatives realised that. A magistrate noted in 1807: “It is doubtless desirable that the poor should bc instructed in reading, if it were only for the best of purposes – that they may read the Scriptures. As to writing and arithmetic, it may be apprehended that such a circle of knowledge would produce in them a disrelish for the laborious occupations of life.”
Ii was attitudes like this that made reformers determined to equip the hands – the Wombles required by the bosses – with eyes and minds. The campaign for mass education succeeded in bringing schooling to everyone by the end of the nineteenth century. This was a tremendous advance, but it failed to bring real insight and anderstanding along with it. Part of the reason why can be glimpsed in Richard Altick’s The English Common Reader: a Social History of the Mass Reading Public, 1800-1900. Looking back from 1957 on the growth of literacy, he concludes:
The long hours and the monotony of work in factory and shop, the dismal surroundings in which people were condemned to spend such leisure as they had, the regimentation of industrial society with its consequent crushing of individuality, made it imperative that the English millions should have some way of escape and relaxation, some new and plentiful means of engaging their minds and imaginations. Books and periodicals were the obvious answer.
If we pull one word out of that liberal piety, it all falls down. “Imperative.” Why imperative? Imperative for whom? ... Precisely! Altick goes on:
Though in the first half of the century there was deep (and not wholly idle) apprehension that making the “lower ranks” of society literate would breed all sons of disorder and debauchery, in the long run the proliferation of reading matter proved to have been the oil that was needed to quiet the troubled waters ... The comparative tranquillity of Victorian society after the mid-century was due in no small part to the growth of the popular press.
One of the editors of that popular press, James Payn of Chambers Journal, put this argument in a nutshell in the 1860s: “Books are the blessed chloroform of the mind.” Educate the hand’s mind if that’s what he wants, but let’s make sure that mind stays asleep.
With the growth of mass literacy came the growth of mass pulp to absorb and deflect that literacy. The Religious Tract Society claimed that it set up the Boys Own Paper in 1879 “to illustrate by practical example the noblest type of manhood and truest Christian devotion.” It was soon selling a quartet of a million copies a week. Tit-Bits and the Daily Mail followed; heavily supported by advertisers, they were both selling over half a million copies per issue by the end of the century. What Orwell later called the dictatorship of the chocolate manufacturers had arrived.
By that time also sections of the working class had won the right to vote and so The survival of the system became dependent on their support. It therefore became essential to train workers to accept the values of that system and all it stands for. Education became not, liberation but drilling in servility, as two of the most acute late Victorian authors pointed out. In his novel The Way of All Flesh, Samuel Butler observes gloomily of one of his characters that by far the greater part of his education had been an attempt, not so much to keep him in blinkers as to gouge his eyes out altogether. In Oscar Wilde’s play The Importance of Being Earnest, Lady Bracknell remarks; “Fortunately in England, at any rate, education produces no effect whatsoever. If it did, it would prove a serious danger to the upper classes, and probably lead to acts of violence in Grosvenor Square.” Readers may remember that in 1968 there were signs that education in England was beginning to produce an effect and there were indeed acts of violence in Grosvenor Square. Since then it’s noticeable that the upper classes have decided that lots of shiny new universities are certainly not a help in solving the problems of British capitalism, though it’s a solution that a lot of their hopes were pinned on in the early sixties.
What Dickens, then, had sensed through the figure of Stephen Blackpool was the way that capitalism didn’t need people, it only needed hands. People are awkward. In large numbers they tend to form mobs and make policemen work overtime. But hands are harmless. They have no voices and if properly trained can make a lot of money for the man who hires them. Stephen Blackpool embodies a whole analysis of nineteenth century capitalist society, of the way that society rose on sweated manual labour and how it thought of us basis as “the hands”.
In the twentieth century The process of automation has replaced many of the hands. The focus of exploitation has shifted but exploitation itself remains, and so too do the partial human beings to service and staff it. Capitalist society now tries to preserve itself with a precariously interlocking and frantically stimulated system of greeds and so ii encourages people to think of themselves primarily as consumers living in a consumer society.
Consumers. It’s worth thinking about the term because it’s what we’re asked to call ourselves. No longer just hands but instead a sort of huge corporate mouth into which pours a spectacular stream of glossy crap. We’re invited to join a Consumers’ Association. There have been Ministers for Consumer Affairs. “But what about the consumer?”, demands the trendy BBC interviewer of some harassed trade unionist who’s gone on strike and interrupted the flow of glossy crap.
It’s imperative – imperative for them – that we should think of ourselves simply as consumers. If you think of yourself simply as a consumer, simply as a mouth, in that one-dimensional way, then of course you oppose strikes. Strikes interrupt the flow of consumer goods. Strikes are bad for consumers Strikes should be outlawed. But if you think of yourself as more than a consumer, if you think of yourself in multi-dimensional terms – as a worker, a father, a mother, a human bring and so on – then you might identify with that harassed glossy crap-packer on the box, you might see his problems as your problems too. You might support his strike.
Hands in the nineteenth century, consumers in the twentieth. What will we be next? Knees? Left armpits? Nostrils? Who knows? Nobody yet, though there’s probably an adman somewhere with a shrewd idea. It’s clear that the system doesn’t like the full you but is happy to use and plug away at any temporarily profitable part. The full you could be a complex nuisance but the partial you is pretty easy to handle. Dickens suggests as much in a scene in Chapter 11 of Hard Times. Stephen Blackpool the power-loom weaver meets Mr Bounderby, his boss:
“Now, you know,” said Mr Bounderby, taking some sherry, “we have never had any difficulty with you, and you have never been one of the unreasonable ones. You don’t expect to be set upp in a coach and six, and to be fed on turtle soup and venison, with a gold spoon, as a good many of ’em do!” Mr Bounderby always represented this to be the sole, immediate, and direct object of any Hand who was not entirely satisfied; “and therefore 1 know already that you have not come here to make a complaint. Now, you know, I am certain of that, beforehand.”
“No, sir, sure I ha’ not coom for nowt o’ th’ kind.”
Mr Bounderby seemed agreeably surprised, notwithstanding his previous strong conviction. “Very well,” be returned. “You’re a steady Hand, and I was not mistaken.”
And so Stephen, isolated and bewildered, not a full human being but just a steady hand, wanders off and drops down a hole. Isolated, bewildered hands often did. Isolated bewildered consumers often will. But what happens when the Wombles come back out of their holes and stop living off scraps of rubbish? If they could see themselves as full human beings they might want the whole bloody Common.
 
Top of the page

Last updated on 14 March 2010



Paul O'Flinn: Them and Us in Literature (12. Superman, the Seven Gates of Thebes, and You)


O’Flinn Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Them and Us

Paul O’Flinn
Them and Us in Literature

12. Superman, the Seven Gates of Thebes, and You

What everyone in this country is agreed on is our need for firm and decisive leadership at the top, the Daily Mail said recently. (The Daily Mail uses the word “everyone” a lot, but in its own distinct way. Roughly translated into English it seems to mean the “Daily Mail”.) We used to have such leadership and then the country did alright. Now we don’t have any and the place is in a mess. We last had firm and decisive leadership during the Second World War. Its name was Winston Churchill and it worked wonders. Here is a typical recent assessment of it, in the Preface to Patrick Cosgrave’s Churchill at War: “The book is, in the author’s view, the story of how Churchill had defeated Germany by the end of 1940.”
Defeating the Nazis singlehanded inside a year with no apparent help from all you idle mob out there is, you will agree, something of a feat, and not something any of our present lot of politicians could be trusted to repeat. Everyone (i.e. the Daily Mail) used to think Enoch might be the man. But then he suggested voting Labour so everyone (i.e. ditto) went off him a bit and we’re back at square one, looking for a leader to put the country back on its feet and the workers back on their knees. Without one we’re sunk.
The middle classes and their spokesmen do tend to go on a bit about the sanctity and supremacy of the individual but when it comes to the crunch they appear to regard the individual and indeed the whole mass of individuals as irrelevant. All you really need is one Great Man. In fact all history, I once heard a university lecturer insist, is the history of Great Men. Hence the present spate of calls for a leader, a Great Man, to take up the reins of history and get Britain moving again.
Meanwhile the job of all of the rest of us is to be silent spectators, waiting for a Great Man to come along and tell us to jump to it. The novelist William Golding put it this way:
New ages, new schools, new floods of literature do not emerge by a process of gradualism from what went before. Nor are major changes in awareness merely the work of economics or even the accumulation of knowledge. They have always come in the first place through the medium of one man. [1]
In a sense this is slightly consoling for us men, because it does suggest that once an epoch at least one of us makes a decent contribution. But it seems from this that you ladies have contributed bugger all since history began. Useless lot of parasites. Never mind, keep ironing the shirts and you’ll get your reward in the next world.
A generation ago the German writer Bertolt Brecht answered all the above rubbish in a poem called A Worker Reads History. This is it.



Who built the seven gates of Thebes?
The books are filled with the names of Kings.
Was it Kings who hauled the craggy blocks of stone?
And Babylon, so many times destroyed,
Who built the city up each time? In which of Lima’s houses,
That city glittering with gold, lived those who built it?
In the evening when the Chinese wall was finished
Where did the masons go? Imperial Rome
Is full of arcs of triumph. Who reared them up? Over whom
Did the Caesars triumph? Byzantium lives in song,
Were all her dwellings palaces? And even in Atlantis of the legend
The night the sea rushed in,
The drowning men still bellowed for their slaves.
Young Alexander conquered India.
He alone?
Caesar beat the Gauls.
Was there not even a cook in his army?
Philip of Spain wept as his fleet
Was sunk and destroyed. Were there no other tears?
Frederick the Great triumphed in the Seven Years’ War. Who
Triumphed with him?
Each page a victory,
At whose expense the victory ball?
Every ten years a great man,
Who paid the piper?
So many particulars,
So many questions. [2]



Enough said. Even at the lowest level, a poem like this can give you a good laugh the next time a TV quizmaster assures you that, say, Edward the Confessor built Westminster Abbey or Nelson won the Battle of Trafalgar or Stephenson made the first locomotive.
The poem also raises questions about how history is made and who makes it. A way of answering those questions is to look at another example. Everyone knows, as the Daily Mail might say, that Sir Humphry Davy invented the miners’ safety lamp, thus singlehandedly saving thousands of lives and earning the miners eternal gratitude (in so far as miners, a graceless lot, are capable of gratitude.) Yet push past this myth and you find Dave Douglass in Pit Life in County Durham describing the miners’ “stubborn refusal to adopt the Davy lamp which continued until late in the nineteenth century”. You find that miners disliked the Davy lamp for two good reasons. First, its light was in the early rears much poorer than the traditional candles. So it cut heavily into the miners earnings because in the gloom they loaded more, stone in with the coal and hence had more confiscated from their wages by the mine owners. Secondly, the new lamp meant, so the owners insisted, that places previously too dangerous to work by the light of naked flames could now be tackled and were to be tackled. At once, deaths by suffocation and gassing began to rise, so that far from saving miners’ lives there were in fact more deaths in the coalfields in the years immediately after the introduction of the Davy lamp than in the years before.
Thinking about the story of the Davy lamp you begin to get a glimpse of how history really works. Out goes the toiling, lonely genius making a brilliant discovery and changing the lives of a thick and sleepy people. Instead you see peoples’ lives and work uncovering problems, solutions tried, tested by mass experience, found wanting, resisted, adapted, tried again, changed again, fought against, modified, fought for and finally accepted. The men digging underground today live marginally safer lives not because of a Great Man but because behind them lie the experience, the skills and the militancy of millions of miners and their organisations over generations. It’s these things which have shaped the miners’ history and the conditions under which they work. What’s true for the miners is true for the rest of us too.
What’s true for the rest of us is not true of the comics we were offered as kids. Our role in the Superman sort of comic is that of innocent bystander, helpless and panic stricken, incapable of doing anything against Mandrill or the Thing from Planet X or whatever. We’re only saved when Superman strips down to his Y-fronts and gets to work. Superman hits all problems on the jaw and they go away, so happily we can carry on living exactly the same sort of jives as before without the need for any radical, disturbing changes.
Turn to cowboy films and the pattern is the same. Gary Cooper, John Wayne and Henry Fonda are three of the best known cowboy actors, and three of their most famous films were, respectively, High Noon, Stagecoach and My Darling Clementine. All three films feature the classic Western situation: the town cowed and terrorised by badmen, held in a grip of fear, but liberated at the end by the one superman who’s big enough to shoot it out.
Any overlap between this version of events and the true history of the American West is of course purely accidental. But what’s interesting in these films is the presentation of the 98.4% of us who aren’t supermen or baddies. When Black Jake and his cronies ride into town and kick open the saloon door we tend to gulp our shot of whiskey down and nip out the back. For most of the rest of the flick we skulk in alleyways, shifty-eyed, saying “But mister, I gotta wife and kids” when anyone asks us to do anything. However, in the last reel, when John Wayne is kicking the crooks in the crutch and restoring Christian civilisation we sidle out gratefully into the sunlight ready for the final scene and the credits, not that we really deserve any. If that’s what we’re like, no wonder Churchill had to beat the Germans all by himself.
This myth about the way Great Men can take the world by the scruff of the neck and change it is unfortunate in that it contradicts another great myth which says the world never changes – it’s always been the same because of Human Nature. This extremely boring myth has been dealt with in earlier sections so hopefully it isn’t necessary to have a go at it again. But it’s worth noting that it’s an idea that fills a lot of the entertainment we’re offered.
The film One Million Years B.C., for example, was mainly built around Raquel Welch’s breasts but also around the notion that then as now we were all suburban bourgeois Daily Mail readers: greedy, centrally concerned about private property, sexually repressed and capable of approximately rational action only when firmly led by one man.
At a jokey level the Flintstones cartoon films push the same idea. Nothing has ever changed. Things have always been the same. Prehistoric man was worried about second hand car values, liked nothing better than hamburger and french fries and was content on a Saturday afternoon to watch the ball game on TV. Meanwhile his good lady wife in the kitchen fluttered about dress patterns and her new hair-do, and the kids, well, heck, they were just kids.
When we break away from these myths flogged by their entertainment industry and turn to the truth the difference is, as usual, complete. When ordinary people – for example, a group of old women from the villages of eastern Nigeria – are asked for once about history, their own history, they are aware of it as progress, as change. Here are some of the things those women said: “Life these days is more simple and better than the days when I was young” [3]; “Life has got better this time than my mother’s day because civilisation has brought into the world many good changes in life” [4]; Life has completely changed and it is in my opinion better than the days I was born” [5]; “Things are different in our days than they were in mother’s days. Civilisation has brought in many changes into our lives now. So that we do not have to live in fear and superstition.” [6]
So against the myth that things have always been the same we need to throw our knowledge of history as change. Against the myth that change can only come from Great Men we need to place our sense of the things that the rest of us have achieved. We hauled the blocks of stone at Thebes. We rebuilt Babylon. We fought to make the mines safer. And we defeated the Nazis. Armed with a knowledge of our own strength and our own history there are no problems we can’t solve, from economic collapse on the one hand to the resurgence of Fascism in Chile on the other.
There’s some of that history in a Pete Seeger song called Talking Union. It’s about the successful fight of American car workers in 1941 to unionise the Ford factories. The song’s typical of the sort of lessons that lie around embedded at all sorts of odd points in our culture, left there as a record of previous struggles. They’re there for the taking, to be used in continuing struggles. Here’s how the song ends:



But out in Detroit, here’s what they found,
And out in Pittsburgh, here’s what they found,
And out in Akron, here’s what they found,
And up in Toronto, here’s what they found:
That if you don’t let Red-baiting break you up,
And if you don’t let vigilantes break you up,
And if you don’t let race hatred break you up,
And if you don’t let stool-pigeons break you up,
You’ll win ... what I mean ...
Take it easy ... but take it! [7]





Notes
1. Times Literary Supplement, June 17,1960.
2. Quoted in Ken Coates and Richard Silburn, Poverty: The Forgotten Englishmen, Penguin 1970, p.23.
3. Iris Andreski, Old Wives’ Tales: Life-Stories from Ibibioland, London 1970, p.79.
4. ibid., p.114.
5. ibid., p.139.
6. ibid., p.146.
7. Words from Edith Fowke & Joe Glazer, Songs of Work and Protest, p.24.
 
Top of the page

Last updated on 14 March 2010



Paul O'Flinn: Them and Us in Literature (6. The Sinking of the Titanic)


O’Flinn Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Them and Us

Paul O’Flinn
Them and Us in Literature

6. The Sinking of the Titanic:
Is Britain Going Under Along With It?

Put this book down for five minutes if you can bear to and switch on the TV. The odds are that if there’s a current affairs programme on there’ll be a man in a hundred guinea suit and a haircut, from The Economist, say, or the New Statesman or the CBI, assuring you that the way things are going with the energy crisis, inflation, lack of real leadership at the top and so on, democracy, nay western civilisation as we have known it, is quite possibly doomed in our time for this generation and we shall not look on its like again. Or some such drivel. Profound pessimism seems as fashionable at the moment as existentialism a generation ago. It’s a dreary philosophy but since it’s so widespread we’d better take a look at it.
One way of doing that is to turn to the novels and poems of a man who’s been described as the greatest English pessimist, Thomas Hardy. His books express that philosophy intensely and fully, and by looking at some of them we can trace its roots, appeal and limitations.
Hardy was born at Bockhampton, Dorset, in 1840. His father was a small builder employing half-a-dozen men but his family on his mother’s side were extremely poor. 1840 was a bad time to be born in Dorset. Average farm wages at less than 40p a week were the lowest of any county in England – 40p a week when it cost the labourers 5p a loaf to buy back the bread they made for their masters.
When times are bad there are two things you can do about it: you can try revolution and you can try reforms. Both appeared to have been tried in Dorset in the ten years before Hardy’s birth, and both appeared to have failed. In 1830 there had been the Captain Swing revolts right across the southern counties, a spontaneous eruption of demonstrations, rick burning and machine smashing. This bitter but politically naive protest against high unemployment and low wages met with fierce repression. At Tisbury, 25 miles from Hardy’s birthplace, John Hardy, a farm labourer and just possibly a distant relative, was first to die, shot down by a troop of yeomanry. By the end of 1832, the revolt was smashed. Nearly 2,000 had been arrested. Of these, 19 were executed, 644 sent to prison and 505 transported to Australia and Tasmania. A generation of militants was effectively silenced.
But the people wouldn’t lie down. In 1834, rebellion having failed, they tried reform. At Tolpuddle, six miles from Hardy’s birthplace, farm labourers set about forming a trade union. Again, the same sensitive, enlightened and sympathetic response from the ruling class: arrest and transportation.
So it was into the aftermath of these two terrible defeats for the people of Dorset that Hardy was born in 1840. What he seems to have found around him is a sort of gloomy stoicism, a feeling that life would never be much good, that there was nothing you could do about it, so you’d best grin and bear it. As a child he practised copperplate handwriting and his copybooks still survive. “Passion is a bad counsellor”; “Quit vicious habits”; “Encourage diligence”, he was told to write – standard Victorian morals perhaps, but ones that also speak of the dull resignation of mid-nineteenth century Dorset.
Even at the age of thirty we find him recording in a notebook: “Mother’s notion (and also mine) – that a figure stands in our van with arm uplifted to knock us back from any pleasant prospect we indulge in as probable.” Clearly Hardy’s mother, after the appalling poverty of her youth and the broken hopes of the 1830s, had picked up like many of her class a quiet pessimism as a kind of psychological survival strategy. Don’t expect much so you won’t be disappointed when you don’t get much. If you try for more there’ll be troops to shoot you, the figure with arm uplifted to knock you back, so keep your head down, encourage diligence, quit vicious habits and maybe they’ll leave you alone. This philosophy Hardy absorbed as a child and never really abandoned.
After work in an architect’s office in London, Hardy at the age of 27 turned to literature and wrote a novel he called The Poor Man and the Lady. In his autobiography he says it was a socialist novel. He sent it to Macmillans the publishers who rejected it. A letter from Alexander Macmillan told him, that the attacks it contained on middle-class heartlessness towards the working classes were intolerably overdone. Hardy then sent the book to the publishers Chapman and Hall and it was rejected again. George Meredith, who returned the manuscript, told him that he must avoid being revolutionary at the start of his career or the reviewers would annihilate him. Once again, then, Hardy was faced with the figure with arm uplifted saying “No!”, and this time he gave in. He burnt the manuscript of The Poor Man and the Lady and wrote instead the kind of novel that Meredith cynically urged – a book with, in Meredith’s phrase, a more purely artistic purpose. The result, Desperate Remedies, was published in 1871 and is one of the worst novels in the English language.
In the next twenty years Hardy wrote another dozen novels, steadily building up his own following amongst the reading public. He became a saleable commodity and so publishers were prepared to accept, with certain cuts and reservations, the kind of novel he really wanted to write rather than the high-minded rubbish suggested by Meredith and enjoyed by reviewers. So it was that in 1895 he came to publish his last novel, Jude the Obscure.
Into the character of Jude Hardy poured all the hopes and frustrations of a lifetime. Jude like Hardy is a stonemason, a builder. Like Hardy he dreams of a university education but is “elbowed off the pavement by the millionaires’ sons”. Like Hardy his search for emotional fulfilment ends in the trap of a failed marriage. Hardy through the figure of Jude presents a whole series of human hopes – hopes for meaningful work, for a decent education, for liberated sexuality – and shows them all systematically denied by Victorian narrowness and commercialism. Jude ends defeated and dies of consumption. As he’s laid out for burial, crowds outside celebrate the honorary degrees awarded to “the Duke of Hamptonshire and a lot more illustrious gents of that sort”.
A few people – Havelock Ellis for example – liked the book and said so, and thousands bought it and were moved. But the ruling classes in general responded to this powerful protest with outrage. Bishop How of Wakefield persuaded the local library to ban the book and publicly burnt a copy – “probably in his despair at not being able to burn me”, Hardy wryly commented. In January 1896 Mrs Oliphant, writing in Blackwood’s, a leading journal of Tory opinion, thought the book was “disgusting” and “coarsely indecent”, full of “grossness, indecency and horror”.
Hardy was hurt by this. Four years earlier, after a bitter attack on him in the liberal Saturday Review, he had written in a notebook: “If this sort of thing continues, no more novel-writing for me. A man must be a fool to deliberately stand up to be shot at.” In 1830 John Hardy from Wiltshire stood up in protest and was literally shot down. In 1895 Thomas Hardy from Dorset stood up in protest and was metaphorically shot down. He retired into a thirty year career as a poet, a career that began with radical hopes, hopes that he could say more in verse and get away with it, but these hopes never materialised.
We can see what happened to Hardy the poet if we look at one of his beet known poems. It’s called The Convergence of the Twain: Lines on the loss of the Titanic and it was first printed in the programme of a charity concert in aid of the Titanic Disaster Fund given at Covent Garden on May 14, 1912. Here’s the poem in full. It opens with a vision of the liner, sunk after hitting an iceberg and lying on the bottom of the Atlantic:



I
                           In a solitude of the sea
                           Deep from human vanity,
And the Pride of Life that planned her, stilly couches she.




II
                           Steel chambers, late the pyres
                           Of her salamandrine fires,
Cold currents thrid, and turn to rhythmic tidal lyres.




III
                           Over the mirrors meant
                           To glass the opulent
The sea-worm crawls – grotesque, slimed, dumb, indifferent.




IV
                           Jewels in joy designed
                           To ravish the sensuous mind
Lie lightless, all their sparkles bleared and black and blind.




V
                           Dim moon-eyed fishes near
                           Gaze at the gilded gear
And query: “What does this vaingloriousness down here?”




VI
                           Well: while was fashioning
                           This creature of cleaving wing,
The Immanent Will that stirs and urges everything




VII
                           Prepared a sinister mate
                           For her – so gaily great –
A Shape of Ice, for the time far and dissociate.




VIII
                           And as the smart ship grew
                           In stature, grace and hue,
In shadowy silent distance grew the Iceberg too.




IX
                           Alien they seemed to be:
                           No mortal eye could see
The intimate welding of their later history,




X
                           Or sign that they were bent
                           By paths coincident
On being anon twin halves of one august event.




XI
                           Till the Spinner of the Years
                           Said “Now!” And each one hears,
And consummation comes, and jars two hemispheres.



We know quite a lot about the sinking of the Titanic. We know, for example, that 1,513 lives were lost when it went down. We know that there were lifeboats for first-class passengers only, so that while 63 per cent of them were saved, 75 per cent of the third-class passengers died.
Turn to Hardy’s poem in the light of those facts and the limitations of stoic pessimism are at once clear. True, there’s a vague radical unease about the vaingloriousness and opulence of it all, but in the end the fault seems to lie with the Immanent Will and the Spinner of the Years, whoever they might be. We know they had nothing to do with it. The Titanic sank because of commercial greed in the pursuit of the Blue Riband – the ship was travelling too fast and too far north. It sank with heavy losses because third-class lifeboats were left out to boost profits. But blame it all on the Spinner of the Years and any real analysis of the event is paralysed. Others made that analysis, learnt from it and got the laws changed. They have prevented the same sort of disaster happening again because they recognised that its origins lay in human decisions which could and must be altered, But say the Immanent Will did it and all you can do is fall on your knees and hope He (She? It?) doesn’t do it again, please.
You may say in Hardy’s defence that this is a 33-line poem, not a 4-volume Government report on the disaster. Okay. Sit down yourself and write a 33-line poem on, say, the Isle Of Man Summerland fire in 1973 or the Flixborougb factory explosion in 1974. What are you going to talk about? On the one hand, are you for example going to say anything about cost cutting on safety in the interests of higher productivity and profits? Are you going to note small details like the fact, that the architects who were responsible for the use of the lethal acrylic sheeting at Summerland got off scot free at the enquiry? Are you at least going to mention that lots of people were killed and you’re sad and angry about it? If you write that sort of poem you just might move some readers and you might help them towards understanding and mastering their lives and the conditions that govern them.
Or, on the other hand, are you going to slide past the very mention of dead bodies and muse instead about the disappearance of a fun palace or a factory? Are you going to blame it all on Fate or Chance and claim that “no mortal eye could see” that this might happen? Are you going to betray the fact that you’re not really looking at what went on with lots of tired verbiage about “paths coincident”, “salamandrine fires” and “august event”? If you write that sort of poem it stands a good chance of being printed, like Hardy’s, in the programme of a charity concert organised for the victims dependents by the people who killed them. Write lots more poems like that and, like Hardy, you too in your old age might get the Order of Merit, be offered a knighthood and have the Prince of Wales drop in for tea.
In short there’s nothing a port-sodden blimp loves more than a good old stoic pessimist. He puts his heed down, takes what’s coming to him and doesn’t complain. If the Tories say what you need is two million unemployed or the Labour Party claims that a cut in your standard of living will do instead, then so be it, you take it’ bravely and encourage others to do the same. Your pessimism and stoicism mean you can do nothing else. What began, as we saw earlier, as a sort of survival strategy in 1840s Dorset in the wake of terrible defeats had become for Hardy by the twentieth century a lame belief, ruling out all action for change or self-defence.
Thomas flardy did act on occasion, like John Hardy before him, but both were shot down because either they were politically inarticulate or because they acted alone. The way out of this bind is to act together and act politically armed. Hardy moved in that direction with his lost novel The Poor Man and the Lady, and moved towards it again in Jude the Obscure with its sense of the social, collective solutions to the problems that break individuals like Jude and his hopes for education. But in the end he backed away and in old age was left with the ironic consolations of honorary degrees from the universities of Aberdeen, Cambridge, Oxford, St.Andrew’s and Bristol.
Hardy was no fool. He knew and wrote in Jude that capitalist society was no way for human beings to live. Great writers and great contemporaries of Hardy like William Morris and Robert Tressell came to the same conclusion. So did millions of other men and women around the world. It drove them to work for the socialist alternative. Hardy didn’t take this step. Cut off from any sense of an alternative, he was left to face the future with deep pessimism. Cut off from any sense of alternatives, it’s about all you’ve got. Switch on that TV discussion and watch the pundits snuffling gloomily over their brandies and see for yourself.
 
Top of the page

Last updated on 14 March 2010



Paul O'Flinn: Them and Us in Literature (11. Coppers' Truncheons and Happy Endings)


O’Flinn Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Them and Us

Paul O’Flinn
Them and Us in Literature

11. Coppers’ Truncheons and Happy Endings

A few years ago my kids brought a couple of books home from the library and I settled down to read to them. The first one was about a sad donkey – sad because he had long funny ears. They kept catching on barbed wire, tripping him up, getting in his breakfast and generally making the rest of the donkeys bray with laughter. The donkey tried everything: tying them in a knot, turning them inside out, visiting a quack vet, but it was no use. Tears rolled down his face. Then one day along came a lady donkey who just adored long ears. She fell in love with the sad donkey, cheered him up, and soon they were married and lived happily ever after.
The second story was about a goldfish. He was browned off too – bored out of his mind in a garden pond swimming round the same cement gnome every day. So one night he popped into the overflow pipe, down the drain and out to sea in search of adventure. His mum and dad were against it and preferred to stay at home watching Coronation St. The sea turned out a disaster: cold, dark salty and full of miserable crabs. Tears rolled down .the goldfish’s face. Then one day he found himself swimming past the end of a familiar drain. Up he went, along the overflow pipe and pop! back into the old familiar little pond. Mum and Dad were overjoyed, the goldfish never grumbled about boredom again and lived happily ever after.
Two different stories and harmless slabs of plastic in themselves, but it’s amazing when you stop and listen how often the same pattern and the same message get repeated. Your world and your position in it might seem dismal but they’re as good as you’ll get so there’s no point in doing anything about it. If you do try and improve it then either, like the donkey, you’re wasting your time or, like the goldfish, you’ll only make matters worse. So leave things as they are, be grateful for what you’ve got, do as you’re told, and in the end you’ll learn to love it all. P.S. Support your local moderate candidates.
Bosses’ propaganda comes in all shapes and sizes. You don’t have to have property developers as heroes and anarcho-syndicalist shop stewards with strong Trotskyite tendencies as villains to get your point across. Often what’s crucial is not who the characters are – who is hero and who is villain, though this may be relevant. More important are the values that the novel or film or TV show acts out or condemns, and how those values relate to our society and the various sections and classes within it.
In short, as Orwell once pointed out, all art is propaganda. He later expanded the remark a bit: “Every artist is a propagandist in the sense that he is trying, directly or indirectly, to impose a vision of life that seems to him desirable.” [1] It’s impossible to disagree with this. You can’t string two phrases together without your values beginning to come into play. The fact that I’m writing these, particular words and not other ones is the result of all sorts of value judgements going on in the back of my head, selecting, rejecting, ordering, shaping. And this remains true whether you’re writing a poem about Spring or a pamphlet about workers’ control.
If values penetrate what we read and see in this way, then it’s worth stopping to think for a minute about some of the forms those values take. Once you can recognise them, half the battle is won, because you’ve got your own built-in crap detector, able to spot and filter out some of the traditional devices of social control. Here, let’s take just two of the most widespread forms: propaganda directed at children and the propaganda value of happy endings.
Propaganda for children is usually pretty crude. If you’ve forgotten how crude, spend five minutes listening to the mind-smashing, down-on-your-knees religious drivel that gets talked at the average school assembly and you’ll soon remember. Even the games children play are often sabotaged by the prejudices of their elders. So, for example, a well researched television play a couple of years ago called The Death of Adolf Hitler featured Dr Goebbels’s children playing a “Snakes and Ladders” type of game called Get the Jews. The seven year old winner “got” 45,000, to Eva Braun’s applause. Trust the Nazis to poison even the kids’ minds. And yet most of us were brought up on Cowboys and Indians. There’s no getting round the fact that the game re-enacts and celebrates the genocide that was the basis of the American empire. Of course it’s a fantastic game for children in terms of its form: it’s exciting, it’s full of movement, it lets them in imagination remake themselves and their world and so on. But the problem is the content of the game. It’s possible to have others with these same qualities, but the one capitalism overwhelmingly offers and reinforces with comics and films is reducing lots of brown people to pulp or herding them in concentration camps called reservations.
When Walt Disney Inc is not busy making money in this way out of the roots of American imperialism it’s busy cultivating its branches. Disney Landia, a comic published in Chile seven months after the Fascist coup of September 1973, pictures helpless kittens attacked by two vultures called Hegel and Marx. As a farmer drives them off with a shotgun, Jiminy Cricket comments with delight: “Ha! Firearms are the only things these bloody birds are afraid of.” [2] You’re liable to be sent to prison if you show children pictures of people making love. Show them pictures of people making mincemeat of Commies and Redskins and you’re liable to make a lot of money.
What about happy endings? It was argued earlier that the effect of tragedy is subversive in so far as it presents to us characters we learn to admire and then shows them being nailed up, something that would not happen if their society were just. The device of the happy ending reverses this pattern. We are shown characters with all sorts of problems, but in the end, like the donkey we started with, they manage to find a way around them and live happily ever after. If all problems are surmountable with a bit of luck and effort then clearly no radical changes are necessary.
This sort of structure is very common in the Victorian novel. For example Dickens in Hard Times is very perceptive about some of the human mutilations that nineteenth century capitalism was responsible for. But in the end Dickens, like all good liberals, backs away from the full implications of his own criticisms. Hence organisations like trade unions that try to defend people from those mutilations are presented as the worthless tools of an outside agitator called Slackbridge. A bit of crude juggling and Dickens conjures up a last page soggy not just with pie in the sky but rather with soggy pie for all, right here and now:
But, happy Sissy’s happy children loving her; all children loving her; she, grown learned in childish lore; thinking no innocent and pretty fancy ever to be despised; trying hard to know her humbler fellow-creatures, and to beautify their lives of machinery and reality with those imaginative graces and delights, without which the heart of infancy will wither up, the sturdiest physical manhood will be morally stark death, and the plainest national prosperity figures can show, will be the Writing on the Wall, – she holding this as part of no fantastic vow, or bond, or brotherhood, or sisterhood, or pledge, or covenant, or fancy dress, or fancy fair; but simply as a duty to be done, – did Louisa see these things of herself? These things were to be.
There’s an obvious connection in these two curious sentences between the sheer dishonesty – part wishful thinking, part misrepresentation – of what’s being said and the fantastically crabbed, convoluted, lopsided, twisting and roundabout way it’s being said.
George Bernard Shaw may often have been a fool in his old age but this shouldn’t be allowed to detract from the sharpness of his early plays. In his very first, Widowers’ Houses, written in 1892, he takes a hatchet to the rotten device of the happy ending. Dr Trench the hero wants to marry Sartorius’s daughter Blanche but is horrified to find that the family’s money comes from the extortionate rents of slum tenants. However it’s soon revealed that his own handsome private income comes in fact from interest on a mortgage he holds on some of Sartorius’s slum properties. Sartorius milks his tenants in order to keep up with the monthly payments due to Dr Trench. Collapse of Trench’s stout liberal scruples, which by the end have declined to a few cynical observations as he exits to marriage and happiness ever after with Blanche.
In Victorian novel after Victorian novel – and indeed later in Hollywood film after Hollywood film – the heroine is swept off by the hero in the closing moments to what Orwell once called “a sort of radiant idleness” – independent means, roses round the cottage door and on the children’s cheeks, and a loyal working-class lunatic in the background to cook the meals, wash the floors and provide comic relief when she drops her aitches or the spoons. Shaw is one of the first to ask rude questions about the economic basis of this fairy tale and to point out that it doesn’t happen in a social vacuum. If some people in the end are able to put their feet up for the rest of their lives it’s because some people elsewhere are being screwed to generate the cash.
It’s necessary to be careful at this point or else you can end up arguing that for art to be progressive it has to be bloody miserable, and that anything that gives us half a smile is part of a ruling class plot to convince us that we live in the best of all possible worlds. But it certainly is true that when serious artists have tried to describe a state of genuine happiness – genuine happiness as opposed to limp little bourgeois dreams of sitting about twiddling your thumbs and watching the roses and the savings account grow – they have been forced to present that happiness existing in spite of or outside their particular world.
Shakespeare, for example, knew that in his world, as in King Lear, people tended to get their eyeballs trodden on, so that when he wants his characters to enjoy themselves, to stretch their minds and their emotions and their potentials to the limits, he shifts them into a deliberately unreal place – an enchanted wood in Midsummer Night’s Dream, a Bohemian harvest festival in The Winter’s Tale, a magic island in The Tempest. In this last play the hero Prospero literally waves a magic wand and freezes for the moment all the life-denying forces in violently emerging capitalist society. So it is that his daughter Miranda is able to gaze around in wonder and exclaim:



How many goodly creatures are there here!
How beauteous mankind is! O brave new world,
That has such people in it!



In the twentieth century, after another four hundred years of human, social and technical development, it’s central to the socialist case that you don’t need a magic wand any more to catch a glimpse of a brave new world. For the first time it’s something that we really can make together. So we need to see clearly that novels and films that nihilistically deny that possibility or that suggest that life’s better under the Conservatives and so doesn’t need tinkering with are the soft ideological equivalent of the policeman’s truncheon – weapons for keeping people in their places and preserving things as they are.

Notes
1. Collected Essays, Journalism and Letters, Vol.ii, p.41.
2. Reprinted in Chile Fights, London June-July 1974.
 
Top of the page

Last updated on 14 March 2010



aul O'Flinn: Them and Us in Literature (2. 'Animal Farm', '1984' and Socialist Revolution)


O’Flinn Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Them and Us

Paul O’Flinn
Them and Us in Literature

2. Animal Farm, 1984 and Socialist Revolution

“Orwell? Yeah, we read a couple of his books at school. Really great. He’s the bloke who showed that revolution couldn’t work – all it means is going round in circles, swopping one lot of bosses for another – you know: ‘Big Brother’s watching you’. Because you can’t change human nature, you see. There’ll always be those on top and the mugs underneath, always has been and always will be: ‘All animals are equal but some animals are more equal than others’.”
Everyone’s come across this argument in various forms. Orwell’s phrases have dropped into everyday speech and everyday newspaper editorials to become, as Isaac Deutscher put it, “an ideological super weapon in the cold war. Keep your nose clean, pay your bills and when you hear some hairy half-wit going on about socialism, look up from your Daily Express and shout “1984!” at him. Soon shut the blighter up.
And yet Orwell claimed shortly after the publication of Animal Farm that he wrote “for democratic Socialism”; and shortly after the publication of 1984 he insisted: “My recent novel is NOT intended as an attack on Socialism ...” [1]
So what are we to make of this socialist who for the past generation has supplied the Right with a whole armoury of blunt instruments with which to attack the Left? More important, what’s useful in Orwell’s ideas and Orwell’s warnings for the present generation of socialists?
One way of starting to answer these questions is to have a look at some dates:



1903:


Orwell born.




1926:


General Strike defeated.




1927:


September: Orwell decides to resign front the Indian Imperial Police.





October: Trotsky expelled from the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.




1929:


Wall Street crash, unemployment starts to soar.




1936:


July: Spanish Civil War begins.





December: Orwell to Spain – enlists in the militia of the semi-Trotskyist POUM (Partido Obrero de Unificacion Marxista).




1937:


March: Road to Wigan Pier published.





June: POUM declared illegal by the Spanish Government – Orwell flees from Communist-organised purge in Barcelona.




1939-1945:


Second World War.




1945:


Animal Farm published.




1947:


Orwell’s tuberculosis diagnosed.




1949:


1984 published.




1950:


Orwell dies.




1953:


Stalin dies.



Briefly the point here is that, after police work in Burma, Orwell coincidentally shifted to the Left and decided to leave the police just a few weeks before Trotsky’s expulsion from the Communist Party – an expulsion that marks a decisive tightening of Stalin’s hold on what had been the crucial revolutionary movement. And then, a generation later, Orwell died three years before Stalin. In other words his life as a socialist matches almost exactly the era of Stalinist domination and frustration of revolutionary hopes. In Barcelona he had vivid and embittering personal experience of that domination and frustration. His work therefore stands as a direct reflection of that generation of despair.
More than that; his life as a socialist also coincides almost exactly with an era of defeat for the British working-class movement. The loss of the General Strike in 1926 was deeply demoralizing: trade-union membership, over eight million in the years before 1926, was nearly halved in the years that followed and didn’t recover properly till the eve of Orwell’s death. The number of working days spent on strike in the nineteen thirties and forties was often as low as ten per cent of the peak in the early twenties. Mass unemployment in the thirties was a further blow, and the apathy and depression that this battering induced in sections of the working class is sharply recorded by Orwell in The Road to Wigan Pier.
In short what we have here is not St. George who taught us abiding moral truths about Human Nature and Revolution as it was in the beginning, is now and ever shall be, but rather a writer theorising gloomily out of the centre of a period of combined and interconnected Stalinist stranglehold and broken working-class militancy. All that is now changed. The Stalinist monopoly is broken and not many would accuse, say, the miners of being insufficiently militant. What then is left of Orwell’s analysis?
However, the problem that remains with Animal Farm is that it’s a fable and can therefore be directed at any revolution. It presents itself not as a direct attack on Stalinism but rather as a parable about the necessary failure of revolutions. This is indeed how a generation since 1945 have been encouraged to read it. But this is far from Orwell’s intentions as spelled out by him in the Preface to the Ukrainian edition of Animal Farm:
Indeed, in my opinion, nothing has contributed so much to the corruption of the original idea of Socialism as the belief that Russia is a Socialist country and that every act of its rulers must be excused, if not imitated.
And so for the past ten years I have been convinced that the destruction of the Soviet myth was essential if we wanted a revival of the Socialist movement. [2]
The publishers who turned down Animal Farm were quite clear that what they were being offered was an attack not on socialism or on revolution but on Stalinism. Victor Gollancz remarked: “We couldn’t have published it then. Those people (the Russians) were fighting for us and had just saved our necks at Stalingrad.” Jonathan Cape also rejected Animal Farm, telling Orwell that after consulting the Ministry of Information, he realised that:
it might be regarded as something which it was highly ill-advised to publish at the present time. If the fable were addressed generally to dictators and dictatorships at large then publication would be all right, but the fable does follow, as I now see, so completely the progress of the Russian Soviets and their two dictators, that it can apply only to Russia, to the exclusion of the other dictatorships. [3]
The Soviet Union was then an ally, so direct assaults on Stalinism were not on. Orwell did it indirectly, through a thinly disguised fable. Indeed he had to – it was either that or no publication. Even so four publishers still refused to handle it before Secker and Warburg finally agreed to take it.
And then the world changed. The Second World War ended in 1945, the Cold War began and by 1946 Animal Farm was a bestseller. The capitalist party line had taken one of its frequent U-turns and Orwell from being “highly ill-advised” and poor found himself U.S. Book of the Month Club choice and rich. And thus an attack on Stalinism, mounted in a veiled way because of historical circumstances, becomes, because of a sharp shift in those circumstances, an apparent attack on the whole notion of revolutionary change.
 
Top of the page
 
Two important points about 1984. The first is that it projects uninterruptedly into the future all the negative tendencies Orwell saw around him in the nineteen forties. Winston Smith’s London is very much forties London, blitzed, dirty and shortage-riddled, after forty more years of the same only more so. All the decaying freedom and growing intrusions of the war and the post-war years are seized on and magnified in the novel. We need to argue against this version of the future that history doesn’t work that way, with graphs moving ever upward or ever downward, with tendencies unfolding unchallenged. History is a dialectical process.
So what does that mean? Take a simple recent example. In 1971 no dockers went to prison but in that year the Conservative government passed a law limiting trade-union rights so that in 1972 five dockers landed in Pentonville for organizing a picket. Projecting this trend we might say that by 1975 picketing would be extinct, 413 dockers would be in prison and holding a union card would be on the way to being a capital offence. In fact this is not so: the Industrial Relations Act has gone and, once again, no dockers are in prison. Why? Because several hundred thousand people went on strike and got the dockers out in less than a week. What happened was that men and women saw a trend developing that threatened them and their organizations and so acted decisively to halt it. Action of this kind is not allowed for in 1984. The proles, after forty more passive years, are an apathetic, ignorant lump. They retain a certain potentially subversive life but for the most part they are, like Boxer in Animal Farm, hard working, thick and manipulated into slavery with laughable ease. But engineers know and have shown, dockers know and have shown, miners know and have shown, that such a picture is false.
The truth is that governments can design all sorts of sophisticated halters and handcuffs, can get them approved by Parliament and issued to judges and policemen. But if people don”t like wearing them they can and do break them soon as they are clapped on.
Orwell, then, is pessimistic about the possibility of direct working-class action to preserve and extend freedom. Part of the reason for this is that he lived in and so drew his experience from a period with the unique and shattering limitations outlined at the start of this chapter. But there’s more to it than that, and this is the second important point out 1984: it is that by the time he came to write it Orwell as a socialist with almost no contact with the socialist or working-class movement. Such a man is very vulnerable to the misconceptions that that kind of isolation can create.
There are various reasons for this isolation. In the thirties Orwell had been a member of the ILP (Independent Labour Party) but resigned shortly after the start of the Second World War when they took up a pacifist position. In 1943 he became literary editor of Tribune, the paper of the Labour Party left, and he remained a supporter of that group for the rest of his life. So we find him remarking in 1949: “If only I could become Nye’s (Aneurin Bevan’s) éminence grise we’d soon have this country on its feet.” It’s a curious and a giveaway thing for a socialist to say. Socialism, after all, is supposed to be about working-class on leading to full freedom, not the sort of cloak-and-dagger manoeuvres by a tiny elite that this remark suggests. But the point is, where in 1949 was the socialist party to stir up and grow out of that sort of mass activity? The answer is nowhere. The Communist Party remained Stalinist and, as such and by definition, part of the problem rather than its solution. The Labour Party as usual had run out of nerve and ideas and was drifting towards electoral defeat. Other left alternatives were then undeveloped.
Add to this the fact that Orwell was by that date dying of tuberculosis and the depressing picture is complete. Socialism in such a context becomes not a shared activity, sharpened at meetings, warmed at demonstrations, revised through conflicts, cheered by the occasional victory. Instead it becomes a lonely dwindling faith, challenged every time you open a newspaper, switch on the radio, go to the cinema or overhear what Orwell called the “constant bah-bahing” of those Tory voices passing to and fro in the private sanitoria where his tuberculosis took him. In such a context working-class action stops being something seen and tried with its possibilities realised and soberly estimated in day-to-day experience. It becomes a dim, half-forgotten doctrine overwhelmed by a sense of all the forces working against it. In such a context you write 1984.
In the very different context of the seventies do Animal Farm and 1984 have anything left to offer? Obviously they do. Orwell knew that the future was not inevitably socialist as Fabians used to believe. He knew with Engels that there’s a choice – socialism or barbarism. At a time when the working class seemed stalled and revolutionary organisations didn’t exist barbarism seemed likeliest, so he wrote to warn. It’s still a valid warning. Either we build the socialism that Orwell believed in or they build the 1984 that Orwell was afraid of.

Notes
1. See Collected Essays, Journalism and Letters of George Orwell, London 1968, Vol.I, p.5 and Vol.IV, p.502.
2. op. cit., Vol.III, p.405
3. Quoted in George Orwell, The Freedom of the Press, Times Literary Supplement, Sept. 15, 1972.
 
Top of the page

Last updated on 14 March 2010



Paul O'Flinn: Them and Us in Literature (9. William Shakespeare and More Original Sin)


O’Flinn Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Them and Us

Paul O’Flinn
Them and Us in Literature

9. William Shakespeare and More Original Sin

If you read one of Shakespeare’s tragedies at school, the odds are you were asked to spend a lot of time in class talking about what they call the hero’s tragic flaw – that fault in his character which brings about his downfall. The immaturity of Romeo, the procrastinationl of Hamlet, the jealousy of Othello, the ambition of Macbeth – these are the weaknesses, so the story goes, which in the end draw these people to their deaths. Interpretation of this kind is very common. There are two other things that need saying about it: it’s extremely reactionary and ii has nothing to do with Shakespeare. How has this irrelevant notion taken root and why is it clamped on most people’s minds as soon as they pick up Shakespeare’s work?
The idea of the tragic flaw has obvious religious appeal. A socialist poet once pointed out:



Religion never has you faltering
In the belief that you not they need altering.



In other words when the religious mind is confronted with a mess – especially the kind of mess we find at the end of Shakespearean tragedy with the stage covered with dead bodies – its natural reaction is not to look for structural causes but rather to beat us breast and cry: “Let us root out the evil in our own hearts!” In literary terms this means blaming the mess at the end of Shakespearean tragedy not on some sort of clash between the hero and his world but rather on the evil in the hero’s heart, his tragic flaw. Thus the notion of tragic flaw becomes a kind of literary equivalent of our old favourite, original sin.
Once you can get readers and audiences to behave like apprentice Grand Inquisitors sniffing round for a scent of the hero’s sin, lists of those sins are fairly easy to make. The literary critic Wilson Knight, for example, assures us that the something rotten in the state of Denmark is Hamlet himself. Schoolchildren all over the world have therefore been solemnly informed that Hamlet’s tragic flaw is indecision. The Ghost tells him to kill his stepfather but he can’t bring himself to act. Murdering when ordered to do so by an authoritative father figure is, it would appear, a quality we would like to see developed in all our young men, so Hamlet stands as a sort of glum moral warning about what happens when this quality is found wanting.
Critics make the same sort of maniacal nonsense of most of the rest of the tragedies. Othello’s tragic flaw? Jealousy, says F.R. Leavis. Macbeth’s? That’s an easy one: ambition, says A.C.Bradley. Antony’s? Sexual passion, says Derek Traversi. And so on.
To turn from this to the Marxist approach. What the Marxist tries to do is avoid lumbering the work with dogmatic categories like tragic flaw. Instead he attempts to make sense of it with analysis that is in the first place sociological. By this I mean that he tries to understand the work not in the light of someone’s bright – or highly slanted – idea but by placing the work in that actual society where it belongs and where it developed. He tries to see the work not through lenses designed by Bradley or Leavis but in the context of the moment when it first appeared.
Okay, that’s the theory, but what does it mean in practice? It means that in order to grasp what’s going on in a particular work we must first try to understand the particular situation in which the work was written. It’s convenient for educational institutions to split reality up into separate departments – English; Politics; Geography; Engineering; Basket Weaving and so on but the world doesn’t exist in convenient boxes. To understand any one object – like, for example a play by Shakespeare – we have to try and break these boxes down and see how the particular object relates to and grows out of its whole world.
About Shakespeare’s world we need to say three things, however briefly. First, he lived in an age of sharp transition when feudalism was finally falling apart – the Rising of the Northern Earls in 1569 when Shakespeare was 5 is normally described by historians as feudalism’s last bid for power – and in an age when the pre-conditions for capitalist society were being laid. Secondly, out of the decay of feudalism and the possibilities that opened up, there was an explosive growth of confidence in human abilities and in the capacities of the human mind that expressed itself in literature as the Elizabethan Renaissance. That literature is full of delight in men and women, in their qualities and liberated individualities. Hamlet’s famous lines “What a piece of work is a man! How noble in reason! how infinite in faculties!, in form and moving, how express and admirable! in action, how like an angel! in apprehension; how like a god! the beauty of the world! the paragon of animals!” could not have been imagined by the medieval mind, obsessed as it was by a sense of man’s fallen nature. Shakespeare’s three dozen plays with their armies of rich characters arc together an impressive celebration of human potential freed, or apparently beginning to be freed, by the struggles of sixteenth and seventeenth century history.
Thirdly, the theatre Shakespeare wrote for was a new, capitalist theatre. In other words it worked by charging people for admission and making a profit. Capitalism at first means an immense expansion of the possible. Before the 1570s dramatic performances were infrequent, usually put on for a small elite in one of the great houses. The dramatist was dependent for his livelihood on pleasing aristocratic patrons – which often meant producing what Orwell calls “revolting flatteries”. With the building of commercial theatres a dozen or so years before Shakespeare started his career, plays could now be aimed at a much wider public – at the penny-a-timers in the pit as well as at the seated gentry. This meant new prospects, much wider horizons, and was another liberating force.
What does all this mean for Shakespeare’s tragedies? First, it means massive, highly individualised characters, the first of their kind in literature. Into these characters Shakespeare projects contemporary dreams of total self-realisation. His characters exploit the possibilities that the newly glimpsed freedoms seem to offer. But tragedy in Shakespeare springs again and again from the clash between men and women awakened, men and women battling to fulfil themeelves, and Shakespeare’s sense, shaped by his times, of the very tiny room for genuine self-realisation that the world actually offers. Again and again Shakespearean tragedy agonises over this contradiction: the fragile beauty of Romeo and Juliet smothered by the feudal vendettas of Verona; the limitless mind of Hamlet clogged in the rotten state of Denmark; the noble Othello wrecked in a racist society, Antony and Cleopatra in a militarist one. [1]
Tragedy in Shakespeare therefore springs not from the hero’s flaw or sin but from his dislocation, his attempt to live in ways that his society suggests but does not yet accept. So, for example, Macbeth and his wife are desperate to climb a rung higher on the social ladder, a desire which capitalist society has since come to insist on as the motor of all human progress. But they do not live in a socially mobile world; theirs is a feudal one where you are born into a certain station and stay there. Out of that contradiction grows their tragedy.
Or take Romeo and Juliet. They went to choose their own marriage partners. This is now recognised as a basic human right. But they live in, a society which doesn’t recognise that right and which gives Juliet’s father the right to dump her in the lap of the highest bidder. Again, out of that dislocation comes the tragedy. It’s a sense of dislocation that was a common experience for Shakespeare and his contemporaries, living as they did with the muddle of feudalism gone senile and capitalism only half born. “If wee present a mingle-mangle,” wrote John Lyly in a much quoted passage, “our fault is to be excused, because the whole worlde is become an Hodge-podge.”
The point I’m trying to make will I think be clearer if we play a game. Imagine you’re writing a tragic drama about the life and death of Christ, based on the Bible story. Forget all the religious nonsense: you’re going to take him as the usual tragic hero, the impressive character who gets destroyed at the end.
What’s going to be the tragic flaw in your hero? It’d be easy to make a list. You could make him a naive idealist, like Romeo, unable to come to terms with the real world. Or you could suggest that he’s indecisive, like Hamlet, dithering about in the Garden of Gethsemane and missing the chance to save himself. Then again you could say he’s ambitious like Macbeth, with grandiose schemes for saving the world. Or, like Othello, he’s liable to violent outbursts of passion as when he takes a whip to the buyers and sellers in the Temple.
A play written and understood in these terms would have at least two results. First, the real crooks get off scot free. Christ gets nailed up because of his own weaknesses, not because of Judas, the Pharisees and the Roman authorities. Second, the story is castrated. If you see someone being crucified and conclude that it’s his own fault then you can shrug your shoulders, say sorry and get on with the gardening. But if, on the other hand, someone basically decent as getting nailed up then the effect on you, the beholder, is disturbing. If decent people are getting nailed up then clearly it’s not the best of all possible worlds you live in. “If it can happen to him then who’s safe? Maybe things need changing ...”
What’s important to learn from this game is that, once you accept the terms of a given question, you are trapped into giving certain answers. Only by challenging the question can you break out of the blinkers it carries with it. Buy the notion of tragic flaw and you see the plays in a distorted but convincing way. Hamlet dies because he procrastinates, you say, forgetting the real villains, the murderous Claudius, the spying Polonius, the corrupt state of Denmark. Othello dies because he’s jealous, you add, ignoring the plots of Iago, the prejudice of Brabantio, the racism of Venice.
It’s a crucial stage in education when you stop answering the questions your teachers set and start asking your own. If you accept their questions – for example, how are we going to save British capitalism? -~ you’re half way to accepting their answers wage restraint and unemployment. Only by rejecting their question which reflects their priorities and substituting your own can you start getting at the truth.
To conclude: tragedy is subversive. It undermines our sense of living in the best of all possible worlds by showing us good people getting screwed. Schools aren’t in business to teach subversive literature so they stand Shakespeare on his head. You can begin by putting him the right way up.

Note
1. This paragraph derives in part from Chapter IV of Christopher Caudwell’s Illusion and Reality.
 
Top of the page

Last updated on 14 March 2010



Paul O'Flinn: Them and Us in Literature (3. Forster and Personal Relationships)


O’Flinn Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Them and Us

Paul O’Flinn
Them and Us in Literature

3. Forster and Personal Relationships
or
She’s Leaving Home for a Room with a View

The Beatles’ Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band was one of the best pop LPs in the past ten years. Part of its success lay in the way it captured some of the most powerful notions lying around in our society. One idea in particular comes up in several lyrics. In A Little Help from My Friends there’s:



I just need somebody to love



and in Within You Without You there’s:



With our love – we could save the world if they only knew.
Try to realise it’s all within yourself.



Then there’s this in She’s Leaving Home:



She’s leaving home after living alone
For so many years. Bye, Bye
Friday morning at nine o’clock she is far away
Waiting to keep the appointment she made
Meeting a man from the motor trade.



So, agreed, the world’s in a mess, it needs saving. Even at home we lead separate, lonely lives. The way out of the mess is to find somebody to love. They may have dreary connections (don’t we all) – say in the motor trade – but get together and within yourselves you can hack out an area where you can live liveable lives. As Getting Better puts it:



I have to admit it’s getting better
It’s getting better since you’ve been mine.
Me used to be a angry young man
Me hiding me head in the sand
You gave me the word
I finally heard
I’m doing the best that I can.



Most people would agree with that. If all life was about was making profits for the people you work for all week, then any sane person would go crazy. It’s personal relationships and the happiness and the refuge they provide that hold a lot of people together. and stop them blowing their brains out. Without somebody to love, what’d be the point of it all?
One of the exciting things about the novels of E.M. Forster is the way he probes beyond this idea, one of the central beliefs in our society. He sets it up, tests it, sees how fat it stands up and works and sees where it begins to break down and fall apart.
In a talk broadcast in 1946, Forster noted that “my books emphasise the importance of personal relationships and the private life, for I believe in them.” This belief evolved and changed, however, reshaped by Forster’s own experiences. At first personal relationships are presented in his novels as the thing that makes life worth livingg. They’re the way we escape from a society gone dismal and absurd. But in his later work this view is revised and those relationships, though still prized, are seen not as a refuge from social pressures but rather as the first victims of such pressures. Part .of the way we realise that society has become vicious and needs changing is the way~ that it again and again aborts the efforts of people to relate normally and lovingly to one another. You can’t get out of soeiety and hide in personal relationships because those relationships are seen as precisely the point where we feel social controls and distortions at their sharpest.
But Forster was a long way from this discovery in his first novels. In them, the belief that we can somehow hide within ourselves and with our friends has no limits. Philip Herriton, the hero of Where Angels Fear to Tread (1905) insists: “Society is invincible – to a certain degree. But your real life is your own and nothing can touch it.” A Room with a View (1908) builds this notion right into its title. English society is mad. Lucy Honeychurch, the heroine, gets out of it by meeting not a man from the motor trade but a socialist, George Emerson. They elope to Italy and there they throw away middle-class inhibitions and blinkers and honeymoon in a room with a view – a view across the city of Florence, a view of life and its fullest possibilities.
In both of these novels and also in a third, Arctic Summer, which Forster began in 1911 but never finished, it’s Italy that’s the key. There, out in the sun and away from the dull suffocations of English Puritanism, people dare to come alive, dare to relate passionately to one another instead of just sniffing warily at each other. Two problems here. First, if personal relationships .are to carry the weight that Forster wants them to, he has to show them working in an English setting. And second, more practically, after 1922 it became difficult even for liberals to have illusions about the uniquely liberating nature of Italian sun and air with Mussolini installed in power.
As early as 1910 Forster tried to show personal relationships triumphing against an English setting. The novel’s called Howards End and it’s full of a sense of menace and submerged violence. “Life’s going to be melted down, all over the world,” concludes one of the characters. Against this prospect, personal relationships are placed as a refuge in the shape of a marriage between the liberal Margaret Schlegel and the conservative Henry Wilcox. But it doesn’t convince. Both are empty shells by the end. Margaret has dumped her earlier radicalism and hasn’t replaced it with anything. Henry is a broken-down businessman wearily arranging his will.
Then in 1913 at the age of 34 Forster’s world changed. He realisei that he was a homosexual. In that year tie had made several visits to Edward Carpenter’s communal farm near Sheffield. Carpenter was part mystic, part socialist, part sexual revolutionary. In 1896 the Labour Press had published his Love’s Coming of Age which included a veiled defence of homosexuality as well as an examination of the sexual exploitation of women. There’s a good brief account of his life and work in Sheila Rowbotham’s Hidden from History.
Anyway, on his second or third visit to Carpenter’s farm Forster’s homosexuality, suppressed till then, emerged. He wrote:
he (Carpenter) and his comrade George Merrill combined to make a profound impression on me and to touch a creative spring. George Merrill also touched my backside – gently and just above the buttocks. I believe he touched most people’s. The sensation was unusual and I still remember it, as I remember the position of a long vanished tooth. It was as much psychological as physical. It seemed to go straight through the small of my back into my ideas, without involving my thoughts. [1]
Forster’s dim, deep sense of frustration, which is there in Howards End and which blocked his attempts to finish new novels like Arctic Summer and A Passage to India, evaporated at once. He wrote the first draft of a new novel, Maurice, in three months.
In its final version then novel presents us with Maurice Hall and takes him through his awful, sexually repressive public school to Cambridge. There he has a mild affair with Clive Durham, a fellow student. Clive, as he puts it, becomes normal later, gets married and runs for Parliament as a Tory. Alone and depressed, Maurice goes to his doctor and then a psychiatrist, looking for a cure. But his depression vanishes in a riotously physical relationship with Alec Scudder, a gamekeeper on Clive Durham’s estate. The novel ends with Maurice-’and Alec determined to live together, in spite of the enormous class difference between them, in spite of the world’s disapproval. Forster comments in his Terminal note to the book:
A happy ending was imperative. I shouldn’t have bothered to write otherwise. I was determined that in fiction anyway two men should fall in love and remain in it for the ever and ever that fiction allows, and in this sense Maurice and Alec still roam the greenwood ... If it ended unhappily, with a lad dangling from a noose or with a suicide pact, all would be well, for there is no pornography or seduction of minors. But the lovers get away unpunished and consequently recommend crime ... the only penalty society exacts is an exile they gladly embrace.
To “roam the greenwood” is, of course, not on as a possibility in twentieth century Britain outside the fantasy world of adverts for lavatory paper, and the unconvincing- ness of the phrase points to the book’s weakness. If Maurice and Alec had set up in a flat together in 1913, the landlady would have been round to the police five minutes after she’d found out what they were up to and that would have been that. Maurice then is not so much a novel about the real world as a necessary psychological release for Forster.
At this point, at the very moment when he begins to know himself properly, Forster’s career as a novelist more or less stops. Maurice, he felt, couldn’t possibly be published “until my death and England’s”. Forster died in 1970 and Maurice came out in 1971. Between 1913 and 1970 he published only one novel, A Passage to India in 1924, and that, as we’ve seen, was started in 1912. In 1964 he wrote sadly in his diary: “I should have been a more famous writer if I had written or rather published more, but sex has prevented the latter.” Forster, in short, joins a whole series of great writers of his era – men like Hardy, Wilde, Shaw, Joyce and D.H. Lawrence – whose experience shows the hollowness of pieties about British free speech. Each in different ways collided with the fact that you are free to say anything you like as long as it upsets nobody important. Say much more and they’ll try to shut you up.
As a homosexual, Forster was clearly forced to re-examine his attitude towards personal relationships. A naturally shy man, he says little about this directly. But the fact is that in his early novels Forster presents personal relationships as a hideout from an oppressive society; the later, homosexual Forster realised that relationships are the first target of such a society. Relationships with other people are, after all, the way we experience society, the way we live in it and have contact with it, and it is of course on the homosexual relationship that social pressures bear heaviest, in the shape of moral disgust, empty-headed jokes, explosive disapproval, active discrimination and so on. A homosexual is forced to see that relationships are not a way out of a mad world but are instead the links that bind us into the values and tensions of that world.
Armed with this radical realisation, Forster was able to complete A Passage to India and able to make it a great novel. It’s set in India where he spent several months and one of its major themes is the frustrated efforts of Aziz, an Indian doctor, and Fielding, an English teacher, to build a friendship. Both are men of sensitivity and goodwill but again and again their attempts to relate to each other are fractured by the stresses in Indian society, split as it is by imperialism, class, caste, religion and so on. Forster’s ability to moye from a grasp of an entire social structure to an investigation of what that structure means down at the personal, one-to-one level is nowhere better seen than in the famous last paragraphs of the novel. Aziz shouts at Fielding as the pair are out riding:
“Down with the English anyhow. That’s certain. Clear out, you fellows, double quick, I say. We may hate one another, but we hate you most. If I don’t make you go, Ahmed will, Karim will, if it’s fifty five-hundred years we shall get rid of you, yes, we shall drive every blasted Englishman into the sea, and then” – he rode against him furiously – “and then,” he concluded, half kissing him, “you and I shall be friends.”
“Why can’t we be friends now?” said the other, holding him affectionately. “It’s what I want. It’s what you want.”
But the horses didn’t want it – they swerved apart; the earth didn’t want it, sending up rocks through which riders must pass single file; the temples, the tank, the jail, the palace, the birds, the carrion, the Guest House, that came into view as they issued from the gap and saw Mau beneath: they didn’t want it, they said in their hundred voices, “No, not yet,” and the sky said, “No, not there.”
Individuals may want it, but what use is that when there are temples, tanks, jails, palaces and a thousand and one other moral or social or concrete barriers in the way? Break those down and then perhaps personal relationships between and within the sexes can grow and expand in ways that now we can scarcely imagine.
The young Forster had dreamed of escaping bourgeois values by finding a partner and fleeing together to a room with a view. The mature Forster realised that first you have to fight bourgeois society to build your room before you can go and live in it. But he never took the next, political step that this insight calls for. Instead he slid into the comforts that a private income and an Honorary Fellowship at King’s College, Cambridge, offered. In 1953 he was made a Companion of Honour. In the 1960s when it was suggested that it was time King’s College began to share its advantages a little by admitting a few extra students, he opposed the idea, telling The Sunday Times: “Whereas in business generally expansion may be beneficial, it is harmful w our business, which is to produce civilised people.”
In a snotty statement like that the easy retrewt from liberalism into self-defensive privilege is obviously complete, and really civilised people can have little but contempt for the attitudes and position of the old Forster. But nonetheless A Passage to India is still there, and it remains one of the best records of the mess capitalism makes of our relationships,

Notes
1. Terminal note, Maurice, London 1971, p.235.
 
Top of the page

Last updated on 14 March 2010



Paul O'Flinn: Them and Us in Literature (1. William Golding and Original Sin)


O’Flinn Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Them and Us

Paul O’Flinn
Them and Us in Literature

1. William Golding and Original Sin

William Golding’s Lord of the Flies is one of the most influential post-war novels. First published in 1954, it caught on in a couple of years and by the end of the decade Penguins could scarcely print it fast enough. It was made into a reasonably successful film and soon found itself required reading in school syllabuses all over the world. Lord of the Flies, it’s generally agreed, is a modern classic.
What’s it about? If it’s a while since you saw the film or read the book it’s worth recalling the story. It’s set in a future of atomic war with “the reds” as the enemy. A party of English private schoolboys, ages ranging from six to twelve, are being evacuated when their plane is shot down over the Pacific. They climb out of the crash to find themselves on a desert island paradise – coral reef, palm trees, lagoon, the lot The rest of the story is about how this paradise is turned into hell by the nature of the boys themselves. Discipline starts to break down. A few – Ralph, Piggy, Simon – try to maintain standards but the majority end up following the vicious Jack, end up, in Piggy’s phrase, like “a pack of painted niggers”. Simon is ritually slaughtered and Piggy is pushed off a cliff. Next there’s a savage manhunt: Jack and his mob chase Ralph across the island, reducing it to a blazing wreckage with fires designed to smoke Ralph out. But help is on the way. The flames have attracted the British Navy. The book closes with the boys in tears at the feet of a puzzled officer and a group of ratings who have landed to see what the trouble is.
So far so good. Golding has selected and isolated some middle-class private school boys, has put them under a microscope and has decided that they are on the whole a vicious and nasty lot. The rest of us are sorry to hear this about the middle classes and hope they soon get better because in small but occasionally worthy ways they have something to contribute.
Perhaps it’s not true, perhaps they aren’t such a loathsome and vicious mob as Golding makes out. And yet he’s uniquely well qualified to judge: four years at Oxford University, five years as an officer in the navy during the War, then twenty years as a grammar school teacher – more or less a lifetime spent almost exclusively in the company of middle-class males of all ages. Golding should know, and if he says they are a heap of crap, so be it. Certainly it’s a verdict that one has heard repeated from time to time by disgruntled foreigners, Marxists, members of the British working classes and the like.
But what’s this? James R. Baker claims that the purpose of Lord of the Flies “was to show that the perennially repeated fall of man is caused by defects inherent in his own nature”. [1] William Golding agrees, and says that the book’s aim is “to trace the defects of society back to the defects of human nature”. [2]
So here we are at the heart of the matter. It’s not just British middle-class males who are rubbish, it’s everybody, it’s human nature, says the novel and its author. That’s why our fall is perennially repeated’ and that’s why any of us would reduce a paradise to a flaming hell in a couple of hundred pages. In short, as Bernard S. Oldsey and Stanley Weintraub put it, “Golding writes ... with the eyes of someone who has seen the Empire crumble and witnessed twentieth century manifestations of Original Sin.” [3] Amen.
How do we respond to dismal pieties of this sort? Respond to them we must, because if Golding is right and if what destroys all attempts to create and maintain a decent society is “the darkness of man’s heart”, as the novel’s lst page has it, then we might as well pack away our socialist illusions, go home and pray.
Argument of this sort withers away once we stop for a moment and look at our actual situation. I wrote this book, a compositor set up the type, you are reading it. That means that the three of us are literate, something that probably wasn’t true of our ancestors, say, a hundred and fifty years ago. Then again, the fact that I have time and money to sit and write this book and you have money to buy it and time to read it means that the pair of us are not fully occupied in struggling for the bare necessities of food, clothing and shelter – again, something not true of many of our ancestors. Or take the mere fact that you and I and the compositor are alive and yet as children we all had measles, flu, chickenpox and so on. The odds are that in any generation before today’s one or more of us would have died from one of those childhood ailments. So in all sorts of small and not so small ways humanity has progressed, we have evolved and moved forward, we are not perennially condemned to trip up and remain stuck in the same groove.
Reactionaries, of course, can handle this line fairly easily. Ah yes, they explain patiently, agreed that the quantity of life has improved, that materially we’re better off. But what about Standards? What about the Quality of Life? As Golding himself puts it, boys nowadays “will have a far less brutish life than their nineteenth century ancestors, no doubt. They will believe less and fear less. But just as good money drives out bad so inferior culture drives out superior.” [4]
At the risk of sounding repetitive, the very fact that William Golding is able to raise the question of the decline of superior cultural standards, and that you and I and the compositor can eavesdrop on his complaint, is evidence of immense progress. Formerly; you’d have been illiterate, I’d have been a serf and the compositor would have been dead, so none of the three of us would have given a twopenny damn about declining cultural standards. Now we know it’s an issue, we’ve the leisure to contemplate that fact and can, if we agree with Golding’s analysis and have nothing important to do, busy ourselves about superior cultural standards (need for raising of).
But setting aside the whole question of whether superior culture has collapsed or not, there is nonetheless a clear contradiction in the unchanging human nature brigade’s claim that it has collapsed. Either human nature is fixed and unchanging, in which case it will tend broadly to reproduce itself and its conditions unchanged over generations, or human nature is ever-shifting, ever-evolving, in which case it will constantly be caught up in remaking, revolutionising, wrecking and rebuilding itself and its conditions, its culture and its habits. Human nature and the culture that nature generates either stays the same or it doesn’t. You can’t have it both ways. You can’t insist that human nature is always the same and muse on about the eternal darkness of man’s heart, and then with the next breath write articles for the Times Literary Supplement complaining about the way things are changing and getting worse.
The root of contradictions of this sort is the fact that the “human nature” argument is not so much truth as ideology – a conscious or unconscious attempt, that is, by a group or its spokesmen to interpret the world in terms that justify and sustain that group and its interests. What we are offered is not the real world but rather the illusions and fears of a class about that world. Hence the contradictions.
Take another example of contradictions of this sort in Lord of the Flies. Two children are playing on the island’s beach:
Roger stooped, picked up a stone, aimed, and threw it at Henry – threw it to miss. The stone, that token of preposterous time, bounced five yards to Henry’s right and fell in the water, Roger gathered a handful of stones and began to throw them. Yet there as a space round Henry, perhaps six yards in diameter, into which he dare not throw. Here, invisible yet strong, was the taboo of the old life. Round the squatting child was the protection of parents and school and policemen and the law. Roger’s arm was conditioned by a civilization that knew nothing of him and was in ruins. [5]
Left to ourselves, this paragraph suggests, we’d naturally throw bricks at each other. We don’t because there are various authority figures, thank Heavens, who tell us not to. Take them away and chaos follows, as the novel fully illustrates.
The problem here is that if it’s human nature to chuck bricks at other people, chucking bricks at other people would not be confined to Roger but is something that the various authority figures – parents, schoolteachers, policemen – would enjoy doing too. But authority figures it seems are by and large exempt from the dark, awful, obscene, violent, greedy promptings of nature that the rest of us are liable to.
Human nature, in short, is something that ordinary people have very badly – which is why we need tough laws about strikes and why a spell of discipline in the Forces would do them all a power of good. Human nature, dark, awful, obscene, violent and greedy, is however not something that, say, Margaret Thatcher, Sir Alec Douglas Home, the Queen Mother and your friendly neighbourhood bobby have at all, and you can be thrown out of Conservative Association meetings for suggesting otherwise.
A last example from this sad but in important ways significant book. One aspect of “the darkness of man’s heart” that Golding presents is child beating. Jack’s first action in power is described by his companion, Robert:
“He’s going to beat Wilfred.”
“What for?”
Robert shook his head doubtfully.
“I don’t know. He didn’t say. He got angry and made us tie Wilfred up. He’s been”– he giggled excitedly – “he’s been tied for hours, waiting –” [6]
Beating little boys’ bottoms and deriving a furtive sexual pleasure from the prospect (note that Robert “giggled excitedly”) has absolutely nothing to do with human nature but has a lot to do with the morbid pressures generated by the English education system. It’s a practice that’s unknown in many other cultures. Take, for example, the Cheyenne Indians of the North American High Plains and you’ll’ find no child beating whatsoever. This is not because of some superior moral quality in the Cheyennes but because, in a tiny tribe in a hostile environment, children are greatly loved and valued as insurance for the future and it therefore doesn’t occur to people to hit them.
Views about hitting people in our own ctilture are a curious muddle. Thus a glance at the papers will show you that it’s regarded as very wrong to beat up babies.
BATTERED BABIES TRAGEDY
NEW SHOCK PROBE SLAMS MONSTER PARENTS
>the Sun might confide one morning. And yet it seems that at a certain age – two? four? six? – suddenly a damn good hiding never did anyone any harm, while the Sun’s sports pages will probably tell you that a stiff birching would soon sort out the soccer hooligans. And then apparently at a later age – twenty? twenty five? thirty? – it’s no longer possible to pass messages through the buttocks to the conscience, so that you never see editorial writers calling for a sound thrashing for older delinquents like Lord Lambton and Richard Nixon.
Enough of the contradictions in the flagellation fantasies of British journalists. The point, to get back to Lord of the Flies, is that here as elsewhere what is presented as eternal, as a part of human nature, is in fact only temporary, a feature of the customs and beliefs of our own dearly beloved ruling classes. These customs and beliefs, as Golding magnificently portrays, are in important ways brutal, anti-life, dehumanising and degrading. The response of Golding and his fans is to fall on their knees before the everlasting horror of Man’s Original Sin. We reject extreme solutions of this sort. Our response is much more moderate and sensible. We become revolutionary socialists.

Notes
1. William Golding: a Critical Study, New York 1965, p.62.
2. Quoted by E.L.Epstein, Notes on Lord of the Flies, in Lord of the Flies, New York 1959, p.250.
3. The Art of William Golding, Bloomington 1968, p.38.
4. On the Crest of the Wave, Times Literary Supplement, June 17, 1960.
5. Lord of the Flies, Penguin 1960, p.59.
6. Ibid., p.151.
 
Top of the page

Last updated on 14 March 2010



Paul O'Flinn: Them and Us in Literature (10. Capitalism, Competition and King Lear)


O’Flinn Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Them and Us

Paul O’Flinn
Them and Us in Literature

10. Capitalism, Competition and King Lear

Competition, they tell us, makes the world go round. It’s the reason for the appearance of most things from better mousetraps to longer long jumpers. Its presence is the basis of a free society, its absence is why the National Coal Board makes a loss. As long as we each spend our time trying to knock lumps off one another then, apparently, a great civilisation is assured. So beaver about looking after yourself, tread on anyone who gets in the way and we’ll soon put the Great back into Britain. The need for greater efficiency and higher profitability means that those who compete well must be rewarded and those who fail can go and hang themselves. In 1967 Reginald Maudling, the Tory politician who later was to become a world famous failure himself, put this whole argument in terms that may be taken as typical:
We must constantly encourage competition not simply because it is the best safeguard for the consumer but because if competition dies away so the spirit of pride and endeavour will die with it. Then we must change the tax system which at present bears so heavily upon success, particularly individual success ...
Finally, there must be penalties too, because the spirit, we require to see will not be fully forthcoming unless we ally a proper regard for success with a proper acceptance of the consequences of failure. [1]
Competition, in short, means rewards for the rich, penalties for the rest and a better tomorrow for all.
Reginald Maudling, of course, is a fool whereas William Shakespeare was not, so that when Shakespeare came to write a play about a competitive society he saw such a society as tragic. The play’s called King Lear, and since cant about competition shows little sign of withering away it’s a play that’s well worth a look.
Lear’s story was several hundred years old by the time Shakespeare took it up – a simple, well-known folk tale. In its earliest versions it told of a king who asks his three daughters how much they love him. The two older girls flatter him with flowery declarations, the youngest says simply that she loves him as meat loves salt. Furious, the king drives her away but later comes to learn the value of salt and is reconciled to her.
Shakespeare takes hold of this thin material, and alters and expands it to make. it convey his ideas fully. First he joins it with a story of a struggle between the Duke of Gloucester and his two sons, Edmund and Edgar. Hence the battles in the Lear family become not eccentric, the result of one old man’s whim, but rather one more sign of widespread social tension. Second and above all he changes the end of the story to make it tragic. Goneril, the oldest sister, stabs herself after poisoning her sister Regan. Cordelia, the youngest of the three girls, is hanged and Lear dies in despair. The reasons for these radical changes will emerge if we look at the play in a bit of detail.
Lear’s Britain as presented at the start of the play is a feudal society with a rigid hierarchy dominated by two old families, King Lear’s and the Duke of Gloucester’s. Lear decides to dismantle that society and set up a competitive one in its place. He decides that his successor will not be his firstborn, as feudal custom would demand. Instead he sets up a competition between his three daughters. “Which of you shall we say doth love us most?” he asks them, intending to reward the one who answers best and impose what Reginald Maudling “calls the consequences of failure” on the rest. Goneril and Regan compete effectively and get half the kingdom each; Cordelia refuses to play silly games and is thrown out.
After giving away his kingdom, Lear hopes to retain nominal power based on the traditional duties owed to him by his two ruling daughters. However, as his court jester the Fool points out, by getting rid of his property he has lost all claim to proper regard in the new society that’s coming into being. This is a society that respects those who accumulate with competitive ferocity and one which, ironically, Lear himself had helped to create with his love competition in the opening scene. In such a society, Cordelia’s love expressed in formal, feudal terms (“I love your Majesty/According to my bond”) counts for nothing, and characters who continue to act out of the old loyalties are forced into hiding and disguise. Lear is treated with increasing contempt as a boring irrelevance by Goneril and Regan. This contempt, by the middle of the play, drives him mad.
The crudest representative of the new order is Edmund, Gloucester’s “illegitimate” son in the terms of the old society and now in the new society quite ready to sell out his father in order to get his hands on “that which my father loses”. He chases after power in the form of property with a ruthlessness that cuts right through family ties. Thus he first slanders and so secures the disinheritance of his brother Edgar. Then he betrays the efforts of his father Gloucester to comfort the rejected Lear, a betrayal which leads Regan first to tear out Gloucester’s eyes in punishment and then to hand over his estates to Edmund. Thus Gloucester begins to see the cruelty of the new order as it blinds him just as Lear had begun to understand its insanity as it drove him mad. A world that you must be mad to understand and blind to see: it’s through these bitter paradoxes that Shakespeare expressed what he sensed would be the development of the post-feudal, competitive society that was erupting around him.
I hesitate to say that Shakespeare shows the new society eventually, perishing in its own contradictions because that sounds a bit glib, yet in fact that’s more or less what happens. On a simple level, anyone who has played the game Monopoly knows that at first the competitive element benefits most of the players but soon they’re trying to bankrupt each other in order to survive. Similarly, Lear sets up a competitive society in the first scene and those who, like Regan, have no scruples about stamping on people’s eyeballs, prosper hugely for a while. But soon the competition to continue has to feed on itself. Before the play’s half over we hear of “likely wars” between the husbands of Goneril and Regan. By the last scene Edmund, himself wounded and dying after a fight with his brother, is left to note how Goneril and Regan wiped each other out in the struggle for his affections: “The one the other poisoned for my sake/And after slew herself.” As the competitive society collapses in on itself it orders, as a last obscene gesture, the hanging of the innocent Cordelia, an action that causes Lear to die of a broken heart.
What we get, in short, in the second half of the play is a grotesque vision of the future of capitalist society in which, in the words of Goneril’s husband Albany, “Humanity must perforce prey on itself,/Like monsters of the deep.” Kenneth Muir’s edition of the play comments on these words: “There are many parallels in contemporary and preceding literature”, and goes on to refer to half a dozen sixteenth and seventeenth century examples. Clearly when Shakespeare through Albany describes Lear’s society in these cannibal terms he’s expressing a view which many echoed and which therefore points beyond the limits of the play itself to Shakespeare’s own radically disturbed world.
 
Most teachers of English would not accept this account of King Lear. The consensus is that Art deals with eternal Verities (here all genuflect), with abíding Truths about Man and Nature. It has little to do with fiddling things like politics or the rise of capitalism or the ownership of theatres or whatever it is that Marxists try and read into it. On the contrary, it captures an Unchanging Human Essence. That is why it appeals to all men in all ages – why, indeed, audiences in the age of astronauts and H-bombs still go to see a play like Lear written in an age of maypoles and muskets.
This argument, or more sophisticated versions of it, can fairly be described as the ideological core of most of the teaching of literature. It’s also the point where the Marxist approach meets strongest resistance – resistance because the Marxist insists on seeing men and women as constantly involved in a process of change, changing their societies and their environment and, through that, changing themselves, their nature and eventually their art too. If you see human history this way it doesn’t leave much room for eternal verities and genuflection.
The proof of the pudding is in the eating. The only way we can decide between these two approaches is not through sterile debate but rather by looking at what actually happens in the real world. That means, in the present case, looking at what has happened to King Lear.
The play has had an odd history. Shakespeare wrote it about 370 years ago, around 1605. In 1681 a hack called Nahum Tate took hold of it and radically rewrote it. Crucially, he gave it what he called “Regularity and Probability” by supplying a happy ending in which Lear is put back on the throne and Cordelia gets married. Tate’s version became popular and Shakespeare’s play disappeared from the stage for 160 years and didn’t return till 1838. A curious thing for a work to do if, as it’s claimed, it appeals to all men in all ages. Why did this happen?
I argued in the first half of this chapter that in King Lear Shakespeare sees feudalism dying and watches capitalism’s bloody birth. He sees the new forces of capitalism and especially its competitive basis as In the end monstrous and tragic. But 1681, when Tate’s Lear succeeds Shakespeare’s, marks the start of a violent decade in which capitalism takes important steps to establish itself. The crushing of Monmouth’s rebellion in 1685, the so-called Glorious Revolution and the dethroning of King James II in 1688, and William’s victory over James at the Battle of the Boyne in 1690 are some of those steps. The Glorious Revolution changed English society. It made the crown a clearly circumscribed, bourgeois monarchy, deprived of control over the army and the judges. It set up the Bank of England and instituted the National Debt, thus laying the basis for the development of full-scale capitalism. A society moving rapidly in a direction Shakespeare defined as blind and mad would find his play bewildering and remote. It preferred the “Regularity and Probability” of Tate’s happy version.
Tate’s play held the stage throughout the eighteenth century. Dr. Johnson, the most perceptive of eighteenth century critics, remarked in 1765 that “in the present case the public has decided. Cordelia, from the time of Tate, has always retired with victory and felicity.” He adds that his own judgment falls in with “the general suffrage”.
Early nineteenth century critics, though responding like Dr Johnson to bits and pieces of Shakespeare’s play, generally agreed with Dr. Johnson’s verdict. Charles Lamb, for example, noted in 1811 that “the Lear of Shakespeare cannot be acted.”
But in the eighteen thirties things began to change profoundly and with those changes Shakespeare’s Lear began to be seen differently. In 1834, less than ten years after the legalisation of trade unions, the Grand National Consolidated Trades Union was formed and announced “a different order of things” as one of its main aims. In 1837 the Chartists, described by A.L. Morton as “the first independent political party of the working class”, were launched. In 1839 there’s the first recorded use of the word “socialism” in the English language.
The eighteen thirties then is clearly that decade in English history when at theoretical, organisational and even linguistic levels capitalist society is first radically called into question. For the first time many men and women saw capitalism not as some inevitable, natural order but as something that human beings had imposed and that human beings at last really stood a good chance of changing. And so for the first time they began to organise to bring about that change. Capitalism in the eighteen thirties was no longer just permanently there, like the weather. It suddenly became problematic and replaceable.
At such a moment Shakespeare’s Lear, which intuitively senses and acts out the tragedy and absurdity of capitalist principles, would speak to people, however subconsciously, in ways that it hadn’t for generations. So in 1838 William Macready produced it on the London stage and it’s remained there, on and off, ever since.

Notes
1. The Times, October 7, 1967.
 
Top of the page

Last updated on 14 March 2010



Paul O'Flinn: Them and Us in Literature (7. Women in the Nineteenth Century)


O’Flinn Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Them and Us

Paul O’Flinn
Them and Us in Literature

7. Women in the Nineteenth Century
or
Mummy, where does literature come from?
From heaven, dear.
Now go back to sleep and don’t be asking questions.

What causes literature? The Greeks thought it was the Muses. Most teachers of English have dropped this explanation as unsatisfactory but by and large they haven’t replaced it with anything else. Literature is just there and on that basis it is taught. How it comes to be there is shrouded in decent mystery. Like most decent mysteries, it’s worth asking questions about if only because, as Shaw put it, “decency is indecency’s conspiracy of silence.’”
Marxists claim that literature is a reflection of the real world – sometimes a crude reflection, but sometimes, especially if the literature is any good, the reflection is complex, dialectical, highly mediated. So what does that mean? We can answer that by taking an example – by looking first of all at the situation of middle-class women in the nineteenth century and then at the way this situation is re-created in the work of five authors in five different countries.
The first thing to note about that situation is that it was extremely boring. In England middle-class prosperity meant that one-sixth of the employed population were domestic servants. Hence the middle-class woman was normally freed from the drudgery of housework, but freed only into a gilded cage. Thackeray in Chapter 42 of his 1848 novel Vanity Fair describes Jane Osborne’s “awful existence” as she confronts her father at breakfast:
She remained silent opposite to him, listening to the urn hissing, and sitting in tremor while the parent read his paper and consumed his accustomed portion of muffins and tea. At half-past nine he rose and went to the City, and she was almost free till dinner-time, to make visitations in the kitchen and to scold the servants; to drive abroad and descend upon the tradesmen, who were prodigiously respectful; to leave her cards and her papa’s at the great glum respectable houses of their City friends; or to sit alone in the large drawing-room, expecting visitors; and working at a huge piece of worsted by the fire, on the sofa, hard by the great Iphigenia clock, which ticked and tolled with mournful loudness in the dreary room. The great glass over the mantelpiece, faced by the other great console glass at the opposite end of the room, increased and multiplied between them the brown Holland bag in which the chandelier hung, until you saw these brown Holland bags fading away in endless perspectives, and this apartment of Miss Osborne’s seemed the centre of a system of drawing-rooms.
It’s all there, right down to neat little details like the Iphigenia clock – Iphigenia being the most famous example in Greek literature of woman as obedient sacrificial victim. Then there’s the sense, conveyed through the image of the mirrors, of life as an infinite series of empty repetitions. From the prodigiously respectful tradesman to the whole atmosphere of nagging aimlessness, it’s a perfect picture of the “lady of civilisation” that Engels described as “surrounded by false homage and estranged from all real work”.
If you make someone look an idiot to suit yourself you need to reassure her by pointing out that her position is quite natural. Thackeray’s Jane Osborne is about as active and useful as a rubber shovel, but the experts insisted that this was biologically determined. William Acton’s The Functions and Disorders of the Reproductive Organs, first published in 1857 and in its eighth edition on both sides of the Atlantic by 1894, may be taken as a standard medical textbook of the time. It described one aspect of women’s passivity – sexual passivity – as follows:
I should say that the majority of women (happily for them) are not very much troubled with sexual feeling of any kind ... The best mothers, wives, and managers of households, know little or nothing of sexual indulgences. Love of home, children, and domestic duties, are the only passions they feel.
As a general rule, a modest woman seldom desires any sexual gratification for herself. She submits to her husband, but only to please him; and, but for the desire of maternity, would far rather be relieved from his attentions. [1]
So much for the ornamental role of the middle-class woman and the justifying ideology supplied in its wake by the experts. If we turn from this absurdity to the portrayal of women by five of the nineteenth century’s most significant writers, we can see in imaginative terms some of the tensions generated by this absurdity being relived and attacked.
In the year that Functions and Disorders of the Reproductive Organs was first published, Flaubert was bringing out his novel Madame Bovary in France. In 1878 the Russian novelist Tolstoy published Anna Karenin at the same time as Thomas Hardy’s English novel The Return of the Native. The American Henry James’s short story Daisy Miller came out the next year, 1879, and the Norwegian Henrik Ibsen’s play Hedda Gabler followed in 1890.
In all five the story is nearly the same: a spirited, far from passive middle-class heroine sets off, more or less alone, on a confused and partial revolt against her society and the confining careers and models of conduct it offers her. The result in every case is defeat and death, death which in four cases is suicide. Emma Bovary swallows rat poison, Anna Karenin jumps under a train, Hardy’s Eustacia Vye drowns herself, Daisy Miller dies of malaria and Hedda Gabler blows her brains out.
Five stories so closely parallel appearing in five different places within a generation provide either a supercolossal intercontinental ballistic coincidence or evidence that literature in some way reflects the real world. The books are broadly similar because they all have the same root, and that is the authors’ shared sense of the tragic gap between women’s full needs and abilities and the dwarf lives offered them by nineteenth century capitalism.
Broadly similar but not identical. The five books are worth looking at in a little more detail because each author selects and emphasises particular angles depending on his own experiences and convictions.
Emma Bovary leads two lives. On the one hand there are the flabby romantic dreams which she, like all young girls, is fed. “A certain agitation,” says Flaubert, using deliberately overstuffed language, “caused by the presence of this man had sufficed to make her believe herself possessed at last of that wonderful passion which hitherto had hovered above her like a great bird of rosy plumage in the splendour of a poetic heaven.” On the other hand there’s the dismal bourgeois reality of the man she marries: “Charles’s conversation was as flat as a street pavement, on which everybody’s ideas trudged past in their workaday dress, provoking no emotion, no laughter, no dreams.” This contrast persists to the end, an appalling chasm between the squalid facts of bourgeois life and death and the sentimental and self- congratulatory image that that life has of itself. As Emma dies, vomiting blood, outside in the street a blind beggar sings:



When the sun shines warm above
It turns a maiden’s thoughts to love.



The last moments of Tolstoy’s Anna Karenin are full of obsessive alienation from other people. She’s isolated and vulnerable, always liable to neurotic despair after a feeble revolt from her husband. At Nizhny station, men, peer into her face and whisper to one another – “something vile no doubt”. “A mis-shapen lady” passes. Anna is “appalled at her hideousness”, at the “grotesque and affected girl” who accompanies her and at the “grimy, deformed-looking peasant” who follows. A husband and wife enter her carriage and she finds them “repellent”. More men stare at her. She searches in panic for an escape because: “Everything is false and evil – all lies and deceit!” She gets Out of the carriage and hatred of humanity explodes into hatred of self: “I shall punish him (her lover Vronsky) and escape from them all and from myself.” She steps under a goods train.
What drives Eustacia Vye in The Return of the Native to suicide is her sense of the impossibility of living a fulfilled life after many muddled struggles to achieve it. When a child she had wanted to be a man – her heroes were William the Conqueror, Strafford and Napoleon. As a woman she plays a man’s role – she takes the part of the Turkish Knight killed by St George in a Christmas play. But when she marries she is forced to confront her economically and emotionally dependent status as wife. Moments before drowning she wavers between a wan husband and a third-rate lover:
“Can I go, can I go?” she moaned. “He’s not great enough for me to give myself to – he does not suffice for my desire! ... If he had been a Saul or a Buonaparte – ah! But to break my marriage vow for him – it is too poor a luxury! ... And I have no money to go alone! And if I could, what comfort to me? I must drag on next year, as I have dragged on this year, and the year after that as before. How I have tried and tried to be a splendid woman, and how destiny has been against me! ... I do not deserve my lot!” she cried in a frenzy of bitter revolt. “O, the cruelty of putting me into this ill-conceived world! I was capable of much; but I have been injured and blighted and crushed by things beyond my control!”
In his miniature portrait of Daisy Miller, Henry James suggests the awful punishment waiting for the woman who steps an inch out of line. Daisy, on holiday in Rome, visits the Colosseum by moonlight with a young Italian. Intolerable, as the Nonconformist conscience in the shape of Mr. Winterbourne hastens to tell her. Within a day or two she’s down with the malaria he warned her she’d catch there and she’s dead a week later. Serve her right, and let that be a warning to the rest of you out there to do as the man says.
What Ibsen examines through Hedda Gabler is the kind of stunted and perverse personality that could grow in the stunted and perverse situation of the nineteenth century middle-class woman. Cut off from all meaningful activity and afraid to drive towards it because of a conventional fear of causing scandal, Hedda conceives a brooding admiration for Lovborg who does challenge bourgeois conventions – an uncritical admiration for action that comes easily to a figure confined to passive observation. Like Hardy’s Eustacia, Hedda, after a life of repressed fantasy, is eventually faced with the reality of her unfreedom and like Eustacia she kills herself to avoid living that reality.
Bourgeois society looked at the critical reflection of itself in its own literature and was annoyed. The Revue de Paris which serialised Madame B ovary was prosecuted for “outrage to public morals and religion”. The Russian magazine that carried Anna Karenin in monthly parts rejected the final section. Ibsen was rechristened “Ibscene” and called a “muck-ferreting dog” by the British press. That press also attacked Hardy and was part of the reason why he gave up novel writing altogether in 1895.
Clearly bourgeois literature could pose and analyse the problem but could not solve it. Approaches to a solution could only come not from men like these authors but from women themselves. And they could only come not from literature but from life itself, from action in the day-to-day as opposed to the imaginative world.
 
In 1883, shortly after Eustacia Vye had felt “crushed by things beyond my control”, Engels wrote gloomily from England to Bebel in Germany: “Do not on any account whatever let yourself be bamboozled into thinking that there is a real proletarian movement going on here.” Yet six years later he writes to Sorge: “The movement has now got going at last and I believe for good.” The political climate changed sharply in the eighties and suddenly the boundaries of the possible seemed much wider. As Hedda Gabler, the last of our five heroines, shot herself in lonely desperation on the London stage, working-class women began to fight their way beyond despair. Sheila Rowbotham has described part of that fight in Hidden from History:
From 1888 to around 1892 there was a considerable amount of spontaneous industrial action not only by men but also by women who had never organised before. The match-girls’ strike is the best known because of the publicity the socialist Annie Besant gave it in papers and journals. However Commonweal, the paper of the Socialist League, reported several other incidents of female militancy in the same year. Blanket weavers in Heckmondwike, female cigarmakers in Nottingham, girls in a tin box manufactory in London, who pelted men who continued to work after they came out with red-ochre and flour, cotton workers, and jute workers in Dundee, took action spontaneously in 1888. The reasons for striking varied, from demands for increases to resistance to cuts, or opposition to fines. Again in 1899 mill girls in Kilmarnock came out over the bad quality of yarn they were being given. At Alverthorpe, near Wakefield, woollen weavers, women and girls, rejected a reduced rate and marched in procession headed by girls with concertinas ...
In London too women workers were helped by the new unionists and by socialists. Laundresses tried to make a union. They were supported by 27 trades councils and held a joint demonstration with railway workers in July 1891 in Hyde Park. According to the records of the Women’s Trade Union League this was the first demonstration of working women in the Park ... [2]
Middle-class women began organising to obtain the vote at the same time. The Women’s Franchise League was formed in 1889 to be followed by the Women’s Social and Political Union in 1903.
A final anecdote to illustrate the immense advances of those years. In 1879 as we’ve already seen Henry James’s fictional American heroine Daisy Miller made a tiny personal gesture of rebellion and was promptly nailed by the mosquitoes. In 1912 some of her countrywomen in Lawrence, Massachusetts, struck against pay cuts, held solid for over two months and won important concessions for a quarter of a million textile workers. During one of their demonstrations a couple of girl spinners carried a banner: “We want bread and roses too.” This moved James Oppenheim to write his poem Bread and Roses which ends:



As we come marching, marching, unnumbered women dead
Go crying through our singing their ancient cry for bread.
Small art and love and beauty their drudging spirits knew.
Yes, it is bread we fight for – but we fight for roses, too!
As we come marching, marching, we bring the greater days.
The rising of the women means the rising of the race.
No more the drudge and idler – ten that toil where one reposes,
But a sharing of life’s glories: Bread and roses! Bread and roses! [3]





Notes
1. Quoted in Steven Marcus, The Other Victorians, New York 1967, pp.31-2.
2. Sheila Rowbotham, Hidden from History, London 1973, pp.61-2.
3. From Edith Fowke & Joe Glazer, Songs of Work and Protest, New York 1973, p.71. The five works discussed in this section are all available in paperback. Hedda Gabler is a Methuen’s Theatre Classic and The Return of the Native is a Macmillan’s Papermac. The other three – Madame Bovary, Anna Karenin and Daisy Miller – are Penguins. All references in this section are to these editions.
 
Top of the page

Last updated on 14 March 2010



Paul O'Flinn: Them and Us in Literature (5. Capitalism, Racism and Joseph Conrad)


O’Flinn Archive   |   Trotskyist Writers Index  |   ETOL Main Page

Them and Us

Paul O’Flinn
Them and Us in Literature

5. Capitalism, Racism and Joseph Conrad

In the first dozen years of the twentieth century British capitalism was in crisis. It wasn’t one of the monthly joke crises invented by the newspapers whose aim is to convince any worker with an ounce of guts and patriotism to Stand Up To The Militants and forego a wage rise for the next 83 years in the national interest. No, this time it was serious. True, it didn’t get in the way of the real business of life, so that historian Eric Hobsbawm has rightly called the period an “orgy of conspicuous waste”, the great age of Biarritz, of Monte Carlo, of the country house weekend. But it did mean threats to and cuts in the standard of living of most people in this country, and that in its turn fuelled all sorts of struggles.
The roots of the crisis are outside the scope of this book, but a few examples of the way it showed itself are worth mentioning. First, inflation. The pound of 1895 was worth only 70p by 1914. That may seem scarcely any inflation at all in the light of our present experience, but coming as it did after a whole generation in which prices had steadily fallen it represented an enormous change, a change not compensated for by a matching increase in wages for the majority of people.
Then there were strikes – workers spent nearly four times as many days on strike on the eve of the First World War as they had done at the turn of the century. 1911 brought a national dock strike as well as the first national rail strike. Miners were particularly militant. Winston Churchill tried to settle them in Tonypandy in 1911. Troops arrived and shot seven pickets, with the result that in 1912 there was the first national coal strike in British history. Union membership, 1.5 million in 1890, was up to nearly 4 million by 1914.
Ireland next. The nationalist movement was recovering from various setbacks in the 1890s and building towards the Easter Rising of 1916. The Liberal Government’s attempt to grant home rule in 1912 was blocked by the House of Lords. This meant a two year delay before the bill could be enacted. The Tories took the hint and, with their customary respect for law and order and hatred of violence, began openly arming and preparing for civil war. In March 1914 they were cheered by the news that British Army officers at the Curragh Camp had refused to obey orders to mobilise against them. (When other ranks do this sort of thing it’s called a mutiny and is very bad. When officers did it, it was called a crisis of conscience and was very understandable, so no one was punished.)
And then there were the women, fed up after generations on their knees and at last rising to their feet. The Women’s Social and Political Union was founded in 1903 at a meeting in Mrs Pankhurst’s drawing room. By 1908 they could draw half a million people to a rally in Hyde Park.
So there, briefly, crudely, was the situation. Inflation, national coal strikes, growth in working class militancy, Ireland in turmoil, women struggling for their rights, the Tories openly flirting with armed vigilante groups. Sounds familiar.
If the situation was familiar, so too was at least one of the solutions the ruling class was prepared to try. That solution was racism, the old divide and rule tactic. Keep the lower orders busy kicking each other and they’ll be in no position to unite and fight their real enemies.
The victims of this racism were largely Russian and Polish Jews fleeing pogroms and discriminatory laws following the assassination of the Czar by Polish students in 1881. Estimates of the number coming to this country varied from 82,000 (the official Government figure) to 800,000 (the total put about by Tory alarmists). As early as 1886 the Earl of Dunraven and Lord Brabazon had founded the Society for the Suppression of the Immigration of Destitute Aliens. Nobody took much notice and the society faded away. Undeterred, the deeply disgusting Evening News tried it on again in 1891: an article on May 20 was headlined The Jewish Invasion and next day it led with Jews as Anarchists. [1]
Trouble was clearly brewing so mobs of ruling class hooligans started congregating, looking for a chance to put the boot in. The Earl of Dunraven now founded the Association for the Prevention of the Immigration of Destitute Aliens (APIDA). His vice-presidents included the Dukes of Abercorn and of Montrose, the Earl of Egmont, Earl Ferrers, Lady Sandhurst, Lady Dorothy Nevill plus the odd bishop and vicar. Lord Charles Beresford thundered that the immigrants were an “incubator for Communism and Socialism”. The Hon. William Le Poer Trench, a member of APIDA, ran for Parliament in Whitechapel but got thrashed.
However, the hooligans plugged away and in 1905 got the Tory Government under Balfour to pass the Aliens Act. This act made entry much more difficult, introduced the term “undesirable alien” into the English language and gave the Home Secretary much wider powers to throw out people already here. It also made poverty a crime – an immigrant could be expelled for “living under insanitary conditions due to overcrowding”.
Literature shared in these issues. In 1906 Robert Tressell started to write his socialist classic, The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists, and devoted the very first chapter to contesting various racist arguments, evidence of the seriousness with which he viewed them as a threat to working-class unity and organisation. On the other hand, a standard chunk of racism and bestselling novel of the period was Guy Thorne’s When It Was Dark, first published in 1903. The villain of this piece is a Jewish millionaire, Constantine Schuabe, who plots to overthrow Christian civilisation by faking archaeological evidence to disprove the story of Christ’s resurrection. The fraud is believed for a while so things fall apart and the number of rapes doubles. Fortunately a plucky curate called Basil and Gertrude, a whore with a heart of gold, unmask the rogue and the Stock Exchange recovers in a twinkling. [2]
Which brings us to Joseph Conrad. In 1905, the Government was busy as we’ve already seen acquiring powers to expel Russian and Polish immigrants for the crime of poverty. Yet the same year Balfour, the Tory Prime Minister, arranged for Conrad, an impoverished novelist of Polish origin, to receive a grant of £500 “in view of the quality of his work and his need for money”. Why? Why didn’t Balfour try to throw him out like the rest? To answer that we need to look briefly at the man and the work whose quality so pleased the Prime Minister.
In 1857 Conrad had been born Jozef Teodor Konrad Korzeniowski of Polish parents living in the Ukraine. They died when he was a boy and at the age of 16 he took up a career as a merchant sailor. He first served on an English ship at the age of 20. By the time he was 29 he had become a naturalized British subject and had earned a Board of Trade master’s certificate. His views at this time were fairly typical of an officer in the Merchant Service: brisk, elitist and right wing. Thus in 1885 we find him writing a couple of letters to a friend. The first thanks him for sending a copy of the Daily Telegraph, and the second has this to say about contemporary politics:
the International Socialist Association are triumphant, and every disreputable ragamuffin in Europe feels that the day of universal brotherhood, despoliation and disorder is coming apace, and nurses day-dreams of well-plenished pockets amongst the ruin of all that is respectable, venerable and holy. The great British Empire went over the edge, and yet on to the inclined plane of social progress and radical reform. The downward movement is hardly perceptible yet, and the clever men who start it may flatter themselves with the progress; but they will soon find that the fate of the nation is out of their hands now! The Alpine avalanche rolls quicker and quicker, as it nears the abyss – its ultimate destination! Where’s the man to stop the crashing avalanche?
Where’s the man to stop the rush of social-democratic ideas? The opportunity and the day have come and are gone! Believe me: gone for ever! For the sun is set and the last barrier removed. England was the only barrier to the pressure of infernal doctrines born in continental back-slums. Now, there is nothing! [3]
Sadly, Conrad never really passed beyond the blinkered world of Daily Telegraph politics. When he retired from the sea ten years later in order to write, it was the same set of thin, reactionary ideas that he began to shape into fictional forms.
In October 1906, a year after the passage of the Aliens Act, Conrad’s novel The Secret Agent: A Simple Tale began to appear in serial form. F.R. Leavis, who’s probably the best known English literary critic, uses the following phrases to describe it in his book The Great Tradition: “indubitably a classic and a masterpiece ... classical in its maturity of attitude ... sophisticated moral interest ... one of the most astonishing triumphs of genius in fiction.., one of Conrad’s two supreme masterpieces, one of the two unquestionable classics of the first order that he added to the English novel ... subtle and triumphant complexity of its art” and so on.
F.R. Leavis notwithstanding, the fact that The Secret Agent was serialised in a U.S. magazine called Ridgeway’s: a Militant Weekly for God and Country is an accurate giveaway, and it really is difficult to take the book much more seriously than the other piece of rubbish, Guy Thorne’s When It Was Dark, that we mentioned earlier. The main character, Adolf Verloc, runs a porn shop in Soho with his wife Winnie. In his spare time he’s an agent provocateur hired by the Czarist Russian Embassy to move in various anarchist and revolutionary groups. He also does a bit of spying on behalf of the British police.
The climax comes after he inadvertently blows up Winnie’s brother during one of his murky escapades. Appalled, Winnie murders Verloc with the carving knife and rushes out of the shop into the arms of Comrade Ossipon, one of Verloc’s contacts. She hands over to him all of Verloc’s savings and together they decide to flit to St. Malo. However, clever Comrade Ossipon slips off the train with Verloc’s money just as it pulls out of the station, leaving abandoned Winnie to jump off the cross-Channel ferry in despairing suicide.
The point of the story is on the one hand straightforward flattery of the fuzz who have the thankless task of dealing with these people – the Russian ambassador at the end is “almost awed by the miraculous cleverness of the English police”. On the other hand it’s an attempt to present all revolutionaries as a poisonous gaggle of drunks, bores, foreigners, maniacs, drones, fatties, loons, and physical and racial degenerates. Read for example the description of Comrade Ossipon and you reach straight back both to the nasty racism and Tory hysteria behind the 1905 Aliens Act and to the sort of quality in Conrad that Balfour had earlier thought worth £500: “A bush of crinkly yellow hair topped his red, freckled face, with a flattened nose and prominent mouth cast in the rough mould of the negro type. His almond-shaped eyes leered languidly over the high cheek-bones.”
The whole is peppered with asides that point to a political grasp roughly on a par with that of Lord Charles Beresford and Guy Thorne. Conrad assures us knowingly that: “The majority of revolutionists are the enemies of discipline and fatigue mostly.” The majority of revolutionists at that time called themselves Bolsheviks, at least in the Russian contest Conrad is describing. Indeed, as The Secret Agent was being printed in London in the summer of 1907 Bolsheviks such as Lenin and Djugashvili-Ivanovich (later known as Stalin) were also in London, attending the fifth congress of the Russian Social Democratic Party. Even someone as politically naive as, say, the editor of the Daily Telegraph would probably hesitate to call people like Stalin an “enemy of discipline”.
And so on. The standard revolutionary is not bothered about the Czar’s police, exploitation, starvation and the rest, he’s just “an insolent and venomous evoker of sinister impulses which lurk in the blind envy and exasperated vanity of ignorance” – the overripe, rotten language here matches the overripe, rotten idea. The readers of Ridgeway’s: a Militant Weekly for God and Country may have lapped it up, but F.R. Leavis is a big boy now and he ought to be a little more discriminating.
Conrad’s next novel, Under Western Eyes, was also a study of Russian revolutionaries, this time operating in St Petersburg and in exile in Geneva. It’s worth a look because it’s a good example of an enormous contradiction that’s still widely believed in. Thesis number one is that all human beings are the same – this because of their common, unchanging human nature. It is for this reason that all attempts at change, especially revolutionary change, are a waste of time, as the novel demonstrates. Conrad insists as much in an Author’s Note he added to the 1920 edition; he wonders at the revolutionaries’
strange conviction that a fundamental change of hearts must follow the downfall of any given human institutions. These people are unable to see that all they can effect is merely a change of names. The oppressors and the oppressed are all Russians together; and the world is brought once more face to face with the truth of the saying that the tiger cannot change his stripes nor the leopard his spots.
Thesis number two is that human beings are unimaginably different – split into utterly contrasting racial groups. Hence the novel suggests that it’s almost impossibly difficult for British readers to understand some of the things the Russians get up to. Indeed, as the English teacher who narrates the story points out again and again, he can scarcely understand them himself. We can only come near it if we remember we’re far from the Home Counties and make huge allowances for the characters and their thoughts:
If to the Western reader they appear shocking, inappropriate, or even improper, it must be remembered that as to the first this may be the effect of my crude statement. For the rest I will only remark here that this is not a story of the West of Europe. [4]
Small problem. Thesis number one (all human beings are the same) contradicts thesis number two (all human beings are different). Contradicts it to an extent that makes the novel more or less worthless. Either we all belong to such totally different racial groups that the habits and deficiencies of Russian revolutionaries have no relevance to the British situation, which destroys the novel’s purpose. Or we re all the same and those habits and deficiencies are relevant – in which case the novel’s frequent insistence on total difference is muddled eyewash. But then anyone who’s listened to Enoch Powell knows that muddled eyewash lies at the centre of all racist theory.

Notes
1. Details in this and the following paragraph from Bernard Gainer, The Alien Invasion: the Origins of the Aliens Act of 1905, London 1972.
2. There’s a great knockabout account of this dreadful book in Claud Cockburn’s Bestseller: the Books that Everyone Reads, 1900-1939, London 1972.
3. Quoted in Jocelyn Baines, Joseph Conrad, London 1960, pp.80-81.
4. Under Western Eyes, Penguin 1957, p.28.
 
Top of the page

Last updated on 14 March 2010





Karl Marx and World Literature
S.S. Prawer.
Oxford University Press, £2.50 paperback.
This is a curious work. It begins by insisting: ‘This is not a book about marxism nor an attempt to construct yet another marxist theory of literature.’ What it turns out to be instead – at least in its worst moments – is an owlish listing of Marx’s references to world literature. Thus, for example, we read of Marx’s journalism in the late 1840s:
“There are quotations from Heine’s Ritter Olaf, Der Tannhäuser, Our Navy (Unsere Marine), Georg Herwegh, Anno 1829, The Changeling (Der Wecchselbalg), Atta Troll, and Kahldorf on the Nobility (Kahldorf über den Adel). Quotations from Burger’s Lenore and from a play by Ferdinand Raimund appear in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung in contexts similar to those in which Heine had used them. There are constant references to, and quotations from, the literature of the past: Homer, Virgil, the Bible, the Arabian Nights, Shakespeare, Molière. Beaumarchais, Goethe, and Schiller; minor works like Arnold Kortum’s eighteenth-century mock-epic The Adventures of Hieronymus Jobs (Die Jobsiade) are not neglected: and we find an allusion to —”
— clunk, as your reviewer passes into a gentle sleep and his forehead thuds down into the Olivetti.
In short, the book is close to being a 446-page footnote. Poor old Karl set out to expropriate the expropriators and here, a century later, the expropriators (in the shape of the Taylor Professor of German Language and Literature at Oxford University) quietly expropriate Marx on behalf of bourgeois scholarship.
The result is a Marx who is castrated, tidied up, given a shave and haircut; warts and carbuncles patched over, he becomes respectable enough, almost the sort of chap you could take to dinner at the club on guest night. And the result is a success: even the club bore, a fierce old reactionary in recent years, welcomes him: ‘A learned, useful and entertaining book’, says the Times Literary Supplement.
Not since Prof. Higgins got to work on Eliza Doolittle has a lump of bold, disreputable life been passed off so cleverly in polite society. Marx, Prof. Prawer solemnly informs us, ‘is too important to be left entirely to the marxists’ so he whisks him off, polishes up his accent and together they make a big hit with the toffs and find warm reviews in the Sunday Times.
But – and it’s a but that saves the book – Marx manages to resist total emasculation and, like Eliza at Ascot, blurts out the brutal truth from time to time to the consternation of the royal enclosure. The problem in the end is that Prof. Prawer is too good and too honest a scholar, so that enough of the real Marx is allowed a look in to make the text worth reading.
For example. Prof. Prawer’s careful disentangling from the confusions of the Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of Marx’s sense of literature and its importance is precise and articulate and leads to a memorable conclusion:
“Literature reminds us of a health we have lost (Aeschylus’ ‘dwelling of light’); literature diagnoses our corruption (Timon’s ‘common whore of mankind’); and literature will have its part to play in our cure.”
Equally impressive is the stout sense Prof. Prawer talks in his concluding chapter on such vexed questions as Marx’s views of economic determinism, base and superstructure, naturalism, realism and reflection.
So, all in all, an odd book, symptomatic of the best and worst, the strengths, weaknesses and contradictions of bourgeois scholarship as it is driven out of its own sense of Marx’s greatness to try to place him and to come to terms with him.
He is glimpsed at one moment, disturbingly, as a threat to civilisation as we know it and at another, comfortingly, as a sort of latter-day Hebrew prophet, complete with flowing beard and demands for righteousness.
Meanwhile, bourgeois scholarship, not to mention the bourgeoisie, seems more entrenched than ever and, as I write, a Labour prime minister is trying to win an election by frankly offering himself as more conservative than the most Conservative Tory leader for a generation.
At such a time we can perhaps find some inspiration in Prof. Prawer’s quotation from the poetry of the young Marx – even though the mature Marx regarded it with hilarity as ‘purely idealistic’:



“Therefore let us dare all,
Never pause, never rest,
Let us never sink into dull silence.
Into willing nothing and doing nothing.
“Let us not walk, in brooding anxiety.
Under the yoke that weighs us down:
For longing and desire
And action – these remain to us in spite of all.”



 



Socialism in a Crippled World
Christopher Hampton
Penguin £4.95
I really would like to review this book warmly. Its heart is in the right place. It hates capitalism, it hates Stalinism, and it wants people to be free. Reading it was an old-fashioned pleasure in many ways: no structuralist gobbledygook, lots of hot indignation at the injustices of the twentieth century, and an invigorating insistence that socialism will need to be built out of Blake and Shelley and Dickens as well as Marx, Lenin and Trotsky. But.
That ‘but’ comes because socialism needs more than hot indignation and a love of Blake’s lyrics, and it’s a ‘more’ that the book doesn’t and can’t supply. What, for example, is socialism?
At moments the text hints it might be found in the policies of the Labour Party – we’re told of the ‘great period of socialist transformation’ under the 1945 Labour government, even though a few pages earlier the author notes that the Labour Party ‘is committed to maintaining a financial and fiscal system that encourages divisiveness and self-interest.’ Then again, it might be Bolshevism, warmly praised in Chapter 2 – but dismissed ‘beyond all argument’ in Chapter 8.
Because the text never arrives at any sharp sense of what socialism means and involves, it’s forced into eccentric movement like some sort of electric crab.
Again and again, it scuttles to and fro between despair at Western capitalism and revulsion at the mess of the Soviet Union; in successive chapters it hobbles backwards through history from T.S. Eliot to Dickens to Shakespeare, lurches forwards to Blake, trips sideways to Shelley, leaps on to Auden and then topples backwards again to William Morris.
As the search for something to stick a claw into and stop the world spinning for a moment gets more frantic, the piles of unanswered rhetorical questions get bigger and bigger – two whole pages of them in Chapter 9, for example, and they are still coming thick and fast in the last chapter. And the hectoring, empty repetitiveness of the style gets more and more irritating. For example:
‘Tragedy ... represents a struggle for survival against the forces of negation, evil, darkness, terror, death, oblivion, and it moves towards catastrophe, obliteration, the defeat of the spirit.’
Why is this? Why is a book clearly written by a generous, sensitive man in the end a mess, a bedraggled bag of symptoms rather than a genuine prescription for cure?
The answer can be found if you look at the text’s sense of who it is that is oppressed and who it is therefore that will liberate themselves with socialism.
This group is variously described as ‘us’, ‘humanity’, ‘community’, ‘commonwealth’, ‘mankind’, ‘individuals’ and so on; except in the odd quote from Marx, the book for the most part avoids anything as vulgar as class analysis so that it never faces the question of the role of working-class organisations – parties, trade unions – in building socialism. Similarly, the persistent use of ‘man to mean ‘men and women’ is not just a verbal flaw that someone on the left ought to avoid – it betrays the fact that the text never even glances at feminism and its part in arriving at socialism in a crippled world. And the same is true of blacks. And the unemployed. And so on.
Granted these absences, what socialism comes to mean in the book is a state of mind. Socialism happens when we get our heads straight, so the author ransacks literature from Shakespeare to Brecht, carelessly abstracting from different societies and different times all the decent, kindly, progressive thoughts he can find. No wonder he was so well reviewed in The Guardian.
Socialism, the text implies, comes not from working-class struggle but is the prerogative of a few heroic individuals who have somehow escaped media manipulation and accumulated (he right insights. And so we shift from gazing reverently at faded photos of Marx in Chapter 1 to see if they can tell us the old boy’s secret, to agonizing in Chapter 2 that maybe the Russian revolution would have been saved if only Lenin had been well enough to address the Twelfth Party Congress.
I’m not enjoying this so I’ll stop. If this review sounds sour and querulous it’s because I’m disappointed – disappointed because a text which promises so much in the end delivers nothing.
 



Soviet Writers’ Congress 1934
Maxim Gorky, Karl Radek, Nikolai Bukharin, Andrey Zhdanov and others
Lawrence and Wishart £2.75
This volume of speeches delivered at the Soviet Writers’ Congress in 1934 is simultaneously a useful and a deeply disgraceful book.
Useful because it was at that Congress that Zhdanov, Secretary of the Central Committee of the CPSU, unveiled the theory of socialist realism that has clogged Soviet literature ever since. His crucial address to the delegates is here in full. So too is Poetry, Poetics and the Problems of Poetry in the USSR, an intriguing paper by Bukharin which ranges from an analysis of the language of poetry through a powerful assessment of Mayakovsky and others to end with a moving call for a communism that ‘aims at an infinitely diversified development of human wants’ including, among other things, a ‘new erotics’.
So, for these documents, much thanks. But the book is nonetheless a disgrace. Why? Because it is a facsimile reprint of a 1935 edition of the main Congress speeches with no added notes, commentary or introduction of any kind. The only new material is an ambiguous piece of blurb on the back cover that tells us that the Congress marked ‘the culmination of one of the richest periods of Soviet literary production’ and ‘summed up and closed this first momentous epoch’.
Culmination and close it certainly was. The Congress was held in August 1934, the month in which Stalin seems to have decided on the murder of Kirov, First Secretary of the Leningrad Party. That murder was carried out four months later and before the end of the year the arrests and executions had begun. Stalin’s massive purge was underway.
There were five main speakers at the 1934 Writers’ Congress and their words make up this volume – Zhdanov, Gorky, Radek, Bukharin and Stetsky. Gorky was the first to go, poisoned in June 1936 almost certainly on Stalin’s orders. Radek was next, arrested in September 1936, sentenced to an Arctic labour camp in 1937 and murdered there two years later. Bukharin followed, arrested in February 1937, tried and shot in March 1938. Stetsky too was arrested in 1937 and later shot.
Only the appalling Zhdanov survived, succeeding Kirov as Secretary of the Leningrad Party and purging it comprehensively. Later, as member of the Politbureau with special responsibility for propaganda, he was to be Stalin’s cultural hitman from 1938 till his own death in 1948.
All of this information is fairly easy to come by but none of it is here in this edition. It should be. To slide quietly over awkward truths, to palm off a document such as this without any attempt to acquaint readers with its context is to perform a huge disservice to the socialist movement.
I do not intend this to be read as a piece of routine sectarianism, bashing Lawrence and Wishart because of their links with the Communist Party. Every socialist is indebted to Lawrence and Wishart for the stream of valuable texts they have brought us over the years.
But what on earth are they doing when they reprint entirely without comment of any kind a lurid threat such as this one from Zhdanov: ‘Under the leadership of Comrade Stalin, the Party is organizing the masses for the final liquidation of capitalist elements ...’ – a threat that within a couple of years was to cost the lives of the bulk of the old Bolsheviks sitting listening to him? In what spirit is this sort of barbarism being offered to readers in 1978? Surely it would only be of value in the shape of an edition that made a rigorous attempt to come to terms with these proceedings, to salvage from them what is worthwhile and to signpost what is lethal.
What, for example, are we to make of the contribution of Bukharin, a man still not fully rehabilitated in the Soviet Union? His speech reads like an honest, if flawed and tentative attempt by someone already on the way out to think about a cultural policy that on the one hand doesn’t reduce poetry to rhymed versions of Central Committee minutes but is on the other hand centrally aware of the coming to power of the other Nazis in 1933 and the implications of that for the world and its writers. There’s still food for thought here, but it’s likely that the modern reader will miss it, stopped in his/her tracks several dozen pages earlier by Radek’s bovine chauvinism or by this sort of numbing rubbish from Zhdanov: ‘At the Seventeenth Congress of our Party, Comrade Stalin gave a masterful, unsurpassed analysis of our victories and the factors conditioning them ...’
To reprint chunks of mouldy Stalinism of that type with only the ambiguous recommendations of the blurb as comment is either a major miscalculation or gloomy evidence of that cultural thuggery that the socialist movement (not to mention the world) can do without. The decision to publish this book in this form is either craven or sinister. Probably it’s both.
 



Berlin Alexanderplatz
Alfred Döblin
Penguin £1.75
Jesus, I hate novels like this. Reading them is the sort of careless fun you associate with chewing a brick sandwich.
It’s 1928 and the hero, Franz Biberkopf, comes out of a Berlin prison after doing four years for manslaughter. After a spell selling Nazi newspapers, he becomes a pimp and a burglar and loses his right arm in a car accident.
His whore is murdered by another burglar, he’s framed, and, when the police come for him, he wounds one of them, collapses into a catatonic stupor and ends up being force fed in a lunatic asylum. Then he dies.
Jolly, no? All related in language as warm and enticing as a kick in the kidney, language that, in Orwell’s phrase, achieves the impossible by making the modern world seem worse than it actually is.
Groping and grinding through 478 pages of this stuff on my precious free evenings has brought out the Philistine in me, baying and hooting for blood. I mean, maybe there was a demand for this sort of thing in 1929, when the book was first published.
In 1978 it seems to me there’s only point in reading two kinds of novel – either cheer-up rubbish to take your mind off things, the type of book in which our hero wins the pools, marries a girl with an insatiable sexual appetite (who loves him for his mind) and lives happily ever after, or subversive, outrageous fiction that stands reality in its head and invites you to ridicule it and change it.
Berlin Alexanderplatz isn’t a shout of rage against reality, it’s a glum reproduction of it. To ask £1.75 for a novel that takes hold of our grey environment and its frustrations, magnifies them, and hands them back with no suggestion of a way out, is a bleeding nerve. Come back Warwick Deeping, all is forgiven!
 



It’s sixty years this month since the death of the poet Wilfred Owen, the close of the First World War, and the structuring of the world we still inhabit.
Owen was killed a week before the Armistice stopped the war. As the smoke drifted clear and the soldiers went home to the dole, a new, appalling but in some ways hopeful world emerged. Ten million dead, seven million missing and twenty-one million wounded marked the end of smug liberalism, of an unthinking faith in orderly progress. The smashed bodies scattered across Europe continue to haunt the memory.
They are still there, not just in the fact of the Somme veteran whose ulcerated leg wound my wife is bandaging as I type this article nor just in the sense that every year in Flanders even now farmers stumble across ten or a dozen of those missing seven million. They are still there not just in the way that the names of Mons, Ypres and Passchendaele remain full of echoes that disturb but in the sense that they same system that brought the First World War is still poised, now with more deadly weapons, prepared to do it all again if its interests dictate.
And yet at the same time at the other end of Europe, in Russia in 1917, there appeared other possibilities, other alternatives, as the Bolsheviks swept to power.
Wilfred Owen’s road to this shambles began at Oswestry, where he was born in 1893. His early politics seem to have come from his father, a railway clerk later promoted to the post of Assistant Superintendent at Shrewsbury Station. Hence one of Wilfred’s schoolboy essays, The Imagined Effects on the Country of a Strike among Railway Workers, takes a dim view of union militancy.
From his pious mother, daughter of a wealthy former mayor of Oswestry, Owen derived his religiosity, so that one of his first jobs after leaving school was to work as lay assistant to the Vicar of Dunsden in Oxfordshire from 1911–13.
Here, away for the first time from the shelter of his home and in close contact with farm labourers and their families, Owen was forced to begin rebuilding his view of the world. By 1912 he was writing:
‘I am increasingly liberalizing and liberating my thought, spite of the Vicar’s strong Conservatism ... From what I hear straight from the tight-pursed lips of wolfish ploughmen in their cottages, I might say there is material for another revolution. Perhaps men will strike, not with absence from work; but with arms at work. Am I for or against upheaval? I know not.’
But the final rupture with the values of his childhood was yet to come. When war broke out in 1914, he was teaching English in Bordeaux and wrote home to his brother Colin with the thoughtless enthusiasm of so many young men that summer: ‘I have almost a mania to be in the East, to see fighting, and to serve. For I like to think this is the last War of the World.’
One of his first poems after the war started is The Ballad of Purchase-Money, where the dismal rhymes precisely match the dismal ideas:



‘O meet it is and passing sweet
To live in peace with others,
But sweeter still and far more meet
To die in war for brothers.’



So it was that two years later, Owen, a newly commissioned 2nd Lieutenant, completed his training back in England and set out for the Somme front with the Fifth Manchesters, his head full of the jingoism of the press and the soft, noble lies of poets like Alfred Austin, Henry Newbolt and Rupert Brooke. At first, he wrote home cheerily to his mother: ‘There is a fine heroic feeling about being in France and I am in perfect spirits’.
But the Somme changed all that. The battle had started six months before Owen arrived and the first day, 1 July 1916, brought butchery unimaginable. Infantrymen were ordered to walk towards German trenches which contained about a thousand machine gun posts. By midnight, 21,392 lay dead and 35,493 were wounded – losses in less than fifteen hours that add up to more than all British casualties in the Crimean War, the Boer War and the Korean War put together.
On 12 January 1917, Owen led his platoon up to the Front for the first time at a place called Beaumont Hamel. Here they came under sustained fire. A sentry fell blinded at Owen’s feet, ‘eyeballs huge-bulged like squids’. All around him men ‘bled and spewed and ... drowned’ as the sentry chattered madly through broken teeth.
The scales didn’t just fall from Owen’s eyes, they were blasted away by that experience. Within a week he was writing home: ‘The people of England needn’t hope. They must agitate. But they are not yet agitated even.’
Within six months he was home himself, invalided out with a mixture of shell-shock and trench fever. During the long process of recovery he struggled to come to terms with what he’d seen in a series of poems. Disabled, written in October 1917 at Craiglockhart War Hospital in Edinburgh, is one of the best of these.
In it he describes the thoughts of a young Scot, both legs and an arm blown off, waiting in a wheelchair for nurses to come and put him to bed. In feeling his way into the horror of this situation, Owen’s homosexuality is both a help and a hindrance. A help in that it lets him identify with and re-create the crippled boy’s sense of sexual rejection by ‘normal’, healthy society:



‘Now he will never feel again how slim
Girls’ waists are, or how warm their subtle hands;
All of them touch him like some queer disease.’



But Owen’s homosexuality was of the kind that had him complacently writing to his mother: ‘All women, without exception, annoy me’, and that attitude comes through and hinders to poem. Those really responsible for the boy’s position largely escape his rage. Which falls in part on the women who encouraged him to enlist and in part on the nurses on whom he is now humiliatingly dependent but who turn from him with aversion:



‘To-night he noticed, how the women’s eyes
Passed from him to the strong men that were whole
How cold and late it is! Why don’t they come
And put him into bed? Why don’t they come?’



By August 1918, Owen had recovered physically and was posted back to France. He remarked to his brother Harold: ‘I know I shall be killed. But it is the only place that I can make my protest from.’ In those last weeks before his death, Owen broke through to new dimensions of power and awareness in the handful of poems (such as Strange Meeting, The Sentry and Spring Offensive) that he had time so write.
Smile, Smile, Smile, dated September 23rd 1918, is one of these last poems and describes a group of wounded soldiers reading a piece of drivel from the Daily Mail with



‘The casualties (typed small)
And (large) Vast Booty from our Latest Haul.’



The day before writing the poem, Owen had insisted in a letter to Siegfried Sassoon: ‘I don’t want to write anything to which a soldier would say No Compris.’
So it is that here Owen pushes the poem as close as possible to everyday language and experience: quotes from Daily Mail headlines, from Minister of Labour George Roberts and from popular songs. The title is lifted from Pack up your Troubles in your old Kit Bag.
What is even more impressive is the way that the poem sees and makes links between the wounds of the soldiers and the lies of the Daily Mail and the politicians. Gone is the narrow if powerful self-pity of Disabled and instead effortless political analysis lets all the poem’s anger focus down on ‘We rulers sitting in this ancient spot’ droning on about ‘this nation’ – a term that simultaneously embraces the soldiers and tries to exploit them, as they spot at once.
Six weeks later Owen, still only 25, was killed by a sniper as he led a platoon across the Sambre and Oise Canal. Among his papers they found a hastily drafted Preface to the volume of poems he never published. It read in part:



‘Above all I am not concerned with Poetry.
My subject is War, and the pity of War.
The Poetry is in the pity.
Yet these elegies are to this generation in no sense consolatory.
They may be to the next. All a poet can do today is warn.
That is why the true Poets must be truthful.’



* * *




DISABLED
He sat in a wheeled chair, waiting for dark,
And shivered in his ghastly suit of grey,
Legless, sewn short at elbow. Through the park
Voices of boys rang saddening like a hymn,
Voices of play and pleasures after day,
Till gathering sleep had mothered them from him.
About this time Town used to swing so gay
When glow-lamps budded in the light blue trees,
And girls glanced lovelier as the air grew dim, —
In the old times, before he threw away his knees.
Now he will never feel again how slim
Girls’ waists are, or how warm their subtle hands;
All of them touch him like some queer disease.
There was an artist silly for his face,
For it was younger than his youth, last year.
Now, he is old; his back will never brace;
He’s lost his colour very far from here,
Poured it down shell-holes till the veins ran dry,
And half his lifetime lapsed in the hot race,
And leap of purple spurted from his thigh.


 


One time he liked a blood-smear down his leg,
After the matches, carried shoulder-high.
It was after football, when he’d drunk a peg,
He thought he’d better join. – He wonders why.
Someone had said he’d look a god in kilts,
That’s why; and may be, too, to please his Meg;
Aye, that was it, to please the giddy jilts
He asked to join. He didn’t have to beg;
Smiling they wrote his lie; aged nineteen years.
Germans he scarcely thought of; all their guilt,
And Austria’s, did not move him. And no fears
Of Fear came yet. He thought of jewelled hilts
For daggers in plaid socks; of smart salutes;
And care of arms; and leave; and pay arrears;
Esprit de corps; and hints for young recruits.
And soon he was drafted out with drums and cheers.
Some cheered him home, but not as crowds cheer Goal.
Only a solemn man who brought him fruits
Thanked him; and then inquired about his soul.
Now, he will spend a few sick years in Institutes,
And do what things the rules consider wise,
And take whatever pity they may dole.
To-night he noticed how the women’s eyes
Passed from him to the strong men that were whole.
How cold and late it is! Why don’t they come
And put him into bed? Why don’t they come?



* * *




SMILE, SMILE, SMILE
Head to limp head, the sunk-eyed wounded scanned
Yesterday’s Mail; the casualties (typed small)
And (large) Vast Booty from our Latest Haul.
Also, they read of Cheap Homes, not yet planned
For, said the paper: “When this war is done
The men’s first instinct will be making homes.
Meanwhile their foremost need is aerodromes,
It being certain war has but begun.
Peace would do wrong to our undying dead, –
The sons we offered might regret they died
If we got nothing lasting in their stead.
We must be solidly indemnified.
Though ail be worthy Victory which all bought,
We rulers sitting in this ancient spot
Would wrong our very selves if we forgot
The greatest glory will be theirs who fought,
Who kept this nation in integrity.”
Nation? – The half-limbed readers did not chafe
But smiled at one another curiously
Like secret men who know their secret safe.
(This is the thing they know and never speak,
That England one by one had fled to France,
Not many elsewhere now save under France.)
Pictures of these broad smiles appear each week,
And people in whose voice real feeling rings
Say: How they smile! They’re happy now, poor things.
23rd September 1918



 



Ecotopia
Ernest Callenbach
Pluto Press £3.60 hardback, £1.20 paperback
One of the best things in recent years has been the development of Pluto Press to the point where its publications now get regular attention from the national media, an advance made without any sacrifice of political principle. Its newest move – into the fraught area of novel publishing – is a welcome venture.
But one of its first attempts in this direction – Ernest Callenbach’s novel Ecotopia – is in my view a mistake, though probably a mistake worth making.
Superficially, Ecotopia is one of the most challenging texts to have emerged from the American underground in recent years. Published at the author’s own expense in California in 1975, it sold 32,000 copies on the grapevine before being ‘discovered’ and re-issued by Bantam Books.
The novel is made up of the diary entries and newspaper articles of Will Weston, first US journalist to visit the breakaway state of Ecotopia, formerly the west coast of America. He’s writing in 1999, nearly twenty years after independence, and in a series of reports he describes the radical society that has evolved, touching on everything from the design of belt buckles to the recycling of sewage.
In the end, he’s won over by the place. He decides against a return to grubby old New York and its complications – wife, kids, mistress – and settles down with the delicious Marissa and the good vibes of San Francisco.
I know it’s considered bad form to give away the ending like that in a review, but it’s necessary here if we’re to grapple with the politics of the text because it is as a political text that, rightly, the book offers itself. As the blurb puts it: ‘In a blending of socialist and anarchist ideas Callenbach creates the most dramatic vision of a possible future since William Morris’s News from Nowhere.’
Looked at in that way, the book certainly has things to offer, and the reader is reminded of the debt that Marxism in recent years has owed to the convulsions of American radicalism – the civil rights marches, the women’s movement, gay liberation and so on.
Of course Marxists ‘knew’ about (for example) the exploitation of women – it’s all been there in Engels’s Origins of the Family since 1884. But that knowledge was dormant and peripheral, and only jerked into analysis and activity a decade ago when a few American women started making bloody nuisances of themselves.
Similarly here, Callenbach’s novel presents a series of bold insights into the way a society could actually be organised round recycling and pollution-free production, and in those areas is years ahead of some European socialists, still blindly planning growth without a thought to the consequences.
But ... and it’s a but, I’m afraid, that wipes out most of the earlier compliments. Ecotopia also has many of the weaknesses and gaps of American radicalism. Central here is the book’s sense of the evils of capitalism being a matter of size rather than system. Break it all into little bits, Callenbach suggests, and there’d be few problems.
‘Small is beautiful’ is the watchword, and so Ecotopia is a mass of tiny private enterprises – schools, fisheries, farms and so on – all competing away cheerfully through TV advertising. It’s the illusion of populist frauds the world over.
With that issue missed, the novel is free to spend much of its time devising ingenious ways of avoiding the use of plastics and turning goat shit into methane gas – the life style, in short, of the BBC’s Good Life. How much of a threat that sort of thing is to civilisation as we know it may be judged from the fact that it’s the Queen’s favourite TV programme.
A final point. How, you ask, does the west coast manage to secede? Surely the rest of the US wouldn’t let them? Answer: by planting atomic bombs secretly under major American cities and threatening to set them off as soon as the US Government attempts to intervene.
It’s here that the book stops being just wrongheaded and becomes plain nasty. It offers not even socialism in one country but a kind of freedom in a bit of one country, a kind of freedom that within its own boundaries is ecologically deeply sensitive but is quite ready to secure itself by turning the rest of the continent into a nuclear desert.
Since the novel invites comparison with Morris it’s worth pointing out that it’s exactly a hundred years ago that Morris said: ‘I do not want art for a few, any more than education for a few, or freedom for a few.’
But it’s freedom for a few that this book is all about. At the end of Morris’s News from Nowhere, the hero leaves his dream of the socialist future to return to struggle with the rest of us in the messy present, where the future is made.
But at the end of Ecotopia, Will Weston lazes significantly in a womb-like hot bath and decides to drop out of the difficulties of his life in New York and hang around in San Francisco, safe behind the nuclear screen and working only at achieving the ultimate fuck with Marissa. Bully for Weston.
Meanwhile the rest of us might enjoy this as a holiday read but will have to look elsewhere for inspiration as we grapple with that messy present.
 



The Life of the Automobile
by Ilya Ehrenburg
translated from the Russian by Joachim Neugroschel
Pluto Press, £4.50 hardback, £2.70 paperback
ILYA Ehrenburg, the Soviet novelist who died in 1967, was a man who survived through forty years of Stalinism on a combination of good fortune and deft manoeuvring that was both necessary and at the same time squalid.
But Pluto’s translation of his early ‘non-fiction novel’, The Life of The Automobile, first published in Berlin in 1929, takes us back before the compromising conservatism of that lifetime to one of his early works that is full of technical daring and radical questioning.
The Life of the Automobile is a bold attempt to make art out of a materialist analysis of society. The book sets out from the implied certainty that economic forces are, in the last instance, determinant and lets the imagination follow that notion through to the edges of individual experience.
Ehrenburg begins with the knowledge that, in particular, the car and its manufacture are central to twentieth-century industrial society and he spend 150 pages feeling and thinking his way into the implications of that fact.
So it is that the book jumps from brutal American intervention in Nicaragua aimed at securing rubber supplies for tire factories to wild gambling on the Paris stock exchange in Citroen shares; from the soul-rotting experience of a life serving a conveyor belt, where at the end of a day “a man leaves 300 cast screws and a bit of his body heat; he walks out with a fistful of coins” to the manic, random chases that are the daily routine of a Berlin taxi-driver.
The end product of this scramble is, for Ehrenburg, first the distortion and fragmentation of the individual:
Metals were etched with acids – the workers had eczema. Metals were cleaned with sand – the workers would be ambushed by consumption. Metals were painted with automatic sprayguns the workers were being poisoned by the vapors. In the foundries, the eyes of workers teared from the oil and sulphur. Little by little, they could no longer bear the sunlight. But there was no sun in the workshops ... Why have eyes, ears or life? They had hands, they stood at the belt.
Finally, the individual disappears altogether as the world is radically reduced to the forms and processes of industrial capitalism:
There are no people at the stock exchange ... There are only names and numbers, the lofty and tender names of three thousand securities. Royal Dutch, Rio Tinto, Malakka – oil, copper, rubber; names and numbers; numbers swarm, whirl, buzz, like locusts. Numbers decide everything here.
Hence the novel closes chillingly with a Dictaphone pumping out jargon about fluctuations in the French market, punctuated only by a single “desperate, bestial shriek” from a functionary at breaking point. Meanwhile the author catches a glimpse of Mussolini, emerging and thriving in this alienated shambles.
The Life of the Automobile isn’t an easy read. It’s written with a calculated monotony of tone to match the calculated monotony of the lives it tries to capture. Page after page is a kind of staccato snarl, with the repetitive insistences of the motorway and the production line, as language is pushed as close as possible to the numbing texture of the existences it seeks to convey.
Reviewers are supposed to say: ‘I couldn’t put it down’ On the contrary, I had to put it down every ten pages to avoid concussion – reading it was like being steadily slugged with wet knotted towels.
But that’s Ehrenburg point. Living and earning a living in a world ruled by Ford and Esso and British Leyland is like being steadily slugged. That’s why I kept coming back to the book, concussion or not, for its deep truth, and that’s why it’s worth your time and your money to get hold of it and read it.
 

