


THE COLOURFUL posters cry “Make it in Livingston”. Despite
the dubious nature of this slogan, it clearly advertises a rosy
future in Livingston for those skilled and interested in the
supposedly developing micro-chip industries.
But what prospects and benefits have the so-called ‘sunrise’
industries brought to Livingston, the ‘Silicon Glen’ of West
Lothian. Looking behind the glamorous exterior of technical
development, reality is rather different. In Silicon Glen youth are
on the dole or in the dead end of Youth Training Schemes. The
Japanese and American multinationals who own the factories want
young, cheap, non-union labour; easy to exploit and then cast aside
when no longer required.
In Silicon Glen you’re told “too old at 18, over the hill at
20”. In West Lothian, home of the sunrise industries there is well
over 20% unemployment. Only a few miles from Livingston is one of the
most deprived areas of Britain, Blackburn.
Youth have taken to drugs and the glue as they are robbed more and
more each day of the hope of ever finding a job and future. The sun
has never risen for the working class in Silicon Glen. The
development of these space-age techniques has never been put to use
to help the unemployed and the poor.
A report last year from a committee headed by a former chief
scientist in Thatcher’s cabinet, said that Britain was headed for
third world status, because of ‘lack of investment in information
technology.’ Tell that to the poor. There are no limitations for
developing the means of interstellar warfare, yet it has taken over a
year to get food to the starving children of Ethiopia.
The truth of the matter is that the sunrise has been eclipsed by
the disease of the bosses system, the system that can no longer
provide the basic necessities. That system has no right to exist.
Youth must fight back and change it.
 




THE DREAM of providing thousands of jobs in West Lothian with the
opening of the British Leyland (BL) plant in Bathgate was transformed
into a nightmare both for the 1,800 remaining workforce and the
future of the community, with the announcement on Tuesday 22 of the
closure of the plant.
The Scottish TUC has set up a steering committee to look at the
situation. This could be used to take the opportunity to link up the
fight to save BL with the fight to save the pits. It is an urgent
task.
 
Social consequences
“Industrial genocide” was the way one worker described the
proposed closure. He was right, but the social consequences in an
area already ravaged with 20% unemployment would also be devastating.
If the plant closes, the surrounding towns of Bathgate, Armadale,
Blackburn, indeed the whole of West Lothian would be transformed from
a once thriving community into a waste land.
 
Slow death
One senior shop steward outlined the run-down of the Bathgate
plant:
“In 1978 we had 6,000 men but due to redundancies –
3–400 at a time we now only have 1,800 left – that is shop floor
workers and staff together. They have issued us 90 days’ notice,
with 516 men being paid off on 20 August.
“They are going to transfer actual buildings to the
Albion from September 1984 to March 1985, meaning another 3–400 men
on the dole, then they intend to close us in 1986. We are all very
angry and we are solid, we are fighting for the community, if BL goes
West Lothian dies.”
Another senior shop steward told me:
“We are fighting for Scotland’s industrial base, we
are the last vehicle manufacturing plant in Scotland, they are not
closing us because of markets but because they have moved their
models down south. They have moved the tractors to Marshalls of
Gainsborough, cars to Motor Panels, Coventry, replacement vans to
Freight Power and six or seven models to BL in Lancashire – that’s
the problem.”
 
Militancy
“We had an excellent response from the men on the shop
floor and once they had decided to take action the staff decided the
same – we are fighting.”
The fight is now clearly on, it is vital that the BL workers now
link up with other local struggles. The proposed closure of
Ravenscraig steelworks in 1986 means also the closure of Polkemmet.
The fight for coal is already on. It is clear that the fight is now a
joint one, it is a fight for jobs – yes, for an industrial base –
yes, but also a fight for every community in West Lothian.
Messages of support to: Jimmy Swann, convenor, JSSC British
Leyland, Bathgate, West Lothian. Donations to: Joint Action
Committee, West Lothian District Council, Southbridge Street,
Bathgate, West Lothian.
 







Listen to their lies, listen!
Listen to their tear-filled speeches of suffering
and democracy – and scream
In your anger and your pain – scream
at those who speak of suffering and know
nothing but the cause,
For their only pain is their conscience – but no,
for they have none
Scream in your hunger,
as they burn the food of life,
For if it does not fill their pockets with gold
it will not be allowed to satisfy the gnawing
pain of starvation – burning in your belly
And scream in pain as they pierce your body
with the sword of oppression.
– But wipe away your tears of blood –
for their chains will never hold us
or their guns destroy us,
As we raise our red flag – of suffering and anger,
let us never see our children suffer through our fear,
But through our victory living as all should,
from poverty and misery – suffering and pain
Forever freedom.
Joe Owens, NUM Polkemmet Colliery



 




Dear Comrades,
I am on strike to safeguard jobs and to win a future for our
industry. This is a fight for the youth who are the future of this
industry and of this country. It is a fight for the future of an
industry that has tremendous prospects.
The coal industry belongs to the people of this country and the
jobs within it belong to the youth. We as miners have no right to
sell that industry or those jobs down the river. We have no intention
of doing so.
Marxism offers hope for the future which as a young miner in the
present dispute I identify with fully.



 


Yours fraternally
Joe Owens
NUM Polkemmet
(personal capacity)



 




UP AND down the country miners are rallying together to fight for
their industry and their future. There is no doubt that now is the
time to fight. Now is the time to stand up to the vicious onslaught
on jobs by Thatcher and her government through MacGregor and his
henchmen. We must make it clear that enough is enough.
Despite the cries for a ballot, the justice of the strikers in
unquestionable. At Polkemmet, even though the majority of men voted
to work, no one crossed the picket line and the pit has been
effectively on strike since the outset. We know that if we lose this
fight the pit would close in about 9 months time. It is clear we
cannot afford to lose.
 
Destruction of the community
MacGregor has made his paymasters’ intentions very clear – to
destroy the industry, the union, and subsequently the communities
reliant upon it. Indeed when recently asked about the catastrophic
effect on communities as a result of pit closures he stated: “It is
not my concern, that is the government’s concern.”
Well, it does not need me to point out how concerned this
government is.
The fact is that the welfare of miners and their families and
future jobs for their children don’t matter a damn to the Tories.
On the pretext of closing pits they will attempt to do so because
they rightly see the NUM as the biggest threat to the continuation of
their policy to abuse, smash and exploit our class to the greatest
possible degree.
That is why we must fight now. That is why we must stand united,
fighting together for the future. It is not our right to turn our
backs on the struggles of the past. Nor is it our future to sell.
This industry belongs to the people, the jobs belong to the youth
who are the future. We must safeguard the future.
I am confident we will take up the fight as in 1972 and 1974 when
major steps forward were taken for our industry and our class.
 




WEST LOTHIAN miners reacted angrily to the first break in the
strike at Polkemmet colliery near Bathgate, West Lothian, last Monday
20 August. Polkemmet employs 1,400 men, and is a main supplier of
Ravenscraig steel works. Six scabs were taken into the pit at around
8 a.m. after the pickets had gone away to do the open cast, because
there seemed to be nothing happening.
The six went back in again on Tuesday; the pit delegates got to
speak to them. One said he wouldn’t return. The other five said
they would. On Wednesday, the police sneaked them in at 4.45 a.m.,
about an hour early before the pickets had arrived in any numbers.
The union had reacted by withdrawing safety cover at 7.30 on
Tuesday morning. Two hours later the underground power was shut off
by management and remained off.
Safety cover was restored when it became clear that severe damage
was being caused to the workings and the future of the pit might be
at stake.
But management stopped NACODS safety men from entering the pit on
Sunday night preventing any assessment for 12 hours – a long delay.
At the time of going to press it is unclear whether management
will claim that the pit is irretrievably damaged. Management’s
current claim that it would take a year to get back to production is
taken with a pinch of salt by Polkemmet miners.
On Tuesday there were 27 arrests, 26 men from Polkemmet and one
from Dalkeith who was arrested to breaking bail conditions. He was
picked out by police from Edinburgh. A special squad has been doing
the same on the Bilston Glen picket line – picking out anyone they
recognise as having been arrested previously.
 




Susan George
A Fate Worse Than Debt
Penguin, £4.50, 1988.
The ‘Third World’ debt crisis is arguably capitalism’s most
crushing indictment. Rapacious international bankers ever hungry for
higher profits, with the often tacit approval of their governments,
have poured loan after loan into the countries of the ex-colonial
world quite aware that they can never be repaid. For them debt only
becomes dangerous when it cannot be serviced; the longer the debt
remains unpaid the longer they receive payment, in the form of
interest, for the use of their money. For every 1% rise in interest
rates there is a further $2bn–$6bn due in debt service – it is a
tidy profit. From 1982, the year regarded as the point when debt went
from being a problem to a crisis, until 1985, profits recorded by the
US’s top banks rose from 38% to 84%. The value of their shares rose
respectively from between 83% and 154%.
The risks involved in such ventures were offset by the power of
the Federal government and the resources of the US Treasury who have
gone to extraordinary lengths to preserve the solvency of US banking.
But the generosity has not extended beyond the barracudas in the
banking pool; the flip side of the coin reveals a rash of small
banking failures and regional bank bankruptcies across the length and
breadth of the USA.
The real consequences of the debt crisis are shouldered day and
night by the men, women and children of the filthy, infested shanty
towns and villages that are the feature and result of so-called
‘development’. For workers and peasants in the grip of the IMF
austerity programmes crushing poverty is sometimes relieved only by death.
A Fate Worse Than Debt is a useful and highly informative
introduction. Susan George outlines the background to the crisis and
the role of organisations like the IMF and the World Bank. She
reveals the sometimes horrifying statistics that chart the
consequences of debt and austerity in the borrowing countries.
One of the main reasons for the artificial length of the present
‘boom’ has been the super exploitation of the ex-colonial world
by the advanced capitalist countries. Worsening terms of trade led to
a net inflow of capital to the developed capitalist world of $65bn in
1985. Debt ballooned to over $1 trillion or $1,000bn. Another feature
of the debt crisis has been the outright robbery and mismanagement of
loans by corrupt governments. At least 15% of the Philippines debt of
$26bn was appropriated by the Marcos family. Some may have been used
on Imelda’s staggering collections of shoes and knickers. But even
more went on projects like the Morong nuclear power plant which was
commissioned from Westinghouse for $2.1bn in 1976. The debt servicing
on this project was costing $500,000 a day by 1987. Although the
reactor is ready to function, fortunately it does not: it was built
in the middle of the Pacific ‘fire rim’ earthquake zone at the
foot of a volcano!
Failure to comply with the IMF’s ‘adjustment’ programmes to
pay for debt means the loss of credit worthiness. Threat of default
on payments is met by a counter threat of seizure of a nation’s
assets on land, sea or air. As one US Treasury official coldly put
it: “Have you ever contemplated what would happen to the health of
a country if the government could not get insulin for its diabetics?”
One study recently quantified the relationship between debt and
mortality: for every additional $10 a year in per capita interest
payments there was 0.39 a year less in life expectancy improvement
for the people involved. In the 73 countries studied in the 1970s
each person had forgone 387 days of life, i.e. lost a year of life.
In Peru infant mortality is estimated at 80 per 1,000 births. In the
worst of the shanty towns half of new born babies die before they are
one year old. This slaughter is the incalculable cost of world debt.
And what is the reaction of those who preside over this? Oscar
Trelles, ex-President of the Peruvian Senate commented in 1981:
“It is healthier to eat less; thin women are more
attractive than fat ones, and just because Jewish children had hunger
in the Nazi concentration camps, it did not make them more stupid”.
Driven by despair, deprivation and hunger children are forced to
beg and steal. Many sell themselves into prostitution. What they face
is not life but an unending, death defying and heroic struggle to
stay alive.
At the end of her book, Susan George considers what to do. “The
debt crisis is a symptom – one among many – of an increasingly
polarised world, organised for the benefit of a minority that will
stop at nothing to maintain and strengthen its control and
privilege”. Absolutely correct! Unfortunately, however, the
author’s own solution, what she calls the ‘Third Solution’ –
debt, development and democracy – relies on this minority
effectively giving up its control and privilege voluntarily for the
good of the poor!
It amounts to this – the developing country would pay its
interest payments into a ‘National Development Fund’,
democratically controlled by a ‘broad-based development fund
management’. This fund would finance various projects for the
community. For every payment into this Fund the donor banks and lMF
would correspondingly write off their debt repayments!
How can Susan George believe in this remedy when she quotes
earlier the views of a Citicorp banker that “our strategy is not
one of making loans but of making money”? Her dilemma is that,
while advocating a solution within the confines of the present
economic order, she marvellously exposes its constraints.
Nevertheless her book puts a devastating case for change in terms of
wasted resources and the potential that could be used if the world
economy was planned and democratically controlled by and for the
working class.
 




At the age of 19, as a miner at Polkemmet colliery, in West
Lothian, Joe Owens was thrown into the year-long miners’ strike.
Joe, who has died unexpectedly aged 44, emerged as a powerful leader,
the youngest NUM pit delegate ever elected in Scotland, and was
recognised as a great speaker.
The strike was the defining experience in Joe’s life. On its
10th anniversary, his book of interviews with miners and their wives,
Miners 1984–1994: A Decade of Endurance, was published. His
introduction is exemplary, revealing Joe’s wide reading (he loved
poetry, particularly Bertolt Brecht and Pablo Neruda), astute
political sense and wonderful command of language. On the 25th
anniversary, Joe returned to the strike in his contribution to the
edited volume Shafted: The Media, the Miners’ Strike and the
Aftermath, in which he wrote how the strike “coloured and will,
in all its brightness, shades and shadows, influence me until I pass”.
Joe was born in Blackburn, West Lothian, with three younger
brothers and two sisters, and attended St Kentigern’s school,
Blackburn. When Polkemmet colliery closed in 1985, Joe moved to the
Bilston Glen mine and, when he lost his job there, he went to Napier
University in Edinburgh to study journalism. In 1988 he was given an
opportunity on the local Wester Hailes Sentinel.
I first met Joe in 1993 when he was the editor of The
Northender, a community paper in Springburn/Possilpark, a tough
area of Glasgow, where he had established a campaigning publication
holding local politicians to account and challenging the drug dealers
in that part of the city.
Joe worked on a wide range of papers as a casual sub-editor before
securing a contract with the Daily Record in Glasgow. He also
became active with the National Union of Journalists (NUJ) and served
as chair of both Glasgow branch and the Scottish council. An
unexpected change for Joe happened when he met Breda Joy, a delegate
from Kerry, at an NUJ annual conference. He went over to live with
Breda in Ireland, where he became a senior sub and an extremely
popular father of chapel (union official) at the Cork Examiner.
Later, he returned to Glasgow and worked as a casual on the Record
before taking up the post of chief reporter on the Highland News
in Inverness. His last job in journalism was with the County Press
on the Isle of Wight.
Joe is survived by his son, Patrick, from his marriage to Liz Catterson.
 




Popular Scottish journalist Joe Owens was found dead on the
Isle of Wight (IOW) last week; he would have celebrated his 45th
birthday later this month. His last written work was recently
published on All Media Scotland web site and he had previously
been working as a freelance and sub in a local paper on the IOW.
Joe started his working life as a coal miner and was the youngest
NUM pit delegate during the historic miners’ strike in 1984. After
losing his job he went to Napier University to study journalism and
was given an opportunity to make his mark by Andrew Clarke
(now of the Guardian), who was editor of the community paper
Wester Hailes Sentinel in 1988.
Within a few years Joe was appointed editor of The Northender,
a community paper in Springburn/Possilpark area of Glasgow, quickly
establishing a campaigning publication which was seen to hold local
politicians to account as well as challenging the notorious drug
dealers in that part of the city.
He went on to work for a wide range of national daily papers as a
casual sub before getting a contract with The Daily Record.
During this period, Joe had become a leading activist with the NUJ
and served as chair of both Glasgow branch and the Scottish Council.
This activity had personal implications for Joe as he met someone
at the union annual conference and took everyone by surprise when he
followed his heart to Kerry in South West Ireland. Quickly
establishing himself as a senior sub and FoC at the Cork Examiner,
Joe became as popular in that part of Ireland as he had in Scotland.
All good things come to an end and Joe returned to Glasgow and
again worked as a casual at The Daily Record before being
appointed as a chief reporter at the Highland News in
Inverness. After a bout of bad health, Joe moved to warmer climes of
Valencia as news editor of an English language web site covering
Spanish national news.
Unfortunately what appeared to be a quality product ran into cash
flow difficulties and closed within a short period. Joe then moved to
a post at The County newspaper on the Isle of Wight and had
recently been doing some freelance and PR work on the island and beyond.
Joe Owens was a working class intellectual, well-read and could
argue politics ’til the cows came home but still be full of fun. He
was a talented journalist both as a writer and sub, a great trade
unionist and socialist and my best friend and will be sorely missed
by his son Patrick and his family and vast number of friends and
colleagues.
 




Joe Owens was a young 18-year-old miner from Blackburn in West
Lothian when he joined Militant (the forerunner of the International
Socialists in Scotland and the Socialist Party of England and Wales)
in 1983. Joe was a leading figure in Militant in the East of
Scotland in the 1980’s – playing a key role at all levels of the
organisation. We first met him at a public meeting in Edinburgh in
support of the print workers who were on strike against Eddie Shah’s
attempts at the Messenger Group in Warrington to smash the print
unions. From the first Joe stood out as an outstanding public
speaker, full of passion, anger and not a little humour, as well as
an incredible depth of knowledge for someone so young. As was to be
the case throughout his too short a life, Joe, who was a force of
nature, made a huge impact on all those who had the privilege to know him.
Joe, like his father, worked in the Polkemmet colliery in West
Lothian where he was elected as the youth delegate for the NUM. When
the miners strike began in 1984 he was already a committed Marxist
and used all of his abilities to emerge as a leading figure in the
year long dispute. I vividly recall Joe Owens speaking in 1984 at the
Labour Party Young Socialists summer camp in the Forest Of Dean.
Hundreds of young socialists had packed into the marquee to hear the
opening rally on the miners strike. Joe Owens was billed to speak as
a young miner, perhaps for 5 or 10 minutes, with Ian Isaacs from the
South Wales NUM planning to develop the wider political issues of the
strike and the strategy to win. Joe, being Joe, spoke for over half
an hour covering everything from the strike, to the crisis of British
capitalism, the importance of a fighting trade union leadership by
the TUC and the need for socialist society. After a prolonged
standing ovation, Ian Isacs got up to speak commented; “well after
listening to Joe there is really nothing left for me to say.”
Time and again during the strike, whether at mass meetings of
miners, fellow socialists or wider public meetings it was possible to
hear a pin drop when Joe Owens got up to speak. He was without doubt
one of the most outstanding public speakers in the socialist and
Marxist movement at the time. But Joe was more than just an orator of
real standing. He was as comfortable speaking about the Spanish
revolution, the black civil rights movement in the US, or dialectical
materialism as he was about the struggle of the miners. He devoured
books whether on Marxist theory, literature, history and also poetry
– which he had a real passion for. He was also a talented writer.
Joe was, in the best sense of the term, a worker intellectual who
loved to discuss ideas – but who was also a working class fighter
who hated injustice and instinctively supported workers in struggle
wherever they were.
Polkemmet colliery was, like so many pits after the strike, shut
and Joe moved to Bilston Glen outside Edinburgh. His standing among
his fellow miners was shown when he was elected to the highest
position in the union as the pit delegate of the NUM at Bilston Glen.
At the age of just 22, Joe was one of the youngest ever NUM pit
delegates to hold that position. But by 1989 Bilston Glen was also
closed, as the mining industry was decimated by Thatcher and the
criminals who surrounded her.
The defeat of the miners strike was a setback for the whole
working class. The more complicated situation for socialists and
Marxists in the 1990’s also affected Joe and he was no longer
active in the Marxist movement. Joe left the mining industry after
the closure of Bilston Glen and used his skills as a writer to train
as a journalist. He worked for a number of newspapers, including the
Daily Record, the Herald and the Cork Examiner
in Ireland, among others.
He did not cease his active involvement in the trade union
movement, nor his belief in socialism. He became the Chair of the
Scottish council of the NUJ. Even when he went to Ireland, such was
his impact, that he was elected as the Father of Chapel for the NUJ
at the Cork Examiner and fought to defend workers terms and
conditions. Joe also worked in Inverness, Valencia and, latterly, the
Isle of Wight.
In the months before his death he regularly visited the Vestas
workers occupation on the Isle of Wight, delivering food parcels
which he bought, even though he was without work at the time. He
marched in support of the Vestas workers in Cowes in August this
year. To the end he always knew which side he was on.
Joe left an impact on all those he met. Universally, his
intelligence, humour, passionate belief in fighting injustice, single
mindedness and concern for others other than himself are all cited by
those whose paths he crossed. The hundreds who attended his funeral
were testament to that. In truth the one person he did not seem to
regard enough was himself, despite all of his talents and humanity.
Joe Owens has died, aged just 44 years. I have lost a friend whom
I will always remember. More important his son, Patrick, has lost his
father and it is to him, to Joe’s brothers and sisters, and all
those who loved Joe Owens, that these few words are dedicated.
 

