





Raymond Williams was a working-class Marxist critic who
revitalized Marxist cultural and literary criticism. Ten years on
from his death, VICTOR PAANANEN pays tribute to his work.





JANUARY 1998 MARKED the passage of ten years since the death of
Raymond Williams, the individual who made the largest contribution to
Marxist literary and cultural criticism of anyone writing in Britain
this century. For Marxist criticism to advance, it had to become more
thoroughly Marxist, indeed more thoroughly materialist, than it had
yet been. The materialist outlook of Marxism sees the work that
humans do in the world – the labour process itself – as the
fundamental reality. Labour is always a material and social process,
and Marx laid out the basis for an understanding of literary and
other kinds of ‘artistic’ production as labour too.
Unfortunately, Marx’s early work on this topic received too
little attention, and artistic production came to be looked at as
different from other labour. As will be suggested later, Williams
might have made his argument for the centrality of labour even more
explicit. Nonetheless, he was the Marxist critic who turned criticism
‘right-side-up’, and he fully deserves the wide influence that he
now has around the world.
Williams’ questioning in depth of the Marxist tradition in
literary criticism produced not only better Marxist criticism but a
more comprehensive understanding of what Marx actually said.
William’s intuitions about the way to proceed seemed to have been
sound from the outset, but he had nonetheless to clear the way
forward, re-thinking and rejecting much of the guidance of earlier
British Marxists like Christopher Caudwell, Ralph Fox and Alick West.
He also resisted the influence of the idealist Marxism emanating from
continental theorists, especially Louis Althusser.
To use one of the terms that Williams would define and render
useful, Williams had the advantage of an ‘alignment’ determined
by his birth into a working-class family as the son of a railway
signalman in Pandy, a village in Wales. He was five years old when
the general strike “was bitterly fought out on a small scale in the
village” (Williams, Politics and Letters, p. 27).
Williams was the precocious scholarship boy who occasionally appears
in such communities, and he won a place at Cambridge, where he “met
only one other person from a working-class family” (Politics and
Letters, p. 40), and understood immediately that the narrow
‘culture’ that his education was based on excluded most of the
whole way of life into which he was born. As one of his early essays
put it, culture is ‘ordinary’; it is how people live.
Despite what appears on the school syllabus, culture is not made
up of specimens of the artistic expression by which a ruling class
has over the centuries revealed its emotions. Matthew Arnold’s
ideal of culture, “the best that has been known and said” –
still the foundation of most liberal education – not only excluded
the experience of ordinary people but understood the world in ways
foreign to all not within a narrow class-based fraternity.
To become conscious of one’s alignment, as Williams did in
encountering the educational system of the ruling class, is to move
to ‘commitment’. For that reason. Williams’s life was also,
throughout, a committed political life. Given the circumstances that
socialists faced in the long night of Stalinism, Williams had to
search for a way forward to a non-bureaucratic and democratic but
still revolutionary socialism and this he did in a life-long quest
that moved forward along with his search for the authentic
intellectual contribution of Marx.
 
COMING FROM A community in which the Communist Party had
traditional roots, he joined the CP while at Cambridge but drifted
away during the war years (during which he saw active service) to
re-emerge in the post-war socialist movement as one of the founding
figures of the New Left and the primary author of the 1967 May Day
Manifesto.
Williams was always impatient with reformists and careerists: in
his contribution to The Forward March of Labour Halted? in
1981, for example, he called for a Labour Party not content to settle
for small gains within capitalism but showing a full programmatic
commitment to socialism.
In a 1977 interview, Williams admitted that he had suffered from
“a generational block” (Politics and Letters, p. 402)
that kept him from exploring Trotsky’s contribution to
revolutionary theory, but he accepted his interviewer’s statement
that a “grasp of this social process through which a new political
order comes into existence was the deep insight, the great legacy of
Trotsky’s thought” (p. 399).
No doubt, Williams’s brief involvement with the Communist Party
left him with a distorted view of Trotsky that he found hard to shake
off. Still, as Terry Eagleton came to recognize, “A striking
feature of Williams’s career is that he moves steadily farther to
the political left, in a welcome reversal of the usual clichéd trek
from youthful radical to middle-aged reactionary” (Eagleton,
obituary for Williams in New Left Review, 1988).
When Williams found apparent contradictions or ambiguities in
Marxist texts, he never hesitated to say so, and, for a time,
resisted the label ‘Marxist’. In his Culture and Society
(1958), he looks at the controversy that once raged over the question
of whether the critic Christopher Caudwell produced pseudo-science or
a Marxist aesthetics and declares that as “one who is not a
Marxist”, it is not for him to decide. Nonetheless, and
characteristically, even though he in that early but important book
declares Marxist explanations of concepts like ‘base’ and
‘superstructure’ to be inadequate formulations, he would spend
almost twenty years in rethinking that relationship so that he could,
as a Marxist, explain it in a more materialist – more Marxist – way.
This long struggle for a truly Marxist approach to literature and
culture finally resulted in the landmark book, Marxism and
Literature, in 1977. By this time, Williams’s thinking had been
so refreshed and clarified by an immersion in Marx, and his lifelong
alignment and commitment so fully confirmed in the
economic-political-historical totality that he now grasped through
Marxism, that he does not hesitate to announce himself a Marxist and
his approach to literature that of a ‘cultural materialist’.
Marxism and Literature, itself now twenty years old, must
stand as the central book in Williams’s career, and the one that
revivified Marxist criticism and assigned it new tasks.
 
THE BOOK PROCEEDS by examining key concepts that were distorted by
previous Marxist critics. At the same time, it exposes the inadequacy
of bourgeois formulations about literature and casts profound doubt
over the value of such commonplace categories as ‘genre’ and
about usual understandings of the nature of the ‘author’.
Literature had long been classified, pointlessly and inconsistently,
within a narrow range of ‘genres’ or types – such as novel,
epic, or lyric – but such categories ignore both developments as
society changes and the innovative drive that humans display. As for
‘authors’, there is, as with all others who perform labour within
a society and economic system, great variation in social role,
consciousness, and degree of independence.
For a book of clarification, Marxism and Literature is
demanding reading in that it must struggle very hard indeed to draw
out seemingly small distinctions – reproducing, as it were,
Williams’s own lifelong struggle with Marxism and literature. It
furthermore suffers from a paucity of examples: Williams explains
that the format of the series of Oxford introductions for which the
book was written severely restricted the number of pages at his
disposal. In his many books and articles, Williams’s writing is
remarkably free of the jargon that has infested criticism in recent
decades, but here the language strikes most readers as abstract and
unfamiliar. Yet, despite its problems, Marxism and Literature
remains a book that in its 218 packed pages allows Marxist criticism
and Marxism itself to lurch forward significantly.
‘Culture’, which most accurately refers to a ‘whole way of
life’ – ‘culture’ in the sense in which anthropologists use
the word – is always something made by humans. Marx developed the
idea that humans make their own world by showing that making a
culture is also material, social production – labour. Many
Marxists, however – unlike Marx himself – failed to grasp that
ideology, the production of ideas, is itself material and social.
Marx used the metaphor of ‘base’ and ‘superstructure’
(‘Überbau’), and Marxist critics and others took this
relationship in terms of a quite un-Marxist separation of material
and intellectual realms. (For a Marxist, ‘social being determines consciousness’).
To begin to demonstrate that cultural activity is material
production, Williams turns to ‘language’ and deplores the
reliance of literary criticism on inadequate linguistic theory like
that of Ferdinand de Saussure. Marx understood that language is an
integral part of human self-creation: even if human identity is
socially and materially determined, it is verbally constituted.
Language, according to Marx, is ‘practical consciousness’;
language is material (‘agitated layers of air’, as Marx puts it) and social.
Language use is productive activity arising from , as Williams
puts it, “continuing speech-activity between real individuals who
are in some continuing social relationship”. There is a “continuing
development of a language”, as opposed to Saussure’s reliance on
‘past product’. “Material reality”, Williams says, is grasped
“through language, which as practical consciousness is saturated by
and saturates all social activity, including productive activity”
(p. 37). The label ‘literature’ was historically limited to
certain works selected by a ruling class from certain imaginative –
generally old – texts, but ‘literature’ more accurately
includes all kinds of linguistic work: “Literature”, Williams
says, “is the process and the result of formal composition within
the social and formal properties of a language” (p. 46).
If, for the most part, Williams finds classic Marxist formulations
about language and the production of intellectual products more
useful than subsequent efforts, he does not hesitate to accept
Antonio Gramsci’s specialization of the term ‘hegemony’ to
describe the way that the ruling class moulds the consciousness of
those that it rules. He finds this word more useful than
‘superstructure’ or ‘ideology’ to describe those ‘ruling
ideas of each age’, which Marx recognizes, ‘have ever been the
ideas of its ruling class’ and thus come to be mistaken for reality
even by those who are ruled. Within a particular hegemony, one may
distinguish tradition (always selective), institutions (particularly
in education and communications, largely what Althusser calls ‘the
state ideological apparatus’), and formations (i.e. self-conscious
intellectual or artistic movements).
Elements in a culture or a specific cultural product, like a piece
of literature, that are Dominant, Residual, or Emergent, may usefully
be distinguished. The Residual, which is made up of attitudes left
over from classical or feudal times, can on occasion be
counter-hegemonic in harking back to pre-capitalist values, as in the
Christian ideal of brotherhood set up against modern competition.
The Emergent is likely to arise on a class foundation from an area
of cultural production neglected by the hegemonic: until trends in
rock music are incorporated into the profit system, they are often
both protest and a vision of new social relationships. Their
emergence is of course often stifled by the Dominant – which is the
shared understanding of life under capitalism that celebrates
competition rather than community.
Within structures of feeling (a favourite Williams phrase
throughout his writings) found in literature and in other cultural
production, even ‘Pre-emergent’ elements can be grasped.
Structures of feeling are themselves social experience but often
mistaken for personal experience and are felt long before fully
articulated. Williams offers no examples, but the various phases of
British youth culture over the last fifty years would, perhaps, be
full of examples of structures of feeling that are ‘Pre-emergent’
but social in origin and in search of cultural articulation over
against the hegemonic. Punk music and body-piercing are two recent
instances of ‘Pre-emergent’ resistance to the hegemonic.
The ‘aesthetic’ experience is an item of consumption within
bourgeois economics. What has been sought in the aesthetic in the
bourgeois period are the human values that capitalism excludes.
Aesthetic experiences are real, indeed at times quite physical, but
occur in specific social and historical circumstances and not on an
ideal plane or with meanings in other cultures or at other times.
Crises in technique have occurred in periods of crisis in the
relationship between art and society, so ‘forms’, which are
themselves modes of social relationship, become unstable in periods
of social change.
The Emergent can, remarkably enough, often be seen in the form of
a literary work even before it is seen in content. (We can begin to
grasp what Williams means by this emphasis on form by realizing that
the new ‘message’ of rock-and-roll was grasped by youth culture
before it could be articulated. Similarly, the disintegration of
traditional forms in the novel has arisen alongside a feeling of
dissolution in bourgeois culture that is still more an anxiety than a statement).
As for ‘Alignment and Commitment’, all writing is aligned in
that it arises from a position within social relationships, but
committed writing is conscious of this alignment or comes from a
change of alignment. Finally, summing up, Williams argues that
literary production is a social and material self-composition in
which at times the hegemonic may be confronted “in the fibres of the self”.
 
OUT OF WHAT appears to be an unwillingness to adopt language
crudely applied by some Stalinist critics, Williams does
unfortunately seem in Marxism and Literature to miss some
opportunities to link literary production and other forms of cultural
production with the general labour process. He notes that the word
“‘labour’ ... was more and more narrowly conceived”, so that
it did not cover “the whole material process” (p. 33), but
only certain kinds of work. But surely Williams should not then avoid
the unifying word ‘labour’ but should insist that it be broadened
to its full Marxist meaning, in which it encompasses all human
efforts to change the world.
As Williams himself points out:
“‘Consciousness and its products’ are always,
though in variable forms, parts of the material social process
itself: whether as what Marx called the necessary element of
‘imagination’ in the labour process; or as the necessary
conditions of associated labour, in language and in practical ideas
of relationship; or, which is so often and significantly forgotten,
in the real processes – all of them physical and material, most of
them manifestly so – which are masked and idealized as
‘consciousness and its products’ but which, when seen without
illusions, are themselves necessarily social material activities.”
(pp. 61–62)
Labour, in fact, represents a linking of mental and material
processes, but when labour is alienated, as it has been ever since
the simultaneous emergence of private property and the division of
labour, the result is ideology, which Marx and Engels call
‘self-dependent theory’ or ‘false consciousness’.
If Williams boldly asserted the inclusion of all social material
process under the word ‘labour’, a unity not missed by Marx and
Engels, he would make it much more evident that literary and cultural
production, its products as well as its processes, may be analysed in
the same terms as other kinds of labour. Humanity itself is divided
in the division of labour (as Engels argued), so it is at best a
damaged human being reaching after completeness who has made the
literary product. All the limits and pressures of the writer ‘s
social existence are reflected in the writer and the literary
product. The realm of the aesthetic as an escape from the harsh
realities of capitalism is the false consciousness that believes it
is “in a position to emancipate itself from the world” (Marx and
Engels, German Ideology). Williams risks maintaining the
separation of ‘mental’ and ‘material’ labour that both he and
Marx warn against. All human productivity is precisely ‘labour’
and must be called that even if other Marxists, especially in the
1930s, had too narrow a view of what the word meant.
The achievement of Marxism and Literature is, in fact, to
return to Marx to demonstrate that the production of literature –
and all other cultural production – is the creation of a material
social process. All creative work is part of the labour process by
which humans, in the defining activity of the species, change the
world. All labour is part of an effort to create a more human world.
When the labour expended is alienated labour, the distortions of
such alienation is evident in the product, whether that product is a
sonnet or a skyscraper. But all work, literature included, reaches
for a full humanity. The work Marxists are called to perform
addresses the ultimate human goal most directly because the labour
that Marxists undertake is the building of socialism. To this
ultimate task, Raymond Williams, from the unexpected vantage point of
the study of literature, helps us to understand how human labour
contains a yearning within it that is part of the historical movement
toward world-wide socialism.

A SHORT LIST OF IMPORTANT BOOKS BY RAYMOND
WILLIAMS:
Culture and Society 1780–1950: An exploration of the
impact of the period of the industrial revolution on society and the
culture that proposes to represent it (1958).
The Long Revolution: The industrial, democratic, and
cultural revolutions are intertwined and must advance together (1961).
Modern Tragedy: Modern tragedy can be understood only
within the twentieth century experience of war, revolution, and
social crisis (1966).
Drama from Ibsen to Brecht: Even though naturalism in
drama was needed to show the human rather than supernatural origins
of human suffering, the conventions of naturalism have proved
increasingly inadequate after Ibsen (1968).
The Country and the City: What we call the country is
largely made by human labour, but English literature has expressed a
longing for a rural way of life impossible in the modern city (1973).
Keywords: Definitions of the slippery words needed to
analyse culture and society (1976).
Marxism and Literature: Williams’ most important work
of Marxist theory (1977).
Politics and Letters: Interviews with the New
Left Review: In his responses to interviewers, Williams
puts forward a history of his ideas and some autobiography (1979).
Culture: A brief outline of a sociology of culture (1981).
Towards 2000: Analysis of the current brutal phase in
capitalism that manages to find hope for a socialist future (1983).
The Politics of Modernism: (Posthumous, assembled by Tony
Pinkney) Modernism in the arts was anti-bourgeois in its initial
impulse but was soon employed to justify capitalist control in a
world without values (1989).
 




Working-class Fiction: From Chartism to Trainspotting
by Ian Haywood
Northcote House (in association with the British Council), 1998, £8.99
WHEN I MENTIONED to a fellow Socialist at a meeting in London that
I was teaching a course in working-class fiction, he replied that he
hoped that I would tell the students about working-class reality too.
One of the many strengths of Ian Haywood’s Working-class
Fiction is that it does keep working-class reality very much in
view. In the front of the book there is a five page chronology of
events in working-class and socialist history that also keeps an eye
on economic developments as well.
In fulfillment of Ian Haywood’s conviction that “the most
productive context for enjoying and interpreting working-class
fiction is within a labour movement and political tradition”, each
chapter opens with detailed discussion of the phase in the history of
British labour struggle which produced the fiction that he will examine.
To say, however, that working-class reality needs first to be
acknowledged, does make one wonder why that reality should be
rendered as fiction at all, particularly when the novel is defined by
bourgeois conventions. As Haywood notes, by the time working-class
people started to write fiction, “the British novel was deeply
biased against reflecting a working-class perspective on society”.
The Chartist novelist Thomas Cooper “understood that
nineteenth-century realism reflected a bourgeois view of the world,
with property and marriage the driving force of most storylines”.
If D.H. Lawrence in Sons and Lovers does not need to expand
the conventions of the novel to include industrial struggle and
solidarity it is because his novel is written to say good-bye to
working-class origins, and affirm, as Haywood says, “bourgeois
individualism” (p. 21).
On the other hand, Robert Tressell in The Ragged-Trousered
Philanthropists must re-invent the novel so that it will be about
a class as well as an individual, depict actual work, and incorporate
teaching chapters about socialism. When a novel reaches a
working-class readership as successfully as Tressell’s did, it
becomes an interpretation of reality that can begin to change it.
Working-class fiction can then fill an important role by
contesting ruling-class notions about what does constitute reality.
Education in Britain, including of course the education provided for
the working-class, has been and remains predominantly a literary
education – not the Greek and Latin classics that were once the
rites of passage for ruling class youth, but ‘English Literature’.
Reading, including the reading of fiction, has been an avenue to
truth approved by the dominant class in society ever since the
English Revolution (when the Puritans insisted that the Bible be
available to all). Socialists, including especially socialist
teachers, have a special obligation to see that books depicting
working-class life are read. It is encouraging that Barry Hines’s
Kestrel for a Knave, a book that Haywood writes well about, is
now among the most read books in schools. Similarly, it is gratifying
to see that Haywood’s book is part of the Writers and Their Work
series that has the support of the British Council behind it.
If working-class fiction demands that work itself be acknowledged
– as it is not in, for instance, a Jane Austen novel – that can
only be done if the characteristic work-related moments in the lives
of ordinary people are described.
Haywood identifies the scenes that occur again and again in novels
over the decades – the first day at work, in the factory or down
the pit; then the routine of rising early to go to work, ‘proletarian
dawn’, as Haywood names it – as well as strikes, periods of
unemployment, and accidents at work. If education is based on books
denying these realities, it is productive of illusions about life
under capitalism.
The reality captured by working-class fiction can of course make
the ruling classes uncomfortable. For instance, the British
government refused to allow a film version of Walter Greenwood’s
1933 novel Love on the Dole until 1941.
Meanwhile, the Communist Party of Great Britain was similarly
aware of the potential power of working-class fiction and encouraged
its production – while opposing modernist experimentation and
holding party authors to support of the party line. Novels could be
critical of the non-Communist leadership of working-class
organizations in the ultra-left ‘class-against-class’ period,
before the change to a popular front policy at the Seventh Congress
of the Communist International in 1935, but not afterwards.
Haywood has done an outstanding job of finding the working-class
novels of all periods, most of which are unfortunately out-of-print.
It is extremely valuable for future work to know, for instance, which
novels to read for scenes from the General Strike of 1926.
Readers will differ in their estimation of the individual novels.
I find Lewis Jones’s We Live (1939) a novel of lasting power
even if not perfectly executed. The claustrophobic descriptions of
the underground life in the dark for miners during a stay-down
strike; the exultant moment when the women take more militant action
against the local council than the men had envisioned; Mary’s
assumption of the leadership in party work; the exhilaration of
demonstrations and marches – all these are scenes that can still
inspire activists. That the hero dies in Spain in service of
Stalinist efforts to prevent revolution adds a historical irony which
is rendered tragic by the knowledge that Jones also died in the year
of the novel’s publication, because of his work for Spain.
Haywood makes a convincing case for Room at the Top as one
of the important novels of the post-war boom period, alongside the
customary Saturday Night and Sunday Morning. Pat Barker’s
Union Street, a book about the shared identity that women
feel, gains additional depth from being brought into the tradition
that Haywood studies. There are, however, so many important – and
generally neglected – authors that Haywood discusses in his short
book of only 178 pages, that a brief review can only name a few other
authors, about whom Haywood’s book must be consulted, that is
(alphabetically): Stan Barstow, Walter Brierley, Sid Chaplin, Allen
Clarke, Len Doherty, Nell Dunn, Buchi Emecheta, Lewis Grassic Gibbon,
James Hanley, Margaret Harkness, Harold Heslop, David Storey, Ellen Wilkinson.
Trainspotting, Irvine Welsh’s picture of urban youth in
the 1990s, rounds out this history. Its success in the cinema serves
to remind us that in this century film has often successfully
challenged the privileged interpretative function previously granted
to print. Since Love on the Dole – once permission for
shooting was finally granted – working-class films have, both as
adaptations of novels like Kes or Saturday Night and Sunday
Morning, or in the original work of directors like Ken Loach,
brought new resources to the depiction of what is, after all, the
class struggle and the prime agent of history.
 




The Crisis of Global Capitalism
by George Soros
Little Brown, 1998
“THE GLOBAL capitalist system which has been
responsible for the remarkable prosperity of (the USA) in the last
decade is coming apart at the seams.”
The words quoted above do not come from the pages of Socialism
Today but they do confirm statements that we have made ever since
the global financial crisis began in Thailand in July 1997. We would
not say that the last decade has meant prosperity for working people
in the USA because workers actually worked longer hours for lower
wages, but we would agree that there is overwhelming evidence that
the ‘global capitalist system’ is indeed ‘coming apart at the
seams’. What is remarkable about the statement, however, is that it
appears in the preface to a new book by George Soros, a spectacularly
successful speculator in the global financial markets of the 1990s.
Soros’s accurate diagnosis of the condition of global capitalism
formed part of his testimony to the US Congress in September 1998.
Normally, when Soros speaks, the markets listen, but his analysis
has been more than US money managers, flush with other people’s
money from pension schemes, want to face. Yet this is the same Soros
who made billions for his own investment fund by foreseeing both the
devaluation of the British pound in 1992 and, six months before it
happened, the 1997 crash in Thailand. It’s not wise to bet against
Soros who says, candidly, “I wonder if you would be reading this
book if I had not gained a reputation as a financial wizard” (p. 120).
Soros reveals in this book that his financial acumen arises from
certain “abstract philosophical ideas”. To the astonishment of a
socialist reader, these ideas turn out to be Soros’s own version of
the relationship between subjective and objective factors in human
activity. Soros, in fact, uses language reminiscent of Marx’s
explanation in Capital of how the labor of humans differs from
the life activity of other species because it involves imagination
and anticipation. Humans, Soros explains, “seek to make an impact,
to mold reality to their desires”, and this characteristic he names
as “the active or participating function” (p. 7). “In
situations that have thinking participants”, Soros says, “the
thoughts of these participants are part of the reality about which
they have to think”. Every Marxist understands these insights as
aspects of dialectical materialism, and even Soros feels that he must
explain that “the only reason I do not use the word dialectic more
prominently is that I do not want to be burdened by the excess
baggage that comes with it” (p. 60). Soros’s notion of an
‘excess baggage’ carried by Marxist philosophy is based on his
distorted perception that “Marx propounded a deterministic theory
of history”. What Soros encountered as ‘Marxism’ in his native
Hungary was instead a rigid, Stalinist distortion.
 
Precisely because it is dialectical, Marxism cannot see
‘determination’ as more than the exertion of pressures and the
setting of limits. Because the subjective factor of conscious human
activity must be present, we cannot be certain that, despite the best
efforts of some, history will not end in barbarism rather than
socialism. Soros, rejecting ‘dialectic’ through some false
associations the word carries for him, chooses ‘reflexivity’ to
describe the human engagement with reality.
Soros’s success in forecasting markets comes from his
understanding their dialectics. Human desire creates and is part of
what passes for reality in the markets. The belief that capitalist
economists hold in an invisible hand that regulates markets and
restores equilibrium is mistaken. Soros says, in fact, that “Marx
and Engels gave a very good analysis of the capitalist system 150
years ago, better in some ways, I must say, than the equilibrium
theory of classical economics” (p. xxvi).
Soros understands that, human desire being what it is, the nature
of markets is to feed on themselves, forming ‘bubbles’ that are
punctured with disastrous consequences: “For example, in the 1990s
the enthusiasm of international investors and bankers for Asian
shares and assets produced domestic booms spurred by high valuations
and easy credit. These booms accelerated growth in the area and
increased valuations, which in turn validated and encouraged further
capital inflows from abroad” (p. 57). Soros hints at the
technology bubble that is evident in 1999 by noting
‘self-reinforcing’ interest in Internet stocks at the date of the
book’s publication in late November 1998. A stock market decline in
the USA will, Soros suggests, cause rapid decline in an economy
sustained by the ‘feel good factor’ created by paper profits.
 
Soros also makes the wry forecast that “the communist regime in
China will be destroyed by a capitalist crisis” (p. 152), but
this is not the paradox that it seems. China’s regime is not
‘communist’ but a capitalist restorationist one which will lead
to similar results as are seen in Russia as far as the economy is
concerned. It is, however, the disastrous collapse of the Russian
economy after the introduction of capitalism that is the immediate
occasion of Soros’s book. “I am afraid”, he says, “that the
political developments triggered by the financial crisis may
eventually sweep away the global capitalist system itself” (p. xxviii).
Soros is convinced that capitalism must be saved. “Financial
markets”, he notes with some irony, “resent any kind of
government interference, but they hold a deep down belief that if
conditions get really rough the authorities will step in.” Soros
rightly feels that national governments cannot provide adequate
supervision of international finance capital. The market
fundamentalism of the Thatcher and Reagan era pushed aside residual
concerns about human values. With the IMF ultimately ineffectual,
Soros argues that an International Credit Corporation is needed to
guarantee loans that themselves reflect international standards of
transparency and collateralization. What makes Soros’s hopes
ultimately naive, however, is the belief that an international
community based on formal but not economic democracy can check the
excesses of capitalism. Capitalism is based on competition and
exploitation of labor which in turn produces a shrinking rate of
profit, overproduction of commodities that cannot be sold, recessions
and economic depressions. Soros’s illusions are like those of union
leaders who fail to see that a system sustained by exploitation
cannot be coaxed into putting effective brakes on exploitation. The
capitalist system may be forced to give some concessions from time to
time under the threat of movements of the masses, but it invariably
returns to take back what it gave.
Soros does reflect the views of the more far-sighted section of
international capitalism that is terrified at the dangers facing the
capitalist system. It is the job of socialists to prepare the ground
for an alternative to the inhumanity of global capitalism and make
possible a world based on democracy, prosperity and international solidarity.
 
The capitalist class and the stock market gamblers enjoyed the
bubbles in their champagne as 1999 began, but they will soon find
that their speculative bubbles are bursting around them. This small
group of exploiters will discover that, for them, the party’s over.
In the next century, the fruits of labor will belong not to the few
but to the entire human race.
 







Last month we reported the death, aged 75, of Victor
Paananen, a longstanding supporter of the CWI in the USA and
contributor to Socialism Today. Below we reprint Vic’s
first article for our magazine, from issue No. 4, December
1995, on Robert Tressell, author of the classic account of
working-class life, The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists





Between about 1905 and 1908, the Hastings housepainter and
sign-writer, Robert Noonan, wrote the first English novel that
addressed from the perspective of the working class such topics as
the alienation of labour under capitalism, the increasing misery of
the exploited, and the barriers to class-consciousness erected by the
press, the church, and the schools.
Meaning to poke a little bitter fun at himself and his workmates
for so generously producing surplus value for their bosses, he gave
that novel the ironic and somewhat awkward title, The Ragged
Trousered Philanthropists.
Appropriately enough for a novel that is about the labour process
itself – and treats the actual work of painters in close detail –
he then signed the book not Robert Noonan but, with the painters’
familiar trestle in mind, ‘Robert Tressell’. To his neatly
hand-drawn title-page, he added the information that the book is “the
story of twelve months in Hell told by one of the damned”.
Bob Noonan, as he was known in Hastings, was born in Dublin to
Mary Ann Noonan, apparently fathered by a married police inspector
and magistrate in whose home his mother was a servant. Hastings
people heard traces of a Dublin accent in Noonan’s speech; but he
had arrived in Hastings not directly from Dublin but from South
Africa, where he had learned his trade before having to flee the
country because of pro-Boer speeches that he made as a supporter of
Irish nationalist and anti-imperialist movements.
Noonan’s sister, who was named Mary Ann like his mother, had
settled in Hastings earlier and promised him plenty of sunshine if he
lived there. In fact, paid at a low rate in a trade in which the
availability of work fluctuated seasonally, he struggled to support
his daughter Kathleen – whose mother had died some years earlier –
and was already suffering from the tuberculosis that would soon kill
him. He had only his novel and his work in the local branch of a
Marxist group, the Social Democratic Federation, as sources of hope.
In his novel, Tressell captures the gloomy prospects that the then
popular ‘resort’ town actually held for him by carefully
eliminating from his otherwise accurate descriptions all references
to the sea which was in Hastings a source of recreation and even of
some free food – and renamed the town Mugsborough.
 
Struggle to publish
The novel ran to 1,700 hand-written pages, and Noonan could not
afford to have it typed. He tried nonetheless to find a publisher but
finally, leaving Kathleen with his sister, he travelled to Liverpool
to earn money that would allow him to emigrate to Canada with the
idea of sending for Kathleen once he was settled there. Instead, the
tuberculosis took its full toll and, aged only 40, he died in a
Liverpool workhouse, to be buried with twelve others in a common
grave. The novel would then have been lost forever but Kathleen, with
whom he had left it, mentioned it to her employer, whose neighbour
was Jessie Pope, a writer and editor who read the manuscript and
recommended it to the publisher Grant Richards. Richards, who was the
same year to take a chance on another book by an unknown Irish writer
– Dubliners by one James Joyce – said later that he had
had to admit that the Tressell manuscript had its own kind of
greatness: “the book was damnably subversive but it was extremely real”.
Not willing, however, to be carried away with admiration, Richards
paid Kathleen only £25 for all rights to the book, and then hired
Jessie Pope to shorten, edit, and rearrange the manuscript so that it
could appear as a book in 1911. Then, in 1918, a still shorter
‘abridged’ edition was issued.
Even though these editions were rearranged to end with the
socialist hero Frank Owen in a moment of despair that suggests he
will commit suicide, they were embraced by working-class readers, who
on worksites and in union halls passed along copies that were often
read until they fell apart. Finally, but not until after world war
two when Tressell’s biographer, the working-class scholar Fred
Ball, tracked down the manuscript and restored the original version,
was it published intact in 1955.
Now the full novel ends, as Tressell meant it to end, with
prospects improving for Frank Owen’s family and, crucially, a
branch of the socialist organisation about to be created in Hastings.
“From these ruins was surely growing the glorious fabric of the
co-operative commonwealth”, Tressell is now permitted to say at the
end of the book, and he looks forward to a “golden light that will
be diffused throughout all the happy world from the rays of the risen
sun of socialism”.
 
Alienated labour
Still, even when reading the severely abridged versions of the
novel that they initially had, workers have for eighty years
recognised what Grant Richards uneasily perceived; namely that the
book is both ‘extremely real’ as an account of working-class life
and ‘subversive’ both of capitalism and of the lies that sustain
it.
An early chapter like the one Tressell titles, with his usual
irony, The Financiers, is, for instance, only one of several
that present what anyone will recognise as what the life of ordinary
people really is. A young married couple with a child plan how they
will allocate the wages to be paid the next day. Tressell reproduces
the bills and threatening letters (warning of ‘unpleasantness’)
that they have received from the council and from hire-purchase firms
(with names like Didlum). The couple talk of their pressing needs for
what are clearly bare necessities; and tensions and accusations
develop as they recognise that they will only fall further behind. To
support life even at this subsistence level, a job must at all costs
be kept: worry about the job possesses this young couple as it does
all the working people in the novel.
Yet the work performed on the job – which is potentially
interesting if well done and which requires genuine skills as
Tressell’s close descriptions make clear – cannot be satisfying
in itself when it is rushed and performed not for use or for beauty
in the product but for profit. “So they went on”, Tressell
writes, “day after day, year after year, wishing their time was
over and, without realising it, really wishing they were dead.”
Under this system, time has become a commodity, within which is
contained the labour power that is all that working-people have to
sell. Thus, in a brilliant stroke of a kind unheard of in other
novels of the time, Tressell introduces directly into the text a
time-sheet complete with instructions (“Each piece of work must be
fully described, what it was, and how long it took to do”) and
threats (“No smoking or intoxicants during working hours”).
 
Rare respite
As Tressell recognised, this time-sheet is exactly the kind of
indignity that working people must endure, under capitalism, in
meeting their basic human needs by selling their labour. The tyranny
of the clock and the commodification of time are left behind in the
novel only briefly when Frank Owen is invited to design and apply
decorations in a house interior: “From one till five seemed a very
long time to most of the hands, but to Owen and his mate, who were
doing something in which they were able to take some interest and
pleasure, the time passed so rapidly that they both regretted the
approach of evening.” The firm has Owen do this job because it
maximises their profit if they do not have to subcontract the fine
work at a good price. In the same way, Noonan was himself asked to
decorate – murals and all – a church under construction in
Hastings and did a fine job, working for an extra halfpenny an hour
on his wages! This church has since been demolished and Noonan’s
art work destroyed except for one mural that was rescued from the
rubble and rebuilt brick by brick by present-day readers of the novel.
But respite from the monotony of the work, from the bad housing
and inadequate nutrition, and from the demeaning treatment of the
bosses, is rare at any point in the lives of the working people in
The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists. As he explains in his
preface, Tressell takes pains “to describe how the workers are
circumstanced at all periods of their lives from the cradle to the
grave”. “Therefore”, he explains, “the characters include
women and children, a young boy – the apprentice – some
improvers, journeymen in the prime of life, and worn out old men”.
It is this comprehensive range of treatment that produces a novel
that uniquely captures life as working people know and live it.
 
The alternative of socialism
Friedrich Engels, writing to the East End novelist Margaret
Harkness in April 1888, expressed his own expectations for novels
about the working class: “Realism, to my mind, implies, besides
truth of detail, the truth in reproduction of typical characters
under typical circumstances”. Clearly, Tressell met Engels’
‘standards’ by picturing working-class life and conditions in a
comprehensive way. Engels, however, went further, saying that it is
false to present “the working class ... as a passive mass unable to
help itself and not even showing ... any attempt at striving to help
itself”. The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists fully
satisfies this second ‘condition’ for realism because it presents
throughout arguments for the socialist alternative.
Tressell achieves this by means of another of his bold innovations
in the way that a novel can be written: ‘teaching chapters’ in
which characters like Frank Owen or the socialist Barrington make the
case for socialism during ‘dinner-time’ at work. Tressell manages
to make these scenes dramatic – and all the more realistic – by
presenting the interruptions, rough mockery, and counter-arguments of
Tory or Liberal workers, some of whom support their anti-socialist
feelings by reading clippings from the bourgeois press. Although a
few workers begin to understand the socialist perspective as the
novel progresses, most remain in mental terms creations of the press,
of the schools that they were only briefly permitted to attend, and
of the self-serving churches. Nonetheless, Tressell’s ironic,
indeed often humorous, presentation makes sure that the reader knows
that only socialism holds out to these workers the prospect of
self-respect, decent conditions, and a full share in the fruits of
their labour.
 
‘A novel not an essay’
Engels had earlier written another letter about socialist fiction
addressed to Minna Kautsky on 26 November 1885, in which he said that
“the socialist problem novel in my opinion fully carries out its
mission if by a faithful portrayal of the real relations it dispels
the dominant conventional illusions concerning these relations,
shakes the optimism of the bourgeois world, and inevitably instils
doubt as to the eternal validity of that which exists”, but he had
then feared that “under our conditions novels are mostly addressed
to readers from bourgeois circles, i.e. circles which are not
directly ours”.
Tressell accepted the story-telling conventions of the bourgeois
novel, setting out, as he says in the preface, to write “not a
treatise or essay, but a novel”. “My main object was”, he adds,
“to write a readable story full of human interest and based on the
happenings of everyday life, the subject of socialism being treated
incidentally”. But in his determination that the book have “at
least one merit – that of being true” and present “scenes and
characters ... that will be readily recognised by those concerned”,
Tressell was also compelled to move beyond the limits implicit in the
novels written to that date. As Engels had hoped working-class
fiction should do, the book achieves realism not only in its
descriptions but by its socialist understanding of how the conditions
depicted will be changed.
The Ragged Trousered Philanthropists has earned a place in
the history of the English novel, as that history is now understood
in academic circles. As, however, the popularity of this book among
working people has testified, Tressell also showed that a novel need
not rely – as novels down to Engels’ time had done – on
‘bourgeois readers’.
By writing a book that has for decades played an important role in
the struggle to create socialist consciousness in the working class,
Tressell has earned a place of honour for his service in what Engels
called “the fights of the militant proletariat”. Until Tressell’s
“rays of the risen sun of socialism” reach all of humanity, The
Ragged Trousered Philanthropists will continue to help win hearts
and minds for the tasks still ahead.
 




Vic Paananen, who died on 24 March, aged 75, was a veteran
socialist activist. A long-standing supporter of the Committee for a
Workers’ International (CWI), Vic was a member of Socialist
Alternative in the US. All those who knew Vic will remember his
dedicated, inspiring commitment to Marxist ideas and the struggle to
bring about a socialist society.
After his retirement from Michigan State University, East Lansing,
where he was the mainstay of the Socialist Alternative branch, Vic
moved to Revere, Massachusetts, and played an active part in the
Boston branch of SA until illness limited his activities.
Vic published two books, William Blake and British
Marxist Criticism, as well as numerous articles and reviews. His
main literary interest was always in working-class authors whose work
appealed to working-class readers. Vic’s first article for Socialism Today (to which he was an enthusiastic subscriber
from our first issue) was on Robert Tressell, author of The Ragged
Trousered Philanthropists (Issue No. 4, December 1995). Vic
explains how this socialist classic came to be written and published:
“a book [that] is both ‘extremely real’ as an account of
working class life and ‘subversive,’ both of capitalism and the
lies that sustain it”. There is no doubt that it will “continue
to win hearts and minds for the tasks still ahead”.
For many years, Victor and his first wife, Donna, spent a few
weeks every summer in Hastings, Sussex. This was the town where
Tressell lived and worked as a housepainter and sign-writer, and Vic
delighted in showing visitors around the local sites associated with Tressell.
Vic also participated in some of the Dylan Thomas festivals in
Swansea, South Wales. On the fiftieth anniversary of Thomas’s
death, Socialism Today (Issue No. 77, September 2003)
carried Vic’s illuminating article on Red Dylan: The Social Vision of Dylan Thomas. Referring to Thomas’s letters, stories
and film scripts, Vic shows (contrary to most academic accounts)
that, although he avoided explicit social commentary or propaganda,
Thomas was driven by a profound social vision based on revolutionary socialism:
“All the evidence points to Thomas holding
revolutionary convictions both before he moved from Wales to London
in 1934 and throughout his life.”
While staying in London or Sussex, Vic attended many Socialist
Party events over the years, as well as CWI summer schools in
Belgium. Despite his accomplishments, Vic was a modest person, quite
shy, but loved and respected by everyone who knew him. We will miss
his conversation and mischievous sense of humour.
Vic’s first wife, Donna, was tragically killed in a motor
accident in 2002. He leaves his second wife, Diane De Santis,
whom he married in 2011, and his sons, Karl and Neil.
Vic was defiant in the face of illness in recent years; his
Marxist vision was undiminished. Dylan Thomas’s words inevitably
come to mind:



Do not go gentle into that good night,
Old age should burn and rave at close of day;
Rage, rage against the dying of the light.



 







With the fiftieth anniversary of the death of Dylan Thomas
now being remembered in events and publications, his commitment to
socialism should be recognised, argues VICTOR PAANANEN.




This is a shorter version of an article by Victor Paananen which
appears in Welsh Writing in English: A Yearbook of Critical
Essays, Volume 8, 2003 [£12.95/ISBN 0-70831-829-0], edited by
Tony Brown, published by New Welsh Review Ltd (tel: 01970-626230) and
distributed by University of Wales Press (tel: 029-2049-6899). We
would like to thank Tony Brown for permission to extract the article
and for providing us with the rare Vancouver photograph of Dylan
Thomas. The current issue of WWE has several articles on Dylan
Thomas, including Victor Golightly’s, ‘Writing with dreams and
blood’: Dylan Thomas, Marxism and 1930s Swansea.

“I take my stand with any revolutionary body that
asserts it to be the right of all men to share, equally and
impartially, every production of man ... from the sources of
production at man’s disposal”. Dylan Thomas, New Verse (1934).
THROUGHOUT THIS YEAR there will be events and publications to mark
the fiftieth anniversary of the death, at the early age of 39, of
Dylan Thomas, Welsh poet, short-story writer, dramatist, and film
writer. Interest in Thomas remains high, and many of his poems (such
as Do Not Go Gentle and Fern Hill) continue to have a
wide popular appeal that few other 20th century poems retain.
Discussion of Dylan Thomas in this anniversary year must acknowledge
not only that Thomas was a poet of astonishing technical gifts but a
man fully conscious of social conditions, a thinker with a grounding
in Marxism, and a self-proclaimed revolutionary socialist.
Writing about Dylan Thomas got off to a bad start with a book by
Henry Treece (Dylan Thomas: ‘Dog Among the Fairies’) that
asserted that Thomas had outgrown the Marxism of his youth. Treece’s
book is a confused polemic against the practice of ‘left-wing poets
and critics’, and when Thomas was given chapters to read in
manuscript, he wrote to Treece to say, “surely it is evasive to say
my poetry has no social awareness – no evidence of contact with
society”, adding “actually, ‘seeking kinship’ with everything
... is exactly what I do do” (Thomas, Collected Letters,
pp. 310–11). Thomas made his opinion of Treece’s book even
more clear when a friend asked him to inscribe a copy for him, and
Thomas wrote in it ‘to hell with this stinking book’.
With Treece as a forerunner, literary critics like M.L. Rosenthal
assigned Thomas a role as the poet of ‘introspective personalism’.
It was readily admitted by the critics that most of Thomas’s ideas
and language were already there in his adolescent notebooks, but they
assumed that he had jettisoned his Marxism and retained the poetic
materials of this period. More recently, however, the letters
collected by Paul Ferris in 1985, the memoirs of friends and
acquaintances that have been published with some frequency, and
especially the film scripts unearthed and published by John Ackerman
in 1995, have provided powerful evidence for a consistent social –
in fact, socialist – vision in Thomas’s work and life.
 
A socialist to the end
JOHN MALCOLM BRINNIN, Thomas’s host and chronicler of his visits
to the USA, found him “actually more censorious of the status
quo than any of the other British poets”. The less than
sympathetic Brinnin says that Thomas “expressed himself strongly on
political matters and tended indiscriminately to support the far left”.
From these American visits, Professor William York Tindall of
Columbia University, offered an important report that has been
ignored by Thomas’s biographers.
“Thomas told me (in 1952) that he was a Communist. My
disbelief was shaken, however, at a party a few days later. Here
Thomas suddenly arose, kicked the cat which turned and bit me and, to
the embarrassment of our hostess, called a distinguished and once
radical American novelist, who was also a guest, both ‘renegade’
and ‘prick’.”
One must regret the unfortunate outcome that Thomas’s explosion
had for the cat, but the incident does point to convictions
passionately held by Thomas. No doubt Thomas had, as so often, been
drinking, but in vino veritas [there is truth in the wine].
The reports from Brinnin, Tindall and others all express surprise
that, at what proved to be the end of his life, Thomas had political
interests and convictions. His description of himself as a communist
is greeted with ‘disbelief’. Nevertheless Thomas’s support for
a revolutionary party had been publicly announced nearly twenty years
before. Thomas’s statement in New Verse in 1934 – “I
take my stand with any revolutionary body that asserts it to be the
right of all men to share, equally and impartially, every production
of man ... from the sources of production at man’s disposal” –
was written during his close association with A.E. (‘Bert’)
Trick, a man twenty-five years older than Thomas, and his political
mentor. In letters from the time of his association with this
socialist grocer – identified as ‘a Communist’ by Thomas’s
wife Caitlin and others, but now known to be a revolutionary
socialist who remained in the Labour Party – Thomas’s politics
can be seen taking shape.
Twenty-five percent of the population of Thomas’s native Swansea
were chronically out of work and the letters reflect Thomas’s
awareness of the resulting conditions. In November 1933, writing to
Pamela Hansford Johnson, Thomas, just 19, speaks of “an outgrown
and decaying system” in which “light is being turned into
darkness by the capitalists and industrialists ... There is only one
thing you and I, who are of this generation, must look forward to,
must work for and pray for”, writes Thomas.
“And, because, as we
fondly hope, we are poets and voicers not only of our personal selves
but of our social selves, we must pray for it all the more
vehemently. It is the Revolution. Later, in another letter, I will
give you a more reasoned outline of Revolution, the hard facts of
communism ... and hope that you, too, may don your scarlet tie... The
precious seeds of revolution must not be wasted.” (Letters, pp. 55–56)
The letter with the ‘more reasoned outline of Revolution’ was
apparently not written, but Thomas does write to Trevor Hughes in
January 1934 that “society to adjust itself has to break itself;
society ... has grown up rotten with its capitalist child, and only
revolutionary socialism can clean it up”. “Capitalism is a system
made for a time of scarcity”, observes Thomas, who has reached the
socialist insight that capitalism, because it seeks only profit for
the few, is not an efficient mechanism for satisfying the needs of
the many. With modern technology, it would, under socialism, be
possible to make “the truth of today the truth of fertility”
(Letters, p. 92).
In a letter to Glyn Jones, Thomas labels himself a ‘socialist’
but on 2 May 1934 he tells Hansford Johnson, “I could go to Russia
with a Welsh Communist organisation” (Letters, p. 127).
On 3 July 1934, when Harry Pollitt, general secretary of the
Communist Party (CP), and Tom Mann, another well-known British
Communist, were on trial for ‘seditious speeches in the South Wales
coalfield’ Swansea seemed “the centre of all revolutionary
activities” (Letters, p. 146). Thomas’s
characterization of the moment is understandable: thousands marched
to the Swansea Assizes at which Pollitt and Mann were being tried. “I
have just left the Socialist Party [not the Socialist Party that
produces Socialism Today in 2003!]”, Thomas tells Hansford
Johnson, “and offered my services to the Communists” (Letters, p. 146).
Later in July 1934, Thomas wrote to Hansford Johnson, “If it can
be forced home on the consciousness of the people that the present
economic system is ethically bad, the seed has been planted that may
in time grow into a fine revolutionary flower”. He saw a society
“composed, at top and bottom, of financial careerists and a
proletarian army of dispossessed. Out of the negation of the
negation”, he said, “must rise the new synthesis”. He expressed
impatience with parliamentary processes for the achievement of social
ownership: “Alternatively, there is the confiscation of property by
force ... If constitutional government cannot, in the space of a year
after the next general election, fulfil their policies ... the army
and the police force must be subdued, and property taken by force”
(Letters, pp. 158–59). At a meeting of a Swansea
literary society in October of that year, Thomas was “introduced
... as a Young Revolutionary” and answered questions about “the
Communist Erewhon” [anagram of ‘nowhere’, meaning ‘utopia’]
(Letters, pp. 171–72).
Whether Thomas was actually a member of the CP is, in fact,
impossible to resolve with any sources now available. His frequent
labelling of himself as a C/communist in reported conversations in
fact left it to the transcriber to supply either a capital C or a
small one. There were and are communists, small c, who belong to
other organizations. Bert Trick, whom Thomas called a ‘communist
grocer’, small c, was – as his son Kerith Trick said at the Dylan
Thomas Festival in Swansea in 2000 – “always a member of the
Labour Party, albeit on the extreme left”. Until the era of Tony
Blair, the Labour Party included socialists, many of them
Trotskyists, but now of course Clause Four advocating public
ownership has been dropped, and most socialists not expelled from the
Labour Party have left.
All the evidence points to Thomas’s holding revolutionary
convictions both before he moved from Wales to London in 1934 and
throughout his life. In 1944, for instance, Thomas wanted the
Communist Party cultural journal Our Time to publish Ceremony
after a Fire Raid, ‘pressing’ the poem “upon [Arnold]
Rattenbury because, he said, he wanted to advertise that he remained
a socialist” (Hobday, p. 233). Thomas contributed not only to
Our Time but to its successor Communist Party periodicals
Arena and Circus. On his 1952 visit to America, he also
agreed to do a poetry reading for the Socialist Party of the USA
without expecting his usual fee. And, as we have seen, Thomas called
himself a communist and relished opportunities for political
discussion in the final days in New York city.
Not surprisingly though, Thomas, who was ill-at-ease with the
university-educated and with academics, disliked the sort of
communist intellectual that was a characteristic product of the
1930s. As he said, he disliked them precisely “as revolutionaries
and as communists, for, born in fairly wealthy middle-class homes,
educated at expensive prep schools, public schools, and universities,
they have no idea at all of what they priggishly call ‘the class
struggle’ and no contact at all with either any of the real motives
or the real protagonists of that class struggle” (Letters,
p. 185). These were the kind of people that Bert Trick had
taught him to call ‘Parlour Pinks’. Thomas, in his own
“semi-proletarian, bourgeois, provincial upbringing” had seen in
Depression era-Wales the material basis for the class struggle that a
Marxist understands to be the motive force of history. In opposition
to theoretical Marxists, who would as poets try to versify theory,
Thomas appealed to concrete experience and to a perspective that
embraces what Karl Marx would call the totality of human
life-activity. “The individual in the mass and the mass in the
individual”, Thomas said, “can be made poetically important only
when the status and the position of both mass and individual are
considered by that part of the consciousness which is outside both”
(Letters, p. 185).
In this often misunderstood rejection by Thomas of the literary
Marxists of the 1930s, one can in fact recognize the stance that he
would take in his own poetry, rejecting propagandizing for the search
for that authentic human being-in-the world that awaits humanity when
alienation and indeed class struggle ceases. Of course, as the
language in the letters shows, Dylan Thomas had some knowledge of
Marx, gained, probably, under Trick’s tutelage. And, as his prose
writings and film scripts reveal, he understood poverty and class
consciousness and could describe them as experienced in Wales and the world.
 
Dylan Thomas as social writer
BECAUSE THERE IS not room here for a close analysis of Thomas’s
socially conscious writing, a few examples must suffice. The
Peaches, one of Thomas’s finest and most often reprinted
stories, is, for instance, a story about class consciousness. Annie,
based on Thomas’s beloved aunt, Ann Jones, ‘brown-skinned,
toothless, hunchbacked,’ forgetfully wearing her usual tennis
shoes, despite having changed into her best dress, tries to please
her wealthy relative, Mrs Williams, by serving a can of peaches she
has saved for a long time. Mrs Williams, whose physical uneasiness in
a poor household has been evident throughout, will not eat in Mrs
Jones’s smelly parlour: ‘I can’t bear peaches’. This refusal
leads to a final break between these class-divided relatives, with Mr
Jones in his rage demanding, “Who does she think she is? Aren’t
peaches good enough for her? To hell with her bloody motor car and
her bloody son! Making us small.” Because of the refusal of the
peaches, Mrs Williams’s son, Jack, and the young Dylan are, at the
end of the story, on opposite sides of the barrier of class: “The
chauffeur came back. The car drove off, scattering the hens. I ran
out of the stable to wave to Jack. He sat still and stiff by his
mother’s side.” There can be few demonstrations in literature of
how class consciousness is created more sensitive or more accurate
than The Peaches.
The film-scripts reveal a socialist understanding of the cost to
humanity of a failed economic system. Wales – Green Mountain, Black
Mountain was too political for the British Council to show overseas.
One memorable passage answers the early critics who said that Thomas
ignored the social reality of Depression-era Wales:



Remember the procession of the old-young men
From dole queue to corner and back again,
From the pinched, packed streets to the peak of slag
In the bite of the winters with shovel and bag,
With a drooping fag and a turned up collar,
Stamping for the cold at the ill lit corner
Dragging through the squalor with their hearts like lead
Staring at the hunger and the shut pit-head
Nothing in their pockets, nothing home to eat,
Lagging from the slag heap to the pinched, packed street.
Remember the procession of the old-young men.
It shall never happen again.



The ‘old-young men’ have been denied the opportunity for free
creative labour that humans require. Such lives are over before they
have begun: a point made again in the image of “the hunger born pit
boy” that Thomas uses to invoke Wales in Our Country, another of
his documentary films. Socialists demand a society “in which the
free development of each is the condition for the free development of
all” (Marx), and Thomas, with his concern for unlived lives, makes
such a demand. In A City Re-born, which focuses on Coventry in
England, Thomas’s commentary asserts that “After the war there
can be no thinking of returning to the good old days, the days of
cramped housing in crippling streets”. In the same film, the
comment about war-time production is that it “makes you think what
a hell of a lot they can produce if it’s for use and not for sale
...” No wonder that, as John Ackerman writes, “there were
objections to some sections of the film” which had the appearance
“of political propaganda”.
The Introduction to John Ackerman’s 1995 edition of
Thomas’s film scripts announces a changed view of Thomas’s
political commitment from the opinions that had been usual since
Treece. Ackerman writes, “Instinctively on the left, [Dylan Thomas]
was one of the few poets of the 1930s who remained steadfast in his
political allegiance throughout his life”. The British documentary
film movement was from the days of John Grierson onwards left-wing in
its orientation and, as Ackerman says, “Dylan Thomas was
comfortably at home with the political ethos of those working on the
documentary propaganda films”. Quoting Thomas’s statement that
“writers should keep their opinions for their prose”, Ackerman
says that Thomas’s “work on these documentary films encouraged
him to articulate political and social views”.
 
The Marxist poet: beyond propaganda
THOMAS’S SOCIAL VISION is one that longs for an outcome in which
alienated existence ends and humanity assumes its place in natural
process. But Thomas would not write ‘propaganda’ poetry, or
rather he would not ‘publish’ such poetry except as it would be
heard as commentary in the film-scripts. A study of his notebooks
supports Ralph Maud’s recognition that “Thomas could write about
‘the century’, ‘the state’, ‘civilization’, and ‘man’s
man-made spare time’ (i.e. unemployment) with the rest of the
thirties poets”. The differences between the notebooks and the
collected poems reveal a conscious decision, however, not to include
direct social commentary in his published work. Thomas, with his
revolutionary outlook, saw through bourgeois social arrangements –
of which he offered a critique in his letters, his published prose,
and the film-scripts – to the more fundamental and enduring
processes of nature.
Thomas chose, in his poetry, not to write propaganda within
bourgeois society, but to write for the timeless realm that comes
with the removal of classes. This approach appears in one of Thomas’s
earliest poems:



And death shall have no dominion.
Dead men naked they shall be one
With the man in the wind and the west moon;
When their bones are picked clean and the clean bones gone,
They shall have stars at elbow and foot;
Though they go mad they shall be sane,
Though they sink through the sea they shall rise again;
Though lovers be lost love shall not;
And death shall have no dominion.



Here Thomas speaks out of the freedom that is the consciousness of
necessity. He is not tied to a self-absorbed ego, but he loses self
in common humanity and in process. When Thomas writes, ‘Though
lovers be lost love shall not;/ And death shall have no dominion’,
he recognizes that the individual passes but that what his fellow
poet and critic Christopher Caudwell calls “desires as ancient and
punctual as the stars” endure.
Perhaps Dylan Thomas should have written propaganda poetry as did
his less radical contemporaries; but what he did write gives him a
stronger claim to readers in the more fully human world of the
socialist future in which social conflict and inequality will no
longer inhibit human development and self-knowledge.

Works cited
Baldanza, Frank. Iris Murdoch. New York: Twayne, 1974.
Brinnin, John Malcolm. Dylan Thomas in America. Boston: Atlantic-Little, Brown, 1955.
Caudwell, Christopher. Illusion and Reality [1937]. New York: International Publishers, 1973.
Cox, Idris. The Fight for Socialism in Wales. Cardiff: Welsh Committee of the Communist Party, 1948.
Croft, Andy. Authors Take Sides: Writers and the Communist Party 1929–56. Opening the Books: Essays on the Social and Cultural History of British Communism, ed. Geoff Andrews, Nina Fishman & Kevin Morgan. London: Pluto Press, 1995.
Hawkins, Desmond. When I Was: A Memoir of the Years between the Wars. London: Macmillan, 1989.
Hobday, Charles. Edgell Rickward: A Poet at War. Manchester: Carcanet, 1989.
Lindsay, Jack. Meetings with Poets. London: Frederick Muller, 1968.
Marx, Karl, Manifesto of the Communist Party (with Friedrich Engels).
Maud, Ralph, ed. Poet in the Making: The Notebooks of Dylan Thomas. London: Dent, 1968.
Rosenthal, M.L. The Modern Poets: A Critical Introduction. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 1960.
Thomas, Caitlin, with George Tremlett. Caitlin: Life with Dylan Thomas. New York: Holt, 1987.
Thomas, Dylan. The Collected Poems, ed. Walford Davies & Ralph Maud. London: Dent, 1988
― The Collected Stories. New York: New Directions, 1984.
― The Collected Letters, ed. Paul Ferris. London: Dent, 1985.
― The Film-scripts, ed. John Ackerman. London: Dent, 1995.
Tindall, William York. A Reader’s Guide to Dylan Thomas. London: Thames and Hudson, 1962.
Treece, Henry. Dylan Thomas: ‘Dog Among the Fairies’. London: Lindsay Drummond, 1949. (Second edition: London: Benn, 1956.)
Trick, Bert, The Young Dylan Thomas. Texas Quarterly 9 (1966).
Trick, Kerith. Bert Trick – The Original Marx Brother. New Welsh Review 54 (Autumn 2001).
 




Witness Against the Beast: Blake and the Moral Law
by E.P. Thompson
Published by Cambridge University Press, 1993, £17.95
E.P. THOMPSON, THE SOCIALIST historian best known for The
Making of the English Working Class, acknowledged two sources of
inspiration for his own work (‘my own patheon’): Karl Marx and
William Blake. Before his death in 1993, Thompson finished Witness
Against the Beast, which studies Blake’s opposition to the
morality, science and social values of his age, the late 18th and
early 19th centuries. Thompson places Blake’s protests in the
context of the religious opinions that had been voiced by the Ranters
and other sects in the English revolution of 1640–1660 and were
still heard from dissenting groups in Blake’s own time.
The Marxist historian A.L. Morton was the first to demonstrate the
similarities between Blake’s ideas and language and those of the Ranters
“The Ranters,” Morton explains, “formed the extreme
left-wing of the sects which came into prominence during the English
revolution, both theologically and politically ... The Ranters, and
they alone at this date, spoke for and to the most wretched and
submerged elements of the population, the slum dwellers of London and
other cities.” (The World of the Ranters, p. 70)
Because the Ranters believed God to be literally in every human
being, they advocated the radical equality of all people, rejected
the need to adhere to the moral law emphasised by other Christian
groups, and denounced the rich while calling for ownership in common.
Around 1649, for about a year, the Ranters appear, according to
Morton, “to have attracted a mass following, especially among the
London poor”. William Blake, a Londoner born in Soho in 1757, more
than 100 years after the high point of Ranter activity, seems to echo
the Ranters in his assertations of the divinity in every individual,
in his objections to the conventional morality of his age, and in his
aspiration for a society based on the principle defined by Blake as
‘all things in common’.
Thompson acknowledges Morton’s pioneering research but also
finds a significant degree of correspondence in content and language
between Blake’s work and the writings of the Muggletonians, a
Christian tendency made up of admirers of the preacher and writer
Ludowick Muggleton, that originated around 1652 immediately after the
period of Ranter successes. Muggletonian doctrines were similar to
Ranter doctrines and influenced by them. Thompson offers some
evidence that Blake’s mother may have been a member of the
Muggletonians. Although not himself a Christian, Thompson, feeling
the influence of both Blake and Marx, had from the time that he
started to do research on the Muggletonians, been amused to call
himself a ‘Muggletonian Marxist’.
The context provided by Morton and Thompson greatly assists the
reader of Blake who moves at all beyond the usual anthology pieces
and enters the bewildering maze of myth, radical politics and
visionary Christianity that Blake creates in such major works as
Jerusalem. Thompson convincingly shows that Blake’s
religious vocabulary was less eccentric than we might think: it was
in fact a language that embodied the opposition of ordinary people to
the ruling powers of the age.
“It struck very precisely at critical positions of the hegemonic
culture, the ‘common sense’ of the ruling groups, which today can
be seen to be intellectually unsound and sometimes to be no more than
ideological apologetics,” Thompson writes (p. 110). “Blake
had been taught in childhood to place a critical distance between
himself and the rich and great,” Thompson explains, and Blake
absorbed from the “pockets of radical dissent among the trades ...
a stubborn lack of deference, both social and intellectual”
(pp. 111–112).
Thompson’s expert knowledge of the vocabulary and attitudes of
the age permits him to offer some powerful new readings even of
Blake’s best-known worker. Blake’s London Thompson shows
to be “an indictment of the acquisitive ethic, endorsed by the
institutions of the state, which divides man from man” and “brings
him into mental and moral bondage” (p. 191).
Thompson’s book is not meant to provide everything that a
beginning reader of Blake’s longer works would need. Blake’s
self-generated mythic system, one of the vehicles for both his
political and religious insights, is not explained, so standard works
like Nothrop Frye’s Fearful Symmetry remain necessary. The
book does however succeed in its demonstration of Blake’s emergence
from a context of growing opposition to the new commercial and
industrial civilisation of England – and it communicates Thompson’s
passionate advocacy of Blake as an ancestor of all militant protest
against this economy and culture.
There is however a further step that Thompson has not taken that
would have allowed him to see more of the ‘Marxist’ in the
‘Muggletonian’. In his opposition to what he called ‘natural
religion’, Blake objected to the efforts of his age to understand
the external world rather than to change it, and Thompson
acknowledges Blake’s Marx-like emphasis on ‘activity’ rather
than contemplation. The labour that Blake calls humanity to perform
is the physical as well as cultural transformation of a recognisable
modern London into ‘Jerusalem’. Blake’s religious vocabulary –
a voice of protest in his own age, as Thompson shows – is also able
to carry Blake’s attempt both to redefine the human
relationship to nature and to insist upon the centrality of labour:
such an enterprise clearly points toward the achievement of Marx.
Yet, despite Blake’s understanding of the
world in terms of dynamic ‘contraries’, Thompson is unwilling to
accept Blake as “a premature practitioner of Marxist dialectic”
(p. 226). For the Marxist Thompson to come so close to a
recognition of Blake and Marx as co-workers, and then back-off, must,
I think, be a disappointment to the reader familiar with both
Blake and Marx. But Thompson has nonetheless done enough to convince
us that Blake’s work is like Marx’s, “a plank in the floor upon
which the future must walk” (p. 228).
Deep within his demanding epic Jerusalem, Blake offers this
account of the human consequences of the industrial revolution:



And all the Arts of Life they chang’d into the Arts of Death in Albion.
The hour-glass contemn’d because its simple workmanship
Was like workmanship of the plowman, and the water wheel
That raises water into cisterns, broken and burned with fire
Because its workmanship was like the workmanship of the shepherd;
And, in their stead, intricate wheels invented, wheel without wheel,
To perplex youth in their outgoings and to bind to labours in Albion
Of day and night the myriads of eternity: that they may grind
And polish brass and iron hour after hour, laborious task,
Kept ignorant of its use: that they might spend the days of wisdom
In sorrowful drudgery to obtain a scant pittance of bread,
In ignorance to view a small portion and think that All,
And call it Demonstration, blind to all the simple rules of life.
                                        (Jerusalem, Chapter three, Plate 65)



In Blake’s objection to ‘Demonstration’ is heard his
objection to the categories of the bourgeois, non-dialectical
thought. His recognition that the industrial worker is permitted
knowledge of only a narrow aspect of the production of the commodity
certainly foreshadows the explanations by Marx and Engels of the
effects of the division of labour with the resulting alienation from
one’s own work.
London, a living symbol for the triumph of capital, has, in
Blake’s Ranter or Muggletonian language, been turned into
‘Babylon’. But, in lines that are among the most widely known in
the English-speaking world, Blake announces his own total commitment
to the labour that will transform London into ‘Jerusalem’, and he
asks us to join in the work:



I shall not cease from mental fight,
Nor shall my sword sleep in my hand,
Till we have built Jerusalem
In England’s green and pleasant land.



Socialists could do worse than to accept E.P. Thompson’s
recommendation of both Blake and Marx as interpreters and prophets:
both saw from their London perspectives the damage to humanity that
capitalism was wreaking and both called upon us not simply to
understand this system but to change it.
 

