der Pantsov: The Chinese Trotskyists in Soviet Russia (Part 4)



Alexander Pantsov Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Chinese Trotskyists in Soviet Russia

Alexander Pantsov
From Students to Dissidents
The Chinese Trotskyists in Soviet Russia
(Part 4)
In the last analysis, all their work was directed toward laying the foundations for subsequent opposition activity in China. The future struggle against Stalinism in China would require great resources and the young Chinese oppositionists did all in their power to lay the basis for it in advance. They paid great attention to the development of their tactical line. The elaboration of the line was the main business of a new meeting of activists which took place in March or April of 1929. [224] It was held in the student accommodation block of the Moscow Artillery School. The meeting consisted of the members of the General Committee, plus Wang Fan-hsi, Fan Wen-hui, Pien Fu-lin, and many other representatives of Chinese Trotskyist groups which, by this time, existed at CUTC, the International Lenin School, the Artillery School, the Military Engineering School, and the Infantry School. [225] The delegates discussed the tasks facing them on their return to China. For many this question assumed an immediate practicality since at the end of the semester they would be finishing their studies and leaving for home. Some indeed, including Wang Fan-hsi, did all in their power to bring forward the date of their departure, so eager were they to return to practical work in China. By a majority of votes the meeting decided to forbid those returning to China to take any steps toward the formation of a new, independent political party, ordering them to conduct their activities within the framework of a secret faction inside the CCP. In the event of their expulsion, they were to work within the already existing opposition organization. (They had in mind the Wo-men-te hua [Our Word] group which had been set up by the former UTC students who had taken part in the demonstration in Red Square on November 7, 1927.) According to Wang Fan-hsi, only one person spoke out against this policy. This was Liu Jen-ching, who declared that he did not want to waste energy working within the Communist Party and that on his return he intended to immediately begin oppositional work outside the CCP. Only time would tell, he said, whether he would cooperate with the ten “milksops” who had returned home before him. [226]
Such an intervention from Liu Jen-ching was not entirely unexpected. He had always played the role of dissident within the Trotskyist organization and the majority already regarded him as a “right-wing liquidationist.” This was because of his particular interpretation of Trotsky’s slogan, proposed in October 1928, for the calling of a Constituent Assembly in China. [227] Liu Jen-ching interpreted this as an appeal for the formation of parliamentary structures whereas the majority, in militant mood, saw in Trotsky’s idea only a tactical manoeuvre to arouse the masses during a period of counter-revolutionary advance and, in the final analysis, as part of the preparation for a new uprising. [228] The meeting also re-elected the General Committee, choosing on this occasion Fan Wen-hui, Pien Fu-lin, and T’an Po-ling (a CUTC student). [229]
While preparing for the struggle in China, the student oppositionists did not neglect the struggle against the Stalinists in the universities. In 1929 they formed a united front at CUTC with all those who were at odds with the university party committee. The concrete problems of the united front tactic were discussed at a third meeting of activists which took place in May or June of 1929. Like the original meeting, this took place in a wood on the outskirts of Moscow. Eleven persons were present, including Fan Wen-hui, Pien Fu-lin, T’an Po.ling, An Fu, Wang Fan-hsi, Li P’ing, Chao Chi, and Liu Yin. There was yet another change of leadership. The leading position on the General Committee was now taken up by Chao Yen-ch’ing, a man who, having been born in 1897, was more experienced than other members and was popular among the students at large. Li P’ing was put in charge of organizational work and Wan Chih-ling (alias Wan Chu-ling, UTC/ CUTC from November 1927) was put in charge of agitation and propaganda. [230] In addition to the General Committee, a new body, the “Struggle Committee,” was established. Its task was to co-ordinate the joint struggle of the Trotskyists and other disaffected elements against the Stalinists in the universities. It was made up of five persons – Liu Yin, Chao Chi, Wang Fan-hsi, Chi Ta-ts’ai, and Tseng Chien-ch’uan (a student at CUTE). The most significant result of the Struggle Committee’s discussions with other student groups came at a general meeting of the university party branch in June 1929 when, in the presence of members of the Chinese delegation to the ECCI (Ch’u Ch’iu-pai and Chang Kuo-t’ao) and of the Khamovnicheskii regional secretary of the Soviet Communist Party, the oppositionists and their allies made fierce and sustained criticisms of the CUTC party leadership. [231] This stormy meeting lasted several days but ended in defeat for the Opposition. It proved impossible to overturn the Stalinist majority in the student body. Not long after this, in mid-August, Wang Fan-hsi, Liu Yin, and Chao Chi left the university and returned to China. With their departure the Struggle Committee ceased to exist. [232] Shortly before this, apparently at the end of July, the membership of the General Committee was increased to five, with the co-option of Hu P’eng-chu (CUTC) and Li Kuang-chi (alias Chung Yung-ts’ang, CUTC). [233] This was not the end of the reorganization. On the contrary, after Wang Fan-hsi, Liu Yin, Chao Chi, and thirteen other activists left the university at practically the same moment [234], the atmosphere within the Chinese Left Opposition began to overheat. A number of activists began to talk of the necessity for a new change in the leadership. As a result, a small group of leading members met in September or October 1929 (there were between five and eight people present) and replaced the five-member General Committee with a new three-member committee consisting of Fu Hsueh-li who became secretary, Li Kuang-chi, and Wan Chih-ling. [235] This committee only functioned for two or three weeks, collapsing in October or early November. A large number of students returning at this time from holidays in the Crimea simply refused to recognize its authority since it had been elected by such a narrow group of activists. It was decided to form a new general committee consisting of the newly elected secretaries of the course committees. The current situation was that Li Kuang-chi was secretary of the first-year course committee, Chia Tsung-chou (at CUTE from September 1927 to June 1928, pseud. Kuznetsov; later at CUTC, pseud. there Stepan Lukich Lugovoi) of the second-year, and Pien Fu-lin of the third-year course committee. [236] However, at the end of December, new elections to the course committees were already being prepared, although in fact only that for the second year went ahead. This resulted in Chia Tsung-chou being replaced by Ch’iu Chih-ch’eng. [237]
These shakeups in the leadership following one after another reflected real political differences emerging among the Chinese oppositionists. The first signs of these differences appeared after the unsuccessful intervention at the ten-day-long party general meeting. The root of the conflict was disagreement over the tactical line to pursue in the struggle against the party committee at CUTC.
The sharpest clash came after a small group of leaders met in autumn 1929 and decided, on the recommendation of Chia Tsung-chou and Li Kuang-chi, to downgrade the struggle against the Stalinists in the party bureau and to break with the united front which had been built up with other disaffected students. An Fu, Li P’ing, Pien Fu-lin, Fan Wen-hui, and Wang Ching-t’ao who resolutely opposed this, in their view, opportunist switch in policy and wanted to continue the anti.bureaucratic struggle, were all absent from the meeting. According to Chia Tsung-chou, by November 1929 a de facto split had taken place in the organization. An Fu and his supporters went so far as to produce a pamphlet which they called Two Tactics directed against the group of “Trotskyist opportunists,” who in their turn accused An Fu of leftism. [238]
The internal dispute had extremely negative consequences for the underground organization whose ranks, however, were still growing in number toward the beginning of 1930. Evidence from a number of sources points to a membership of about eighty around this time. [239] In addition, there were scores of sympathizers and waverers. [240] The Trotskyists accounted for more than 20 per cent of the total number of Chinese students in Moscow. But in conditions of continual feuding, the dangers of disintegration of such a comparatively large organization were acute. To prevent this, Chia Tsung-chou proposed that the internal structures of the Trotskyist faction be strengthened. Until then, the Chinese Left Opposition had been a fairly amorphous body. The only active body within it (apart from the short-lived Struggle Committee) was the General Committee which directed all the work of the membership. There was no real primary organization in the real meaning of the term. [241] On Chia Tsung-chou’s recommendation, a reorganization was carried out in the autumn of 1929. The basic unit of organization within the faction was to be a three-person cell. The leaders of each cell would, in turn, form another layer of cells – in Chia Tsung-chou’s words, “party troikas” – with roughly one for each study circle. These cells would, in tum, be subordinated via the appropriate course committee to the General Committee. [242] This organizational structure only extended to the Trotskyists at CUTC. Oppositionists in other colleges, despite formal links, were practically speaking autonomous. The biggest of the groups outside CUTC at this time consisted of ten to fifteen oppositionists at the Moscow Infantry School led by Lu Yeh-shen. There were also groups of Trotskyists at the Military Engineering and Artillery schools and at the International Lenin School, where, following the departure of Liu Jen-ching, the major role was played by Ma Yuan-sheng. [243] Contacts between these groups and the General Committee were organized by a special body known as the “Secretariat” whose members were Chia Tsung-chou, Li P’ing, and Hu Ch’ung-ku. [244]
But special measures taken to improve the security of the organization by making it more rigorously conspiratorial could only postpone what was to be a tragic denouement. By the time the discussions on reorganization were taking place, the OGPU and the ECCI had at their disposal solid information on the individual membership of the Trotskyist organization at CUTC and were simply waiting for a suitable moment to deal the organization a shattering blow. In the archives of the Chinese delegation to the ECCI, of the Comintern International Control Commission, and of CUTC itself, there are innumerable documents (denunciations, intercepted letters, statements of the university authorities to the OGPU and the ECCI, files of the Chinese ECCI delegates, etc.) which prove incontestably that the destruction of the Chinese Left Opposition on the territory of the USSR was inevitable. Of course, it might not have been as devastating as it turned out to be since the authorities did not possess compromising material on all the members of the organization. But what there was in the dossiers of the secret police and the Comintern was, in the event, enough. What follows is some of this information.
On June 26, 1929, a certain student, belonging to one of the disaffected groups with which the Trotskyists had cultivated close links, wrote to the rector of CUTC, V.J. Veger:
“In our university there are Trotskyists and comrades who are under the influence of Trotskyism. They all have close links with the Trotskyist organization in China and are acting as mouthpieces for the counter-revolution.” [245]
There follows a list of thirty-three surnames. Not all of those named were indeed Trotskyists and it appears that the author of the letter may have been settling a few personal scores. Nevertheless, the majority on the list were correctly identified as Trotskyists and included Wang Fan-hsi, Wang Wen-hui, Wang Hsin-keng, Wang Ching-t’ao, Liu Yin, Chao Chi, Fan Wen-hui, Chi Wai-fang, T’an Po-ling, Kao Heng, Lu Meng-i, Li Ts’ai-lien, Ch’i Shu-kung, and Hsieh Ying. [246] For reasons not fully understood – perhaps it got mislaid in the rectory, or in transit – the letter was passed on to the authorities only after a number of the students mentioned in it had already returned home to China in mid-August. Eventually, copies were sent to the CUTC purge commission, one of whose leading members was Berzin, which began its work on October 20, 1929, and to the OGPU.
At a meeting held on October 1, 1929, the Chinese Commission of the Eastern Secretariat of the ECCI assembled and summarized all the information at its disposal, acquired from its own or other sources, concerning the activities of the Trotskyists at CUTC. It adopted a resolution, the salient points of which were:

We consider it a matter of urgency to remove from the university Nekrasov [Ch’i Shu-kung] (he is a hostile element and a Trotskyist), Oberg [real name Wang Hsin-heng] (a Trotskyist with links to the third party [247]), and Istomin [Huang Chu] (a Trotskyist with links to the third party) – all three of whom were formerly translators at CUTC.
To verify the links between the Trotskyists and the following persons: Dragunov [Ts’ai Tse-min], Klementyeva [Liu Ch’ien-yu], Forel [Fan Wen-hui], Loza [Shao Shih-kuei], Zonin [Hsiung Chang-ch’un], Devyatkin [Chi Ta-ts’ai], Dontsov [Wang Ching-t’ao], and Knizhnik [Wang Chien-ch’iu].
To note the influence of the Trotskyists on the following group: Ogloblin [Chang Ch’ung-te], Lukashevich [Fang Shao-yuan], Slonova [Chu Tzu-mu], Muklevich [Ch’in Lung, alias Ch’in Piao], Fazanov [Liu Ho-sheng], Gutman [Liao P’eng-ming], Kobzar [Yu Chi-t’ang], Klyaz’min [Kuan Erhk’ang], Klubov [Pan Shu-jen], and Musin [T’an Po-ling]. (The first four are definitely influenced by the Trotskyists, the second four less definitely, and on the final two there is no precise information.) This entire group must be re-examined. This task is to be assigned to Comrade Tokin. [248] If our information proves correct, it will be necessary to immediately expel those concerned from the university on the same grounds as those mentioned in paragraph  1. [249]

The information was indeed correct. Those mentioned were either members or sympathizers of the Trotskyist organization. It is difficult to say whether the authorities at CUTC, in particular Tokin, were aware of this. What is certain is that no serious effort was made to verify the information they received from the Chinese Commission of the ECCI. After only three days Veger and Tokin gave the following report to the Eastern Department of the ECCI and the Chinese delegation to the ECCI:
At a meeting of the Chinese Commission of the Eastern Secretariat of the ECCI which took place on October 1, 1929, it was proved [!] that the following members of CUTC were either members of a Trotskyist organization or sympathizers of the Trotskyists, or had links with Trotskyists or a third party. [There followed a list of names of the persons referred to in the resolution of the Chinese Commission of the ECCI.] Our own investigations at the university confirm the political estimate of the said Chinese Commission. We therefore consider it necessary to immediately remove these persons from the student body and send them to Vladivostok from where they will be deported to China without the secret rendezvous necessary for their continued activity as members of a clandestine party. [250]
The evidence suggests, however, that a decision was taken to hold back from taking action against those mentioned in the resolutions. For the time being they remained at liberty in Moscow and no restrictions were placed on them. The authorities continued to play a waiting game, hoping for more information to emerge. At the end of October, the CUTC secretary Yeshenko informed the OGPU that Hsu Yun-tso (who, as described above, had already been expelled from the Komsomol and CUTC for membership of the Opposition but had been detained within the borders of the USSR) had approached him and in the course of a conversation had, through carelessness, let him see a note received from Ch’i Shu-kung concerning the latter’s opposition activities. [251]
The OGPU and ECCI gathered great quantities of information during the so-called clean-up of the CUTC party organization. At the outset of this operation, which began in October, someone, referred to in the documents as Kirsanov (apparently Kirsanova, the rector of the International Lenin School and a member of the Berzin commission) received a denunciation from a CUTC student considered by the Trotskyists to be one of their closest and most serious allies in the united front against the bureaucracy. This student submitted evidence on eighty-one persons [252], dividing his list into three parts. In the first, which consisted of twelve names, he listed those people whose membership of the Trotskyist organization he could demonstrate from an abundance of documentary evidence at his disposal. The second group consisted of those (thirteen in number) whose membership of the organization could be supported by concrete testimony. (Documents concerning their underground activities were not enough for him.) In the final part of his list, consisting of fifty-six names, were those he suspected of Trotskyism without having clear evidence. Among those he named were the leaders of the Chinese Opposition – An Fu, Pien Fu.lin, Fan Wen-hui, Chi Ta-ts’ai, Hu P’eng-chu, Fu Hsueh-li, Wang Ching-t’ao, Chi Wai-fang, T’an Po-ling, Wan Chih-ling, Chao Yen-ch’ing, Ch’i Shu-kung, Wang Wen-hui, Huang Chu, and many others. This denunciation was sent on to the CCP delegation to the ECCI where Teng Chung-hsia, a member of the delegation, used it to draw up on January 10, 1930, precise instructions to the party purge commission at CUTC:
We must pay particular attention to the growth of Trotskyist groups at CUTC ... we must ask the [O]GPU to supply the college purge commissions [253] with detailed information. Those who, after examination, turn out to be Trotskyists must be expe11ed from the party and the entire membership informed of this so as to provide an example to the masses. Those elements whose membership of the Trotskyist organization is attested by a number of sources, or who are actually leaders of the Trotskyist group, although we as yet have no up-to-date information on this, must be arrested and sent under supervision to a suitable place on Soviet territory. As regards the remainder, suspected of Trotskyism but not considered to have played a major role, we must also raise the question of expelling them and, at a suitable moment, returning them to China, having first supplied the Central Committee with their names and a short biography of each to prevent them clandestinely re-joining our party. [254]
Clearly, sentence had already been pronounced, despite the fact that no proper investigation had yet been carried out. Penalties were doled out according to the classification of the names in the denunciation. Teng Chung-hsia introduced only one elaboration. The same punishment was to be meted out to those who “according to many reports” were Trotskyists but about whom there was no documentary evidence, as to those who were undoubtedly Trotskyists. It was simply a matter of contacting the OGPU who would then make up the deficit in documentation.
The secret agents of the busy-body lecturers at CUTC had also by this time amassed enough information to give them a clear picture of the underground activity of the Trotskyists at the university. A list they compiled around this time, of Trotskyists and of persons “siding with them,” contained seventy-seven names. [255]
The Chinese Left Opposition was living through its last days on Soviet territory. The purge of the party organization at CUTC took on an ever more determined and single-minded character as the commission struggled to flush out all the Trotskyist conspirators. A number of the oppositionists sensed that the net was closing around them and tension within the organization began to rise. Chia Tsung-chou later admitted that some individuals considered the possibility of dissolving the organization and even of volunteering confessions. [256] The first person to crack under the pressure was Chao Yen-ch’ing. According to Chia Tsung-chou, “he seemed to fall ill with persecution fever. He was, in a way, mad. If he heard somebody whispering it seemed to him they were saying, ‘There goes Donbasov the Trotskyist’; and if someone looked at him he became afraid that they were shadowing him in order to kill him. He remained in the organization. Although he wanted to resign, he hesitated to do so. Several times he broke down, crying that there was no way out. He went to see a doctor on a number of occasions.” [257] Finally, on January 21, 1930, he handed in a statement to Ignatov, the newly appointed secretary of the party branch at CUTC. [258] According to Wang Fan-hsi, Chao Yen-ch’ing was under a lot of pressure from his close friend Logov [259] (a certain Fang Ting-chen [260] appears under this pseudonym in the CUTC records), who was a secret agent of the Stalinists within the Trotskyist organization. Hsu Yun-tso and Yao Ping-hui who later escaped from Siberia to China affirm that Wang received this information from either Sung Feng.-ch’un or Hsiao Ch’ang-pin. Chao first confessed to Sheng Yueh who was at that time a member of the party committee. Sheng then arranged a meeting between Chao and Ignatov in the latter’s apartment. [261]
Ignatov handed Chao Yen-ch’ing’s statement to Veger, the rector of CUTC, who sent out several copies – to Stalin, Kaganovich, and Stetskii at the Central Committee, to Yaros1avskii at the Control Commission, and to Bauman and Kogan at the Moscow City Committee. [262] Chao Yen-ch’ing was then interrogated by the CCP delegation to the ECCI and by the OGPU. From his statements and from notes found in one of his exercise books, the authorities were able to confirm, or in many cases discover for the first time, the membership of the underground organization of about sixty persons. [263] Six of these – Wang Fan-hsi, Liu Yin, Chiang Te-fang, Chao Chi, Yuan Fan, and Hsiao Chen-han – had already returned to China. [264] Chao Yen-ch’ing also described how Trotskyism had taken root in the International Lenin School (there he betrayed Ma Yuan-sheng) and in the Moscow Infantry School (where he named Lu Yeh-shen and a certain Li Hsiao-sheng). He unmasked the entire General Committee and all the course committees at CUTC and gave information about the bloc between the Trotskyists and other discontented elements. [265] Having completed his betrayal, this utterly demoralized man took his own life on January 28. [266]
The death of Chao Yen-ch’ing was a profound shock to the members of the Trotskyist organization, all the more so since news soon leaked out about his treachery. In fact, the party committee convened a special general meeting at which Sheng Yueh made a statement about the matter. [267] The aim of the Stalinists in calling the meeting was evidently to terrify the underground oppositionists into confessing. They succeeded in doing so. Soon afterwards, Li P’ing unexpectedly cracked [268] and gave evidence on eighty-eight Trotskyists, sympathizers, and others who were influenced by Trotskyism. He did not omit to mention certain people about whose sympathies he was merely uncertain. [269]
After this the OGPU decided to waste no more time. On February 8 and 10 (and according to some reports, also 13), arrests took place at CUTC. Twenty-five persons were put behind bars, including An Fu, Pien Fu-lin, Wan Chih-ling, T’an Po-ling, Ch’iu Chih-ch’eng, Hu Ch’ung-ku, Li Kuang-chi, Hu P’eng-chu, Fan Wen-hui, Chi Ta-ts’ai, Chia Tsung-chou, and Wang Wen-hui; in other words, practically the entire leadership of the underground organization. In the following three months, another eleven activists of the Chinese Left Opposition followed them to the cellars of the Lubianka, among them Wang Ching-t’ao, Huang Chu, P’an Shu-jen, and Ma Yuan-sheng. [270]
The investigators kept to a punishing schedule. All-night interrogations followed one after the other [271] and by March 8, 1930 they had amassed material on 171 “Chinese Trotskyists in the USSR.” [272] (The figure is so large that we can safely assume that a large part of the evidence was fabricated, which would be entirely in keeping with the methods of the OGPU.) The prisoners, as well as giving evidence about their own group, gave information on Trotskyists in China, naming about seventy persons and giving away a large number of addresses and secret rendezvous. [273]
Immediately after the first arrests, there was a wave of voluntary confessions from those oppositionists who remained at liberty. Activists surrendered to the party purge commissions of CUTC, the International Lenin School, and the Infantry and Artillery schools. (By this time there were no longer any supporters of Trotsky at the Moscow Military Engineering School.) Interestingly, these confessions were not always motivated by fear. Some activists saw them as a manoeuvre to permit them to stay in the party, return to China, and there take up the struggle once more under the slogans of the Opposition. This ruse, however, was quickly uncovered by their interrogators [274], merely exposing them to even more severe punishment.
The Chinese Left Opposition on Soviet territory then ceased to exist, sharing the fate of the Russian Bolshevik-Leninists. On July 20, 1930 a special commission of the International Control Commission made up of Solts (chairman), Angaretis (secretary), Trilisser, Berzin, and Artuzov (the latter three were officials of the OGPU) with Kirsanova present as an observer, met to consider the fate of thirty-six arrested Chinese Trotskyists. They decided to “isolate” twenty-four of them; that is, to send them to concentration camps or into exile. (Another three were later added to this group.) Three individuals, including Chia Tsung-chou and Li Kuang-chi, were sent to work in factories in the Moscow area. The remainder were expelled from the USSR. [275]
The commission also decided to clear up some unfinished business by formally expelling from the party nine persons who for some unknown reasons had not been expelled at the time of the initial purge. [276] In only six days, Angaretis, Artuzov, Berzin, Kirsanova, Solts, and Trilisser (who only met on this one occasion to consider the matter of those arrested) arrived at their predetermined conclusion. [277] On September 13 their colleagues in the OGPU pronounced sentence:
Ch’iu Chih-ch’eng, Li Tz’u-pai, Chao I-fan, Fang Shao-yuan, Fan Wen.hui, Liu Han-p’ing, Hu P’eng-chu, and Liu Ho-sheng each received a sentence of five years in a camp. Chiang Hua-an, Chang Ch’ung-te, Jung Li, and Li Shih-le each received three years. Various terms of imprisonment were handed down to An Fu, T’an Po-ling, Ma Yuan.sheng, Wang Ching-t’ao, Li I-fan, T’ang Yu-chang, and Chiang I-mu. Several persons were sent to Ivanovo, including Wan Chih-ling and Hu Ch’ung-ku. Huang Chu and Chi Ta-ts’ai were sent to Gorkii. [278]
The majority of those former Trotskyists who were not imprisoned were sent to work in various Moscow factories as a punishment. It was intended that they should “learn from the proletariat.” Some were sent back to China. The overwhelming majority were expelled from the party, although a few such as Li P’ing who had “sincerely repented his mistakes” were treated leniently and got away with a reprimand and a severe warning. In Li P’ing’s case, this was in recognition of the fact that he had “helped to unmask the entire Trotskyist organization at CUTC, the military schools, and even in China itself.” [279]
Some former leaders of the Trotskyist organization, in particular Lu Yeh-shen and Fu Hsueh-li, were sent into industry. These, unlike many of their former comrades who were striving to “expiate their guilt through honest work,” banded together with some like-minded people and in the early part of 1931 took the first steps toward relaunching the activities of the Left Opposition. Their base of operations was a Chinese workers’ hostel. [280] But their efforts did not last long. In May 1931 they were arrested with seventeen other oppositionists and sent to the OGPU’s Butyrskii “isolator” (a jail). [281] They were soon convicted and sentenced. [282]  
Conclusion
With this event the story of the Chinese Trotskyist movement in the USSR reaches its conclusion. However, as they left the political scene, the Chinese Trotskyists did not disappear completely. Their activities gave a powerful stimulus to the emergence and growth of the Left Opposition in China itself. It is true that their theoretical achievements were meager and that they left no powerful organization as their legacy. But the Chinese oppositionists in Russia exerted enormous influence on the internationalist wing of the Communist movement in China. In this way, they acted as a genuine link between Russian and Chinese Trotskyism.
* * *
Footnotes
224. From the Testimony of Vitin, 26; Testimony of a Student, 15.
225. Wang, Shuang-shan hui-i-lu, 102, Testimony of Comrade Nekrasov, 9–?
226. Wang, Shuang-shan hui-i-lu, 102.
227. Leon Trotsky, The Chinese Question after the Sixth Congress, in Leon Trotsky on China (New York: Pathfinder, 1978), 345–97.
228. Wang, Shuang-shan hui-i-lu, 94–95.
229. See Russian Center 505/1/22/7; From the Testimony of Vitin, 26; Testimony of a Student, 15–16; Record of Communications between the Student Donbasov and a Member of the CCP Delegation, Comrade Teng Chung-hsia, 99.
230. Russian Center 505/1/22/90; From the Testimony of Vitin, 26; Testimony of a Student, 17.
231. For a stenographical record of this meeting, see Russian Center 530/1/7071.
232. Ibid., 530/1/56, 64; From the Testimony of Vitin, 26–27, 32–33; Testimony of a Student, 17.
233. See Record of Communication between the Student Donbasov and a Member of the CCP Delegation, Comrade Teng Chung-hsia, 99; From the Testimony of Vitin, 26; Testimony of a Student, 16.
234. They were sent as part of a group of twenty-six who left Moscow in four parties on August 13, 14, 16, and 18. Apart from Wang Fan-hsi, Liu Yin, and Chao Chi, the group included the following Trotskyists – Wang Hsin.keng, Kao Heng, Yeh Yin (also known as Yeh Ying, the wife of Wang Fan.-hsi who was known as Nevskaya while studying on the military-political course at CUTE, October 1927–June 1928, and later, at UTC, had the pseudonym Anna Dunaeva), Li Ts’ai-lien, Lu Meng-i, P’u Te-chih, Hsieh Ying, Huang Lieh-wen, Hsieh Shu-ta, Chiang Te-fang, Chou Ch’i-heng, Chou Ch’ing-ch’ung, and Yuan Fan. See Russian Center 530/1/56; 530/1/64.
235. See Testimony of a Student, 16; Testimony of the Student Lugovoi, 20–21.
236. From the Testimony of Vitin, 27; Testimony of a Student, 17; Testimony of the Student Lugovoi, 21; Record of Communication between the Student Donbasov and a Member of the CCP Delegation, Comrade Teng Chung-hsia, 99.
237. See Testimony of the Student Lugovoi, 22; Russian Center 495/225/1891.
238. See Testimony of the Student Lugovoi, 21; Testimony of a Student, 16–17.
239. From the Testimony of Vitin, 28; Testimony of a Student, 17; V.I. Veger, Documents of the Soviet Communist Party Central Committee Addressed to Kagonovich, Stetskii; Moscow Committee of the Soviet Communist Party, Bauman, Kogan, April 25, 1930. Russian Center 530/1/71.
240. See List of Trotskyists at the Communist University of the Toilers of China, Russian Center 514/1/1010/38; List of Chinese Trotskyists in the USSR, ibid., 514/1/1010/44–56.
241. Interview with Wang Fan-hsi at Leeds, England, July 25, 1992.
242. Testimony of the Student Lugovoi.
243. Record of Communication between the Student Donbasov and a Member of the CCC Delegation, Comrade Teng Chung-hsia, 99; Testimony of the Student Lugovoi, 22; From the Testimony of Vitin, 28; Testimony of Comrade Nekrasov, 9–10; Russian Center 514/1/1010/48, 52, 54; 530/1/62.
244. See Testimony of the Student Lugovoi, 22; Testimony of a Student, 17.
245. Russian Center 514/1/1010/42, 43.
246. Ibid.
247. Refers to the Chinese Revolutionary Party formed at the start of 1928 in Shanghai on the initiative of T’an P’ing-shan and some other former Communists who left the KMT. The party raised liberal democratic slogans.
248. Tokin was at this time secretary of the party committee at CUTC.
249. Resolution of the Chinese Commission of the Eastern Secretariat of the ECCI, March 1, 1929, Russian Center 530/1/48.
250.
Letter from Veger and Tokin to the Eastern Department of the ECCI, Russian Center 530/1/56. To be sent to China without a party rendezvous was equivalent to being expelled from the party, with the corresponding loss of the income which went along with the status of a professional Communist revolutionary.
251. Russian Center 530/1/56.
252. I have discovered three versions of this document. The most complete, entitled List of Trotskyists, contains information on eighty-one persons. The other two refer to seventy-nine and sixty-eight persons respectively (the last version has pages missing). The lists tally almost perfectly with each other with only a couple of names not matching up. See Russian Center 514/1/1010/25–35, 77–81, 87–90. The document is not signed. I managed to identify its author by comparing it with other material stored alongside it in the archives. See, for example, Russian Center 495/225/1106, 1891, 2411.
253. Another commission, chaired by Appen, was set up to assist the Berzin commission shortly after the latter commenced work.
254. Teng Chung-hsia, Some Considerations concerning the Party Purge of the College Cell at CUTC, Russian Center 514/1/1010/1. Teng Chung-hsi a evidently used a fourth version of the denunciation referred to above: he speaks of seventy-four Trotskyists and “sympathizers.”
255. See the list of Chinese students at CUTC who, according to the OGPU, were Trotskyists or oppositionists linked with them. Russian Center 514/1/ 1010//57–66.
256. See Testimony of the Student Lugovoi.
257. Ibid., Sheng Yueh describes the condition of Chao Yen-ch’ing at this time in similar terms. See Sheng, Sun Yat-sen University, 175–76.
258. I have been unable to locate the text of the declaration. As to its existence, see Russian Center 530/1/71.
259. Interview with Wang Fan-hsi at Leeds, England, July 25, 1992.
260. Russian Center 530/1/75.
261. Sheng, Sun Yat-sen University, 175.
262. Russian Center 530/1/71.
263. Wang Fan-hsi writes that Chao Yen-ch’ing betrayed between 200 and 300 Chinese Trotskyists (See his Shuang-shan hui-i-lu, 111). This, however, could not be true since there were simply not that many Chinese Trotskyists in the USSR.
264. See Members of the Trotskyist Organization at CUTE (according to Donbasov), Russian Center 514/1/1010/17; List of Trotskyist students at CUTC named by the student Donbasov in his testimony and statements, Ibid., 18; Supplement, Ibid., 80; Record of Communication between the Student Donbasov and a Member of the CCP Delegation, Comrade Teng Chung-hsia, 99.
265. See Supplement, 80; Record of Communication between the Student Donbasov, and a Member of the CCP Delegation, Comrade Teng Chung-hsia, 99.
266. Russian Center 514/1/1010/46.
267. Sheng, Sun Yat-sen University, 176.
268. Ibid., 176–77; Testimony of the Student Lugovoi, 24.
269. See Testimony of a Student, 17–18.
270. See OGPU on the List of Students Arrested at CUTC, Russian Center 514/1/1010/36–37; 530/1/62; List of those arrested by the OGPU on February 8 and 19, 1930, Ibid., 514/1/1010/73–74, Ibid., 495/225/1100.
271. Sheng Yueh later described how some of these interrogations were conducted (during this period he acted as translator for one of the investigators). See Sheng, Sun Yat-sen University, 178–80. On the life of Chinese Trotskyists in Soviet prisons, see the memoirs of Ma Yuan-sheng, Liu Su chi-shih (Notes on life in the USSR) (Peking: Ch’un-chung ch’u-par-she, 1987), 124–44.
272. List of Chinese Trotskyists in the USSR, 44–56.
273. See List of Trotskyist Addresses and Rendezvous in China, Russian Center 514/1/1010/91; List of Trotskyists in China, Ibid.,, 92–97; List of Trotskyists who were former members of the party cell at CUTC, Ibid., 530/1/39; Li, Oppositionists Returned from Moscow, 1; Testimony of the Student Lugovoi, 23.
274. See Ch’u Wei-t’o [Ch’u Ch’iu-pai] and Teng Chung-hsia, Our Views on CUTC, sent to the ECCI, CPSU(b)CC, and CCPCC from the CCP Delegation to the ECCI. Russian Center 530/1/68.
275. Five persons were deported from the USSR, including Pien Fu-Jin and Wang Wen-hui.
276. See Russian Center 505/1/22/2–14; 505/2/23; 514//1/1010/36–37, 530/1/62.
277. See Minutes no. 1 of the meeting of the commission examining the activities of Chinese students at CUTC, concerning the purge relating to the fifth group, June 26, 1930, ibid., 505/1/23.
278. See OGPU on the List of Students Arrested at CUTC, 36–37; Supreme Court of the USSR, Ruling no.  4N–013598/57, Russian Center 495/225/1100; Ibid., 495/225/ 543; 495/225/1106, 1116, 1384, 2045.
279. Characteristics of the CUTC students sent to work in industry, ibid., 530/1/73.
280. The hostel was located at no. 51 Ulitsa Herzena (Herzen Street).
281. See Russian Center 514/1/1014/1, 15.
282. What became of the majority of former members of the Chinese Trotskyist organization active in the USSR is unknown. We do, however, know a few facts about some of them. For example, Ch’iu Chih-ch’eng and Hu P’eng-chu managed to escape from the USSR, in 1933 and 1934 respectively, but sometime between 1937 and 1939 they were arrested by the Sinkiang (Xinjiang) government (apparently, they were then shot). Of those who were subject to repression, fifteen persons were finally rehabilitated on March 8, 1958. Their names were: Liu Ho-sheng, Li Tz’u-pai, Chao I-fan, Liu Han-p’ing, Jung Li, Chiang Hua-an, Chang Ch’ung-te, Li Shih-le, Wang Wen-hui, Li Wei-min, Chin Hung-ti, Ch’en Fang, Ch’eng Ping, and also Ch’iu Chih-ch’eng and Hu P’eng-chu (who were partially rehabilitated). It is unclear which, if any, of them was still alive at the time of their rehabilitation. According to the information in the archives, we can be sure of the survival through it all of less than ten persons, who included Wan Chih-ling and Fan Wen-hui. This was despite the fact that the former was arrested and sentenced three times and the latter twice. In 1955 Fan Wen-hui and his family were finally allowed to leave the USSR for the People’s Republic of China. And in 1956 Wan Chih-ling and several other former Chinese Trotskyists left for the PRC. See Russian Center 495, 225/1018, 1116; Supreme Court of the USSR, Ruling no. 4N–013598, 57.
 

der Pantsov: The Chinese Trotskyists in Soviet Russia (Part 1)



Alexander Pantsov Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Chinese Trotskyists in Soviet Russia

Alexander Pantsov
From Students to Dissidents
The Chinese Trotskyists in Soviet Russia
(Part 1)



In the fall of 1926, Chinese students at Soviet Russia’s “cadre schools”, both Communists and members of the Kuomintang, were drawn into the struggle between Stalin and Trotsky. It was precisely within these circles that the Left Opposition in the Chinese Communist Party was born.
The primary aim of the education process was to propagate Bolshevik strategy and tactics among radical Chinese youth in order to strengthen the Soviet influence in China. But the ideological training given to Chinese students in the USSR had a contradictory character. On the one hand, it really enabled them to make the transition from intuitive patriotism and revolutionary feeling to conscious anti-imperialism. And for many it awakened an interest in theory which was never extinguished. On the other hand, they were heavily influenced by Soviet Communists who did everything in their power to mould them in their own image. And it was precisely at that time, when Chinese students were being educated in large numbers in the Soviet Union, that Russian radical Marxism began to undergo a profound evolution – from international concepts of Bolshevism (Leninism and Trotskyism) to national Communism (Stalinism).
Dr Pantsov’s paper will be published in consecutive issues of Marxist Monthly.



* * *
Introduction
The disputes between Trotsky and the theoreticians of Russian national Communism which raged within the Executive Committee of the Communist International (ECCI) until the end of 1926 and covered the fundamental issues of the inner-party regime, economic construction in the USSR, and the direction of world developments, including the Chinese revolution, were largely unknown within the individual sections of the Communist International (Comintern), Not only the rank and file but also the leaders of these parties were ignorant of the positions of Trotsky and his supporters. This was the result of Stalin’s attempt to fence off the world Communist movement from the influence of his principal rival. In this, however, he was only partially successful. Despite his best efforts, both the foreign staff of the ECCI and those foreign Communists who were, for various reasons, living in the USSR were drawn into the struggle within the Bolshevik party. Above all, this meant those who had come to study in the various universities and “cadre schools” set up to train militants of the world Communist movement. Our story concerns those Chinese Communists, ECCI delegates, and students, who became involved. It was precisely within these circles that the Left Opposition in the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) was born.
 
Chinese Students in Soviet Russia
The Bolsheviks understood that the fate of the October revolution depended on an early victory of the world revolution. Therefore, from the very first days following their seizure of power, they offered moral and material aid to foreign revolutionary movements, helping to set up political parties, giving advice on strategy and tactics, and above all developing a system for training cadres. Aid was given on an especially large scale to the Chinese movements and many Chinese came to study in Russia, having to a greater or lesser degree thrown in their lot with the Communists.
Since, in the early years following October, it was practically impossible for Chinese revolutionaries to make the journey to Russia, the Bolsheviks concentrated their efforts politically educating those Chinese workers who, for one reason or another, found themselves on Soviet territory. According to various estimates, there were some 300,000–400,000 Chinese citizens on Soviet territory during the years 1917–20. The majority were labourers contracted to the Tsarist government during World War I. Many were ruined peasants and lumpen proletarians driven to seek work in Russia by sheer destitution. [1] During the civil war, many revolutionary-minded Chinese served in the Red Army and the Soviet authorities organized military and political training for them. For example, in August 1920, a special officer school set up by the international brigade of the 5th Army was attended by two hundred Chinese. By 1921, when the 5th Army was merged with the Eastern-Siberian military district, an international party school had been established. Teams of translators enabled lectures and political discussion groups to function. Scores of Chinese attended the agitprop courses organized by the central federation of foreign groups set up by the Central Committee of the party. [2]
In organizing these courses, the Bolsheviks believed that these Chinese revolutionaries, having witnessed and participated in fierce battles in Russia, “would act as a link between the existing movement [in Soviet Russia] and that soon to be born in China”. [3] And indeed some of this first wave of Chinese, having studied at the school of the class struggle so to speak, subsequently played prominent roles in the Chinese Nationalist and Communist movements – for example, Yang Ming-chai and Liu Ch’ang-sheng. [4]
Chinese emigrants in Russia on several occasions requested the People’s Commissariat for Nationalities (Narkomnats) to set up a central political school for them. [5] And F.I. Gapon of the Communist Party Siberian district committee drew up a detailed memorandum proposing a special school for training Marxist revolutionaries from Eastern nationalities. [6] During this early period, however, the education of Chinese students in Russia never attained a systematic or centralized character.
With the end of the civil war, however, and with national liberation movements springing up in the East, the task of organizing systematic education for revolutionaries of the East assumed a more urgent character. Young freedom-fighters would travel spontaneously to Russia seeking help and there was a need to set up a central school which could teach them Marxism-Leninism and revolutionary strategy and provide them with some military training which they could later put to use in their own countries. [7] A proposal to found such an institution was put to the Second Congress of the Comintern on June 26, 1920. The representative from the Dutch East Indies, H. Maring (alias H. Sneevliet), declared that:
”The Third International should make it possible for students from the Far East to live here for a year or so, to study courses in Communism, so that they properly understand what is taking place here and can breathe life into the theses [resolutions of the Congress], create Soviet organizations, and carry out Communist work in the colonies.
... Moscow and Petrograd are the new Meccas of the East. We here in Russia must make it possible for Eastern revolutionaries to get a theoretical education, so that the Far East becomes a living part of the Communist International. “ [8]
At the end of 1920 and the beginning of 1921, Narkomnats set about developing a programme of short-term schools capable of educating about one thousand students of various nationalities at a time including, of course, Chinese. [9] On February 3, 1921, the Politburo took a decision to organize courses for Eastern students under the direction of Narkomnats. [10] On February 10, 1921, the Central Committee decided to collect the various schools and courses together under the name of the University of the Toilers of the East. [11] A resolution concerning this was adopted by the Central Executive Committee of the Soviet Union on April 21, 1921. [12] The institution soon became known as the Communist University of the Toilers of the East (CUTE). In 1923, it was renamed the J.V. Stalin Communist University of the Toilers of the East. Its initial aim was declared to be the political education of representatives of the working masses of the Soviet Far East – “... treaty lands, autonomous republics, autonomous areas, workers communes, and national minorities.” [13]
But from the outset, it was given the additional task of educating Eastern revolutionaries from beyond the borders of the USSR, including, of course, from China. [14]
With the foundation of CUTE in Moscow, the education of Chinese revolutionaries in the Soviet Union entered a new phase. Between 1921 and 1925, and again in the 1930s, all Chinese students were educated alongside those from other nationalities. But from 1925 to 1930, there was a university devoted exclusively to educating Chinese revolutionaries. It was founded in response to the outbreak of the national anti-imperialist revolution in China, and from 1925 to 1928 it was known as the Sun Yat.sen University of the Toilers of China (UTC). On September 17, 1928, after the defeat of the CCP and the institution of a fierce white terror in China, the university was renamed the Communist University of the Toilers of China (CUTC). [15] A short time previously, Chinese students at CUTE had been transferred there. The aim of CUTC expressed in its journal Kung-ch’an tsa-chih (Communist Journal) was to give a Marxist education to “the leaders of the mass Communist movement in China, the Bolshevik leaders of the Chinese revolution.” [16] In the summer of 1929, the Russian name for the university was again changed to the Communist University of Toiling Chinese. [17] Toward autumn of 1930 it was closed down.
Following this, the International Lenin School became the focus for the education of Chinese revolutionary youth. A special Chinese department was established within the school known as department “C”. Members of the Communist League of Chinese Youth were also educated at the Central Komsomol School. In 1934, a Chinese section was again opened at CUTE but it lasted only two years. On March 25, 1936, the overseas department of CUTE (known at this time as the cadre department) was transferred to the Institute for Scientific Research on National and Colonial Problems, which then became responsible for the education of students from abroad. The Chinese students at CUTE (143 persons) were transferred to the new institute, making up about 80 percent of its intake. In September 1938, however, the institute was dissolved by a decision of the ECCI Secretariat.
Apart from CUTE, UTC/CUTC, the International Lenin School, the Institute for Scientific Research on National and Colonial Problems, and the Central Komsomol School, there were other institutions where Chinese revolutionaries studied during the 1920s and 1930s. In December 1921, a decision of the Agitprop Department of the Russian Communist Party’s Central Committee led to the opening of a department of CUTE in Irkutsk devoted to the education of Far Eastern peoples including Chinese. [18] In June 1922, a decision of the party’s Far East Bureau established a political education department of the military-political school of the people’s revolutionary army of the Far Eastern Republic. [19] This was intended to educate Chinese partisans from Manchuria among whom Communist influence was practically non-existent. A Chinese Leninist school functioned in Vladivostok in the mid-1920s. [20] In 1932, a series of courses entitled “The Workers’ Movement” were organized on the initiative of A Lozovskii (Solomon Dridzo), the general secretary of the Red International of Trade Unions. They were intended to prepare Chinese graduates of Soviet universities for their return home. Lozovskii and others taught the young revolutionaries the art of leading strike movements among the workers, building trade unions, etc. [21] Chinese were given technical industrial training in various Soviet firms. There were many other specialist courses available to Chinese Communist cadres. [22]
The Bolsheviks gave great assistance to the Chinese Communists in the field of military training. Special departments for Chinese students were set up at the Frunze Military Academy, the Tolmachev Military-Political Academy, the Aeronautical Military-Theoretical School, the Artillery School, the Moscow Infantry School, and in military schools in Kiev and other provincial centres. From September 1927 until June 1928, CUTE ran special military-political courses. [23] Chinese commanders were also sent on the “Vystrel” (Shot) courses organized for Red Guard commanders. In an official message to the military academies, KE. Voroshilov directed that they should aim to train officers capable of commanding “large-scale military units in China”. [24] At the request of Chou En-lai, the Soviets routinely organized military training for Chinese Communists coming to Moscow on Comintern or other business. [25]
The process of selecting Chinese students for study in Russia and the composition of the student groups varied with the political situation in China and, of course, with the particular profile of the institute in question (was it a specifically Communist university or a military school, etc.). It also depended on the importance attached to the institution by the Kuomintang (KMT, Nationalist Party) or CCP leadership.
For example, the selection of students for specifically Communist institutions lay entirely with the ECCI, and the central committees of the Russian and Chinese Communist parties. For the general political schools and, during the period of the CCP-MKT united front ( 1924–27), for military academies, the selections were made jointly by the central executive committees of the USSR and the KMT, with the participation of the CCP Central Committee. After the break-up of the united front, responsibility for choosing students for military schools fell to the Chinese delegation at the ECCI. Naturally, a great deal of the practical work of selection was carried out in China itself, by Soviet and Comintern workers.
In 1920, the ECCI representative G.N. Voitinsky, together with his assistants M.F. Kuznetsova and Yang Ming-chai, organized the so-called School of Foreign Languages in Shanghai. [26] This was in reality intended for socialist-minded youth who wanted to study in Moscow. The secretary of the Shanghai Union of Socialist Youth, Yu Hsiu-sung, also played an active part in setting up the school, of which he became the technical director. The students for the most part (several groups of ten to twenty students passed through the school) studied the Russian language, which was taught by Yang Ming-chai. Once a week a member of the Shanghai Communist circle, Ch’en Wang’tao, who was also the first Chinese translator of the Manifesto of the Communist Party, gave a lecture on Marxism. [27] lt is likely that other members of the Shanghai Communist organization gave lectures, though given the low level of development of Chinese Marxist thought at the time, it is unlikely that the students came away with any clear picture of socialism. In the spring of 1921 (apparently in April or May), the first fourteen graduates of the school were sent to Soviet Russia, on the recommendation of the Shanghai Communist circle and Yang Ming-chai. Among them were some who later became prominent figures in the CCP-Liu Shao-ch’i, Jen Pi-shih, P’eng Shu-chih, Lo I-nung and Hsaio Ching-kuang. [28] According to Pao Hui-seng, one of the first supporters of Communism in China, a special commission for education was set up in Shanghai in early 1921 by himself and Yang Ming-chai. Its function was to choose worthy representatives of Chinese socialist youth to be sent to study in Moscow. [29] Some reports suggest that Tung Pi-wu also took part in the work of the commission. [30]
The high level of activity of the School of Foreign Languages and the commission for education is explained by the fact that among Chinese youth at this time there was an enormous interest in events in Russia and especially in the Russian Communist Party. Many young Chinese were desperately searching for a way out of their country’s acute crisis. One of the results of this was a transformation, in the early 1920s, of the “diligent work, economical study” (ch’in-kung chien-hsüeh) movement. [31] There was a gradual waning of interest in studying in Western Europe whose place began to be occupied by Russia in the minds of young Chinese. In August 1920, Mao Tse-tung, Fang Wei-hsia, and Ho Shu-heng set up the “Society for the Study of Russia”, based in Changsha, which aimed to “agitate for diligent work and economical study in Russia”, so that people could study the situation in the country. [32] According to Hsiao Ching-kuang, the Society had links with the School of Foreign Languages in Shanghai and its members were sent to study in the Soviet Union via the School. [33]
The first large intake of Chinese students, including Liu Shao-ch’i and Hsiao Ching-kuang, were enrolled at CUTE on August 1, 1921. [34] A total of twenty-six Chinese were issued with student cards on that day, having arrived in Moscow on the recommendation of various Communist circles. Prior to this, only two Chinese had enrolled at the school, arriving on July 9 and 23 respectively. [35] By the second half of 1921 there were thirty-five or thirty-six Chinese students at CUTE; by 1924, fifty-one; and in mid-April 1925 there were 112. [36]
As revolutionaries and conspirators, the majority (and after December 1922, all) were given pseudonyms by which they were known in all official documents. P’eng Shu-chih was known as Ivan Petrov, Jen Pi-shih as Brinskii, Lo I-nung as Bukharov, and Liu Po-chien, who later rose to prominence in the CCP, as Sherstinskii. [37] The students represented a significant percentage of CCP and Socialist Youth members. In April 1924, about 9 percent of the CCP membership were in Russia. [38] The majority came from non-proletarian backgrounds. In China, as in other countries, the intelligentsia predominated in the early stages of the Communist movement. [39]
Following the formation of the national united front by the CCP and KMT, the basis on which students were selected for study in the USSR changed. After the foundation of the Sun Yat-sen University of the Toilers of China (October 7, 1925), a central selection committee was set up in Canton (Guangzhou) on the proposal of M.M. Borodin, adviser to the KMT’s Central Executive Committee. A number of prominent leaders of the Nationalist party and government took part, including T’an Yen-k’ai, Ku Ying-fen, and Wang Ching-wei. Borodin acted as adviser. Selection boards sat in several large cities, including Shanghai, Peking (Beijing), and Tientsin (Tianjin). In Shanghai, Yang Ming-chai and Chou Ta-wen were in charge. [40] All the students had to sit arduous three-part examinations. Finally, a contingent of 310 students was selected, including 180 from Canton, 100 from Shanghai, Peking, and Tientsin, and 10 each from the military schools in Hunan and Yunnan, and the Whampoa Academy. An extra 30 were added to the group without having to sit the exams, on account of their close family relations with important KMT officials.
Although the rules of the new university laid down that the number of CCP and KMT students should be roughly equal [41], both parties did their best to obstruct members of the other party from getting to Moscow. For example, 90 percent of those chosen in Canton, where the right was strong, were KMT members. On the other hand, the majority of students from Shanghai, Peking, and Tientsin were members of either the CCP or its youth wing. [42] Taking the group as a whole, the number of Communists was greater. Among those who had arrived in Moscow by December 1925, 188 (68 percent) were Communists. [43]
The whole process of getting the group to Moscow took several months. [44] The first group of 119 people received their student cards on November 23, 1925 [45], while others had to wait for a passage from Canton where they were taught Russian by Soviet advisers to the KMT. [46]
Chinese émigrés could also be selected for study in Moscow and this was left in the hands of the particular party they were attached to. Some, of course, simply turned up in Russia on their own initiative. The first group to arrive, from France, were members of the CCP or its youth organization and enrolled at CUTE in April 1923. Among them were Wang J o-fei, Kao Feng, Hsiung Hsiung, Cheng Ch’ao-lin, Ch’en Ch’iao-nien, Ch’en Yen-nien, and Chao Shih-yen, all of whom were active members of the CCP’s European Department (which had been set up in 1922 in Paris). [47] In mid-November of the same year, another group of twenty arrived at CUTE from France. Among them was Yin K’uan, one of the future leaders of the Trotskyist movement in China. [48] In October 1924, another group from France enrolled at CUTE, including Nieh Jung-chen who was later to play a prominent role in the CCP. [49] In January 1926, ten Chinese, mainly KMT members, arrived from Germany to enrol at UTC, followed in autumn of the same year by ten CCP members from Belgium and France. [50] Chinese students also arrived from the Philippines and the United States and a number enrolled who had previously been resident in Soviet Russia.
At the end of the first academic year at UTC, the selection process had to be repeated and the Organization Bureau of the Soviet Communist Party Central Committee appointed S.A Dalin, one of the staff at the university, to take charge of the matter. [51] Thanks to his efforts, the links between UTC and China were maintained throughout the revolutionary period of 1926–27. During these years, groups from central and south China continued to arrive in Moscow, mainly enrolling at UTC, but also at CUTE and various military academies. In August 1926 and at the start of 1927 commanders and political commissars from the People’s Army of Feng Yu-hsiang arrived at Sun Yat-sen University and in the winter of 1926 a large party arrived from north China. [52] By July 1927, around the time of Wang Ching-wei’s coup in Wuhan, there were 562 students at the university. [53] Their social backgrounds reflected the makeup of the national united front in China, in that they included members of the bourgeoisie and land.owning class as well as workers and peasants.
On September 13, 1927, the KMT’s Central Executive Committee formally broke relations with the Sun Yat-sen University of the Toilers of China, deciding to “send no more students to this university.” [54] But even before this, the KMT had forbidden its members to remain at UTC and on August 5, 239 students quit the university and returned to China. [55] With the withdrawal of the KMT, the selection of students was left in the hands of the Communists. UTC was reorganized into a Communist institution and in March 1928 its rector, Pavel A. Mif, presented a document to the Chinese commission of the Soviet Communist Party’s Central Committee recommending a maximum of 20 percent non-communist members of the student body. He also proposed that no less than half of the students should be industrial workers. As regards émigrés, only those with a solid record in the CCP or its youth wing should be accepted and, above all, no one who had spent more than five years abroad should be considered. [56] At the beginning of August 1927 there were 320 students at UTC. [57] Some of them returned to China, having finished their courses. Others were kept on as translators, instructors, or researchers and still others went on to study in military academies around the Soviet Union.
In autumn 1927 a group of prominent CCP members arrived at the university. Some of them, including Wu Yu-chang and Lin Po-ch’u, had held posts in the KMT government in Wuhan until the July coup d’etat. At the beginning of 1928 a large group of working class and peasant youth, veterans of the Nanchang uprising and the “autumn harvest” uprisings of 1927, arrived in Moscow. They were accompanied by many trade unionists and activists from the women’s movement. Most of these people were members of the CCP or its youth wing. A number of delegates to the CCP’s Sixth Congress, which was held near Moscow in August 1928, were sent to study at UTC at the conclusion of the congress. Among them was the fifty-two-year-old founder-member of the CCP, Ho Shu-heng. At this time, the university, now renamed the Communist University of the Toilers of China (CUTC), numbered around 600 students, including 137 who had been transferred from the Chinese Department of CUTE. [58]
As a whole, looking at the period of the 1920s and 1930s, we can say that a significant proportion of the Chinese revolutionary movement (both the CCP and the KMT) received a political education in the USSR. A whole network of higher educational establishments were created for this purpose. About 1,600 Chinese studied at UTC/CUTC [59] and no less than 500 at CUTE. A large number of officers both from the Chinese Communist Red Army and the KMT-controlled National Revolutionary Army studied at Soviet military schools. From various sources we can conclude that of the 118 top leaders of the CCP (we are talking here of the period from the 1920s to the 1940s) who studied abroad, 80 (70 percent) studied in Russia. [60] More than half of these (47) became members or alternate members of the Central Committee and 15 became members of the Politburo. Apart from those we have already referred to, there were such prominent figures as Wang Chia-hsiang (studied at UTC/CUTC), Kuan Hsiang-ying (studied at CUTE), Teng Hsiao-p’ing (on enrolment at CUTE on January 17, 1926 he was given the pseudonym Krezov; after twelve days, he was transferred to UTC where he studied until January 12, 1927 under the name of lvan Sergeevich Dozorov), Li Fu-ch’un (student at CUTE), Hsiang Ching-yu, Ts’ai Ch’ang (CUTE), Tso Ch’uan, Chang Wen-t’ien (UTC/CUTC), Chu Te (CUTE), Ch’in Pang-hsien (UTC/ CUTC), Ch’en Po-ta (alias Ch’en Shang-yu, UTC/CUTC), Ch’en Ch’ang-hao (UTC/CUTC), Ch’en Shao-yu (alias Wang Ming, UTC/CUTC), Yang Shang-k’un (UTC/CUTC), and others. Four of the five members of the executive committee of the united Trotskyist organization founded in May 1931 had studied in Moscow. These were Ch’en 1-mou, Cheng Ch’ao-lin, Wang Wen-yüan (alias Wang Fan-hsi, CUTE, later CUTC), and Sung Feng-ch’un (UTC/CUTC).
The majority of these people came to study in the Soviet Union at a comparatively early age-on average about twenty to twenty-one years. As a rule they had little practical experience of revolutionary work and their understanding of Bolshevik theory was still more limited.
Liu Shao-ch’i, for example, before arriving in Soviet Russia, “understood only that socialism was a good thing. I had heard of Marx and Lenin, about the October revolution and the Bolshevik party. However, at that time I did not have a clear idea of socialism and how it could be brought about.” [61] The theoretical level of the majority of Chinese left-wing democrats at the time of their arrival in the USSR can be gauged by the admission of Sheng Yueh that he and the overwhelming majority of his colleagues before arriving to study in the USSR had only a weak acquaintance with traditional Chinese philosophy and knew virtually nothing of Western, bourgeois philosophy. [62] Judging from reports on the newly arrived students held in the archives of CUTE and UTC/CUTC, at best they could be expected to have read the Manifesto of the Communist Party or Bukharin and Preobrazhenskii’s ABC of Communism. [63] Of course, a student might write down that he had read such and such a work without really understanding its contents. According to Wang Fan-hsi, he and his comrades “in fact did not understand what Communism really was” even after reading the few Marxist books available in China in the mid–1920s. They desperately sought reading material and, still more, teachers who could educate them. [64]
The task facing the authorities of the Soviet international schools, therefore, was to devise a special teaching programme suitable for students of whom the majority carried with them the baggage of patriarchal and national traditions, had a very feeble grounding in Marxism, and did not even have a grasp of the basic social, political, and economic concepts of the modem world. Of course, the levels of education of the students varied widely. Workers and peasants who had not even attended elementary school would study at CUTE and UTC/CUTC alongside graduates of Chinese universities such as Peking University, the Peking National University of Law and Political Science, the Sun Yat-sen University of Canton, and Shanghai University, or foreign universities like Gotebourg, the Lyons Franco-Chinese Institute [65], and the University of Labour at Charleroi [66], Belgium. However, even the most educated had little knowledge of Marxist theory.
The students at both CUTE and UTC/CUTC were divided into study groups according to their level of education. In the Chinese section at CUTE (at first known as department A, later as department C), they were split into seven groups with about half a dozen students in each. By contrast, the eleven groups at UTC each had between thirty and forty members. [67] The make-up of the groups was determined by party allegiance and age as well as educational attainment. An example of such a group which existed in 1926–27 at UTC was the so-called Theoretical Class consisting of leading CCP and KMT members. The secretary of its party cell was Teng Hsiao-p’ing. [68] In 1928, a Special Class was set up for CCP members over thirty years of age. There were fifteen members, including Tung Pi-wu (pseud. Slukhov) [69], Yeh Chien-ying, Lin Po-ch’u, Hsu T’e-li, Wu Yu-chang, Fang Wei-hsia, Ho Shu-heng, and Chao Ju-chih. [70]
The universities had special access departments (similar to those run for workers) which ran foundation courses for those students with little formal education. There were also, on the other hand, advanced study groups, whose members were proficient in Russian and worked as lecturers and translators. These advanced students were also expected to prepare course summaries and translate any necessary special material into Chinese. The student-translators could be attached to a particular study group or to the faculty as a whole. At CUTE in 1921 there were two student-translators, Li Tsung-wu (alias Li Chung-wu) and Ch’u Ch’iu-pai. The latter worked as an assistant in the social studies department. [71] By September 1927 there were twenty Chinese graduates of UTC in the general lecturers’ group at the university, All had received the permission of the CCP Central Committee to remain in Moscow. Among them was Wang Chia-hsiang, Tung l-hsiang, Pu Shih-ch’i, Huang Li, Shen Tse-min, Chang Wen-t’ien, Ch’en Shao-yu, Ch’en Yuan-tao, and Lu Yuan, this last a leader of the Chinese Left Opposition. [72]
The revolutionary movement needed highly trained cadres and the course of study was extremely arduous. At CUTE to begin with, the course lasted seven months. In 1922 it was extended to three years and in 1927, to four. The length of time students spent on military training also increased, to between six and nine months at CUTE and two years at UTC. It was planned to run a three-year military course at CUTC. [73] The best teachers in Moscow were attracted to work at CUTE and UTC/CUTC. These included the distinguished Sinologists M.G. Andreev, G.N. Voitinskii, M. Volin (alias S.M. Belenkii), A.A. Ivanov (A. Ivin), E.S. Iolk, V.S. Kolokolov, V.N. Kuchumov (who from mid–1927 to May 1928 was pro-rector of UTC), L.I. Madiar (sometime director of the economics faculty at UTC), I.M. Oshanin, and E.D. Polivanov (director of the native languages department at CUTE). Karl B. Radek also lectured at UTC, where he was rector from 1925 until April 6, 1927. B.Z. Shumyatsky was rector of CUTE from 1926 to 1929 and taught a course on the history of revolutionary movements in the East. Others included Pavel A Mif (pro-rector, then, from 1927 to 1929, rector of UTC), V.J. Veger (rector of CUTC, 1929–30), A. Aizenshtat (lecturer in political economy at UTC/CUTC), A.I. Skorplilev (director of the faculty of the history of class struggle at CUTC), and V.I. Gorev (military director of CUTE, expert on the Chinese army and the Chinese language). Many other historians, economists, philosophers, and graduates of the Institute of Red Professors and the J.M. Sverdlov Communist University taught at CUTE and UTC/CUTC. In 1922–23 at CUTE there was a teaching body of 165 lecturers; in 1925–26 there were 146. [74]
In 1926–27 there were 62 teachers at UTC and in 1930 there were 70. [75] The teaching department at UTC/CUTC had responsibility for the organization of courses. It prepared teaching materials, hired staff, and organized staff conferences on educational problems concerning the performance of the students, and on the development of more effective teaching methods. [76]
Many leaders of the Communist Party, the Comintern, and the International of Professional Unions (Profintern), including Stalin, Trotsky, Bukharin, Krupskaya, Lozovskii, Manuilskii, Pick, and Katayama, attended as visiting lecturers. The students were also able to meet with leaders of the CCP such as Chou En-lai, Teng Chung-hsia, Chang Kuo-t’ao, and Ch’u Ch’iu-pai, on their visits to Moscow.
The course work was extremely intensive. At CUTE in 1923 students had to study the Russian language, political economy, historical materialism, history of class struggle, history of the working class movement, history of the Russian Communist Party, as well as a number of natural sciences. [77] The first-year students at UTC studied the Russian language, the history of the development of social forms [78], history of the Chinese revolutionary movement, history of the revolutionary movement in the West, general Western history, history of the Soviet Communist Party, economic geography, political economy, party-building, military affairs, and one other subject which went wider the name “Gazette”. [79] In the general lecture group at UTC, only four subjects were studied – political economy, general history of the West, historical materialism, and the theory and practice of proletarian revolution. [80] In the foundation (access) courses, they studied the Russian language, history, geography, arithmetic, and social science. [81]
The most intensive and effective were the Russian language courses. The principal aim was to permit the students to read social and political texts and to carry on discussions on these themes, which naturally were of most relevance to young revolutionaries. Social science courses were, of course, influenced by ideological and political developments within the Russian Communist Party and the Comintern. Before 1924 and Trotsky’s defeat following his first clash with the Stalinist bureaucracy, students were taught according to the Trotskyist-Leninist theory of world development. But as Stalin’s role in the Bolshevik party grew in importance and the struggle against Trotsky and later, the joint Left Opposition, intensified, the spirit of the ideology taught in these schools underwent a fundamental change. This process was under way from the time of the very foundation of UTC, despite the fact that oppositionists held many leading positions in the university and the rector, Karl Radek, was one of Trotsky’s closest co-.thinkers. According to the prevailing norms of party discipline, Radek and his colleagues were obliged to publicly defend the party line as defined by congresses, plenums, and other leading bodies controlled by the Stalinists. They had certain room for manoeuvre and attempted to outline their own views in their lectures and seminars [82], but only within definite limits, bearing in mind that they were under constant surveillance by Stalin’s supporters on the staff at UTC, headed by the pro-rector Mif. At the end of 1926 the Chinese students themselves were drawn into the inner-party struggle by order of the Soviet Communist Party’s Central Committee [83] and many of them subsequently saw it as their duty in the fight against the Opposition to inform on their teachers to the university party committee. [84]
(To be continued)
* * *
Footnotes
1. See Novy Mir (New World), 1959, no. 4:115; M.A. Persits, Eastern Internationalists in Russia and Some Questions of the National Liberation Movement (1918–July 1920), in Komintern i Vostok (The Comintern and the East), ed. R.A. Uliyanovsky (Moscow: Nauka Press, 1969), 55–56; N.A. Popov, The Participation of Chinese Internationalists in Defence Units of the Soviet Republic in the Period of the Civil War (1918–1920), Voprosy Istorii (Problems of History), 1957, no. 10:110; V.M. Ustinov, Chinese Communist Organizations in Soviet Russia (1918–1922), in Kitaiskie Dobrovol’tsi v Bayakh za Sovetskuyu Vlast’ 1918–1922 (Chinese volunteers in the struggle for Soviet power 1918–22), ed. M. Liu (Moscow: Nauka Press, 1961), 39.
2. See Popov, Participation of Chinese Internationalists, 120; also his Chinese Proletarians in the Civil War in Russia, in Liu, Kitaiskie Dobrovol’tsi, 35; and Ustinov, Chinese Communist Organizations, 44.
3. Pravda, June 30, 1920.
4. Yang Ming-chai (1882–1938) arrived in Russia before the overthrow of Tsarism; after the October victory, he became a member of the Russian Communist Party (Bolshevik) [RKP(b)]; in 1920 he was assigned to the Vladivostok Department of the Far East Bureau of the RKP(b) and accompanied a group of Comintern officials sent to China to establish links with the Chinese revolutionary movement. Until the summer of 1927 he worked and studied in Moscow, then occupied a leading position in the Peiping-Tientsin regional organization of the CCP. At the beginning of the 1930s he was deputy editor of the Khabarovsk regional newspaper Rabochii Put’ (Workers’ Road). Yang was arrested in 1938 by the People’s Commissariat for Internal Affairs (NKVD) and shot soon afterwards, accused of being a member of the so-called counter.revolutionary bloc of rightists and Trotskyists. He was later rehabilitated.
Liu Ch’ang-sheng (1904–67) arrived in Russia in 1922 and worked as a docker in Vladivostok. He was a member of the Russian Communist Party from 1923 and of the CCP from 1928. He was an alternate member of the Seventh CCP Central Committee (CCPCC) and a full member of the Eighth CCPCC. From 1953 to 1957 Liu was vice chairman of the Chinese trade union organization. He was killed by Red Guards on January 20, 1967.
5. Zhizn’ Natsional’nostei (Life of Nationalities), May 28, 1921.
6. See Persits, Eastern Internationalists in Russia, 65; K.V. Shevelev, Episodes from the History of the Formation of the Communist Party of China; Problemy Dal’nego Vostoka (Far Eastern Affairs), 1980, no. 4:145.
7. At this time, Chinese were still being trained as party and Soviet cadres with a view to working among the Chinese population within Russia. In October 1929 a party school accommodating 125 students opened in Vladivostok and an International Pedagogical Institute (also in Vladivostok) opened in 1931. The latter comprised a Chinese and a Korean department. See Russian Centre for the Preservation of the Records of Modern History [hereafter Russian Centre] 530/1/57; Vestnik Dal’nevostochnogo Otdekniya AN SSSR (Bulletin of the Far East Department of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR), 1932, nos. 1–2:34.
8. Kongress Kommunisticheskogo lnternatsionala: Stenograficheskii Otchet (Stenographical record of the Second Congress of the Communist International) (Moscow: The Comintern Press, 1921), 165–66.
9. Zhizn’ Natsional’nostei, January 13, 1921.
10. Pod Znamenem Ilyicha (Under the Banner of Ilyich), May 8, 1926. According to a number of sources, the decision to open a school for party and Soviet workers drawn from the toilers of Eastern borderlands was taken by the RKP(b) Central Committee in January 1921. See Zhizn’ Natsional’nostei, January 26, 1921.
11. Pod Znamenem Ilyicha, May 8, 1926. On April 18, 1924, with the abolition of Narkomnats, CUTE was placed under the direction of the Central Executive Committee of the USSR. From 1929 to 1937 (when it was restructured), it was managed by the Scientific Research Association for the Study of National and Colonial Problems. In 1937–38, it was under the control of the Presidium of the Central Executive Committee of the USSR. It was closed down in 1938.
12. Zhizn’ Natsional’nostei, May 15, 1921; Sobranie Uzakonenii i Rasporyazhenii Rabochego i Krest’yanskogo Pravitel’stva (The Statutes and Orders of the Workers’ and Peasants’ Government) (Moscow), 1921, no. 36:194; Pod Znamenem Ilyicha, May 8, 1926.
13. Zhizn’ Natsional’nostei, May 14, 1921.
14. Ibid., May 22, 1921; Pod Znamenem Ilyicha, May 8, 1926. It should be noted that when CUTE was opened, there were already a number of general educational establishments giving training in Marxism-Leninism to members of the national liberation and Communist movements of the Near and Middle East. For example, there was a Socialist Academy of the East (see Kommunist [Baku], October 15, 1920). In mid-January 1921, the first students graduated from the “shock” courses in Soviet activity and propaganda in the East (see Zhizn’ Natsional’noetei, March 17, 1921). But CUTE was the first school dedicated to the systematic education of revolutionaries from the major countries of the East, including China.
15. This decision was taken by the Organization Bureau of the Soviet Communist Party Central Committee (see Russian Centre 530/1/27). The internal reorganization of UTC into a Communist institution (by re-working the study programme, altering the basis for the selection of students, and reinforcing party-political work) dragged on until the start of the 1929–30 academic year. See G.V. Efimov, Episodes in the History of the Communist University of the Toilers of China, Problemy Dal’nego Vostoka, 1977, no. 2:173.
16. Kung-ch’an tsa-chih (Communist Journal), 1929, no. 1:5.
17. The Chinese name of the university changed only once-in 1928. Until autumn 1928, it was known as “Sun Chung-shan ta-hsueh” or “Sun Wen tah sueh” or “Sun 1-hsien ta-hsueh” (Sun Yat-sen University). Then it became “Chung-kuo lao-tung kung-ch’an-chu-i ta-hsueh” (Communist University of the Toilers of China).
18. See N.N. Timofeeva, The Communist University of the Toilers of the East (CUTE) (1921–25) [hereafter cited as CUTE, 1921–25], Narody Azii i Afriki (The Peoples of Asia and Africa), 1976, no. 2:52.
19. See Persits, Eastern Internationalists in Russia, 89.
20. See N.N. Timofeeva, The Communist University of the Toilers of the East (CUTE) (1926–38), [hereafter cited as CUTE, 1926–38], Narody Azii i Afriki, 1979, no. 5:40.
21. Sheng Yueh, Sun Yat-sen University and the Chinese Revolution: A Personal Account (New
York: Paragon, 1971), 66.
22. A.M. Grigoriev, Revolyutsionnoe Dvizhenie v Kitae 1927–1931: Problemy Strategii i Taktiki (The revolutionary movement in China 1927–31: Problems of strategy and tactics) (Moscow: Nauka Press, 1980), 271.
23. See Russian Centre 532/1/41.
24. Cited in R.A. Mirovitskaya, The Soviet Union and the CCP at the End of the 1920s and the Start of the 1930s, in Opyt i Uroki Istorii KPK: K 60-ktiyu Obrazovaniya Partii (Experience and lessons from the sixty-year-long formation of the CCP), ed. M.L. Titarenko (Moscow: Institut Dal’nego Vostoka Press, 1981), 202.
25. Ibid.
26. See Ch’i-wu Lao-jen (Pao Hui-seng), Before and After the Formation of the Communist Party of China, Rabochiy Klass i Sovremenny Mir (The Working Class and Contemporary World), 1971, no. 2:120; People’s Daily (Peking), August 14, 1983; Hsiao Ching-kuang, Before and After Studies in the Soviet Union, Ke-ming shih tzu-liao (Materials on the History of Revolution) (Peking), 1981, no. 3:6; Donald Klein and Anne B. Clark, Biographical Dictionary of Chinese Communism; 1921–1965, 2 vols. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1970), 1:241, 2:982.
27. See Hsiao, Before and After Studies in the Soviet Union, 6.
28. Ibid.
29. See Ch’i-wu Lao-jen, Before and After the Formation, 121.
30. Klein and Clark, Biographical Dictionary, 2:983.
31. Another important factor influencing the change of character of this movement was the post-war economic decline in the West and a corresponding sharp fall in the demand for Chinese workers. For more details on the “diligent work, economical study” movement in Western Europe, see E. Yu. Staburova, Anarkhizm v Kitae 1900–1921 (Anarchism in China 1900–1921) (Moscow: Nauka Press, 1983), 106–14; Liu Fa ch’in-kung chien-hsüeh yün-tung (The “diligent work, economical study” movement in France), 2 vols. (Shanghai: Shang-hai jen-min ch’u-pan-she, 1986).
32. See Wu-ssu shih-ch’i te she-t’uan (Societies of the May Fourth Period) (Peking: Sheng-huo, tu-shu, hsin-chih san-lien shu-tien, 1979), 67.
33. See Hsiao, Before and After Studies in the Soviet Union, 6.
34. The remaining graduates of the school’s first intake (among them P’eng Shu-chih) arrived in Moscow in the second half of September.
35. See Russian Centre 532/1/393/69-72.
36. See Chiang K’ang-hu, Hsin E yu-chi (A journey to the new Russia) (Shanghai: Shang-wu yin-shu-kuan, 1923), 35; Russian Centre 532/1/393/22–29, 61–64.
37. See Russian Centre 495/225/730; 532/1/393/5, 17; Cheng Ch’ao-lin hui-i-lu (Memoirs of Cheng Ch’ao-lin) (Hong Kong: 1982), 59.
38. Pod Znamenem llyicha, April 26, 1924.
39. “Comparative predominance of the intelligentsia at the start of the movement was observed everywhere,” wrote Lenin. See V.I. Lenin, How V. Zasulich Fights Liquidationism, in Collected Works 24:22.
40. Sheng, Sun Yat-sen University, 16.
41. See Russian Centre 530/2/35.
42. Sheng, Sun Yat-sen University, 16.
43. Calculated according to Russian Centre 530/1/3; 530/1/42/79.
44. Our best information is that the last group of this intake (seventy-five persons) arrived at UTC on September 22, 1926. See Russian Centre 530/1/42.
45. Russian Centre 530/1/42/68.
46. See Sheng, Sun Yat-sen University, 21–22.
47. See Russian Centre 495/225/874; 532/1/393/5, 10, 15, 21, 30; Cheng Ch’ao-lin hui-i-lu, 54–55, 62.
48. See Russian Centre 532/1/393/14, 18, 70.
49. Ibid., 43.
50. Sheng, Sun Yat-sen University, 102; Chiang Tse-min, Days of Diligent Work and Economical Study in France and Belgium, Ke-ming shih tzu-liao, 1981, no. 3:84.
51. See Russian Centre 530/1/9/11; S.A. Dalin, Kitaiskie Memuary 1921–1927 (Chinese memoirs 1921–27) (Moscow: Nauka Press, 1975), 176.
52. Russian Centre 530/1/42; Sheng, Sun Yat-sen University, 30, 137–38, 147.
53. Calculated according to Russian Centre 530/1/42.
54. Ibid., 530/1/16.
55. Calculated according to Russian Centre 530/1/42/79–61. About fifty KMT members remained at UTC, many of whom expressed a desire to join the Komsomol or Communist Party. See ibid. 530/2/26.
56. See also Russian Centre 530/1/33.
57. Calculated according to Russian Centre 530/1/42/79–61.
58. See ibid. 532/1/69/4–9; Sheng, Sun Yat-sen University, 42.
59. Calculated from Russian Centre 530/1/75.
60. Calculated from Klein and Clark, Biographical Dictionary 2:1056–57.
61. Liu Shao-ch’i, Speech at a Meeting Held in the Moscow Palace of Sports (December 7, 1960), Pravda, December 8, 1960.
62. Sheng, Sun Yat-sen University, 63.
63. The name of the second author of The ABC of Communism, it is true, was never mentioned. See, for example, Russian Centre 495/225/401, 1100, 1629 and other sources.
64. Wang Fan-hsi, Shuang-shan hui-i-lu (Memoirs of Shuang-shan) (Hong Kong: Chou Publisher, 1977), 34.
65. This institute was founded in autumn 1921 by Chinese anarchists as part of the programme of “diligent work, economical study” in France. For more details, see Staburova, Anarkhizm v Kitae, 111–12. More than one hundred Chinese studied there.
66. The University of Labour at Charleroi was formed by Belgian socialists for the children of Belgian workers. However, the administration opened its doors to young Chinese also, giving them free accommodation and setting up special courses for them. For details, see Chiang, Days of Diligent Work and Economical Study in France and Belgium, 74–84. Among others, Nieh Jung-chen and Liu Po-chien followed training courses here.
67. Pod Znamenem Ilyicha, April 26, 1924; Efimov, Episodes in the History of the Communist University of the Toilers of China, 172.
68. Russian Centre 495/225/1629; Sheng, Sun Yat-sen University, 69.
69. According to other reports, Sleptsov (Russian Centre 495/225/31).
70. Russian Centre 530/1/40, 75; 530/1/76/2, 7, 9, 20, 27; Yang Tzu-lieh, Chang Kuo-t’ao fu-jen hui-i-lu (Memoirs of Madame Chang Kuo-t’ao) (Hong Kong: Tzu-lien ch’u-pan-she, 1970), 216.
71. Both Ch’u Ch’iu-pai and Li Tsung-wu arrived in Moscow in January 1921 as correspondents of the Peking newspaper Ch’en Pao (Morning Post). See Hsiao, Before and After Studies in the Soviet Union, 11; Chiang, Hsin E yu-chi, 35; and Klein and Clark, Biographical Dictionary 1:241.
72. See Russian Centre 530/1/16.
73. Ibid., 532/1/37/5; Timofeeva, CUTE, 1921–25, 50; Pod Znamenem Ilyicha, May 8, 1926; Wang, Shuang-ehan hui-i-lu, 53; Ch’ien-chin pao (Forward) (Moscow), December 18, 1925; Sheng, Sun Yat-sen University, 61.
74. See Timofeeva, CUTE, 1921–25, 50, and CUTE, 1926–38, 34.
75. Russian Centre 530/1/16, 68.
76. See Sheng, Sun Yat-sen University, 49–50.
77. See Cheng Ch’ao-lin hui-i-lu, 63.
78. This discipline was an introduction to the social sciences, history, political economy, and philosophy for those students with only a slight acquaintance with Marxism. See Dalin, Kitaiskie Memuary, 176.
79. See Russian Centre 530/1/16. According to Sheng Yueh, the UTC students also studied one Western language, English, German, or French. See Sheng, Sun Yat-sen University, 61.
80. See Russian Centre 530/1/16.
81. See Sheng, Sun Yat-sen University, 75.
82. This was extremely characteristic of Radek who, until 1927, taught a general course on the history of the revolutionary movement in China. We have the testimony of several persons that he was deeply revered and loved by the majority of students. See, in particular, Russian Centre 530/2/29, 32.
83. For details, see Meng Ch’ing-shu, Vospominaniya o Wang Mine (Memories of Wang Ming) (Manuscript in Russian) (Moscow: n.d.), 66–67.
84. See Russian Centre 530/2/29.
 

der Pantsov: The Chinese Trotskyists in Soviet Russia (Part 3



Alexander Pantsov Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Chinese Trotskyists in Soviet Russia

Alexander Pantsov
From Students to Dissidents
The Chinese Trotskyists in Soviet Russia
(Part 3)



Some of the Chinese Trotskyists who in 1927 had been left behind in the Soviet Union did keep faith with the Opposition. From the end of 1927 onwards they paid particular attention to the newest arrivals who had come to study in Soviet Russia, many of whom had already been groping empirically toward the same conclusions on the Chinese question as Trotsky and his co-thinkers.
In autumn 1928 the Opposition formed into a strongly centralized, conspiratorial organization centered on CUTC, which held the greatest concentration of Chinese Trotskyists. Its members studied, translated, and diffused Opposition literature, and did their best to enlarge the organization. All their work, however, was directed toward laying the foundations for subsequent opposition activity in China.
The destruction of the organization by the United Government Political Department (OGPU, Soviet secret police) in February 1930 resulted in the arrests of thirty-six activists. In September 1930, twenty-.four of them were sent to concentration camps or into exile. Most perished; less than ten survived.
Thus, the Chinese Left Opposition on Soviet territory shared the fate of the Russian Bolshevik-Leninists. It is true that the theoretical achievements of its members were meagre and that they left no powerful organization as their legacy. But their activities gave a strong stimulus to the emergence and growth of the Left Opposition in China itself.



* * *
The Tragedy of the First Chinese Trotskyist Organization
Those Chinese internationalists who were left behind in the Soviet Union faced the future with different problems from those who had been expelled. It seems that the first to quit the Opposition was Chiang Ching-kuo. According to Ch’i Shu-kung, “the thought of active Trotskyist activity simply terrified him”. [173] Ch’en Yuan-tao and Tung I-hsiang [174], “recovered” from their Trotskyist leanings and after finishing their courses at UTC, stayed on as translators. They broke off all relations with the remaining oppositionists, “sympathizers,” and “waverers. “However, a few students did keep faith with the Opposition. From the few scraps of evidence available, it appears that they included Wang Wen-hui, Wen Yueh, Kuo Miao-ken, Ke Ch’ung-e, Tuan Tzu-liang, Lo Han, the brothers Liu Jen-ching and Liu Jen-shou, Sung Feng-ch’un, Hsu Cheng-an, Hsu Yun-tso, T’u Ch’ing-ch’i, Feng Hung-kuo, Huang Chu, Ch’i Shu-kung, and Ch’en Ch’i. [175] Hsiao Ch’ang- pin was evidently still a “waverer,” despite his retraction at a party committee meeting on November 9 [176], as was Kao Heng.
Up until this time, the majority of the Chinese oppositionists had been students at UTC and at the end of 1927 there were still eleven of them there. There were another three, apart from Lo Han, at CUTE or on military courses run by CUTE, who could be classed as sympathizers; these were the translators Kao Heng, Hsu Yun-tso, and Ch’i Shu-kung (who had been transferred from UTC in August). [177] Kuo Miao-ken was at this time on a temporary placement at UTC. [178] Liu Jen-ching was a student at the International Lenin School, while his brother Liu Jen-shou was transferred in mid-autumn to the Moscow Military Engineering School. [179]
It appears that a large number of these people had been forgiven for their past transgressions. No administrative or party disciplinary measures were taken against Wang Wen-hui, Kao Heng, Kuo Miao-ken, Ke Ch’ung-e, Lo Han, the Liu brothers, Sung Feng-ch’un, T’u Ch’ing-ch’i, Huang Chu, Ch’i Shu-kung, Hsu Cheng-an, Hsu Yun-tso, or Hsiao Ch’ang-pin. Possibly the university authorities did not have sufficient evidence to prove their membership of the Opposition.
A different fate awaited those the university Stalinists had decided to make an example of. Following the fifteenth congress of the Soviet Communist Party, which drew up a balance sheet of the anti-Trotskyist campaign, the UTC administrators and party leaders decided to expel from the university Wen Yueh, Ch’en Ch’i, and Feng Hung-kuo, but following this did everything in their power to prevent them from leaving for China. In the case of Feng Hung-kuo, Pavel Mif petitioned the Central Committee, the United Government Political Department (OGPU, Soviet secret police), the Ministry for War and Naval Affairs, and the fourth (intelligence) directorate of the Red Army headquarters staff, requesting that, as the son of Feng Yu-hsiang, one of the leaders of the anti-communist coup in China (and besides this, a “politically unstable” element and an oppositionist), he should be detained on the territory of the USSR. Mif argued that Feng, his sister Feng Fu-neng (the wife of Chiang Ching-kuo), and another relative of one of the Chinese anti-communist generals should effectively be held as hostages. [180] But he failed to convince the authorities of the expediency of this course of action. The UTC leadership was forced to back down and on May 25, 1928 Feng Yu-hsiang’s children were allowed to return to China. [181]
Despite suffering a setback in the case of Feng Hung-kuo, whose fate had been decided by more influential people using the student as a pawn in a game of high politics, the rector of UTC continued to pursue Wen Yueh and Ch’en Ch’i with great enthusiasm and not a little subtlety. He received support from the Chinese delegation to the ECCI which, on its own initiative, proposed that they not be allowed to return to China. [182] A former CUTE student, Wang Fan-hsi, many years later recalled the impression these two men made on him during a visit to UTC:
They stayed on at the university awaiting their punishment, isolated from all others. No one dared speak to them and they, for their part, communicated with no-one. From morning to evening, the two of them sat in the library reading weighty Russian tomes. The “loyal elements” (students from the Ch’en Shao-yü group) were completely unaware of their existence, while the majority, who belonged to neither camp, looked on them with awe and amazement as if they were museum exhibits bearing the label “Trotskyists. [183]
On more than one occasion, Wen Yueh and Ch’en Ch’i petitioned the rector to be allowed to return home. But in vain; what was expected of them was repentance and an unequivocal, irreversible renunciation of Trotskyism. But they continued to stand by the Opposition, as is evidenced in their statements.
“Although we have only been studying Marxism-Leninism for a short time,” they wrote (in Russian) to Mif, “we are convinced we have already acquired the revolutionary light and spirit of Marxism-Leninism ... We support the Opposition precisely because the views of the Opposition are not just theoretically correct and follow the line of true Marxism-Leninism, but also because the facts have borne out and continue to demonstrate the correctness of the Opposition’s views.” [184]
Having been expelled from the university, Wen Yueh and Ch’en Ch’i existed in a kind of limbo, unable to return home but also unable to continue their studies. Finally, in the summer of 1928, they were exiled to Azerbaijan, near to the border with Iran. They attempted to leave the USSR illegally, and were captured and put in prison in Baku. [185] Ch’en Ch’i was freed and returned to Moscow but was then exiled to the Far East. [186] What happened to them subsequently is unknown. It is possible that they were killed. In 1928, Hsu Yun-tso was also expelled from the university and the Komsomol for his opposition activities. Like Wen Yueh and Ch’en Ch’i, he was refused permission to return to China. He worked at the Centrosoyuz (Central Cooperative) [187] in Moscow until 1930, when he was exiled to Siberia. In 1932 or 1933, he and another Chinese Trotskyist, Yao Ping-hui, who had been expelled from UTC in 1930, escaped to China. It is not known what became of him following this. [188]
Until they were exiled to Azerbaijan, Wen Yueh and Ch’en Ch’i continued their oppositional work together with those other students who remained true to their ideals, although by now only underground activity was possible. In practice, this consisted of establishing clandestine links with the Russian Bolshevik-internationalists, collecting and translating Trotskyist literature, and individual recruitment of new supporters into their circle. Toward the end of 1927, Ch’i Shu-kung met with Radek in private – about a month before the latter was exiled from Moscow. Radek “ordered” him (at least this was the interpretation put on his words by Ch’i Shu-kung) to “hold fast” to the line of the Opposition. “He told me,” Ch’i recounted later, “don’t be afraid to set up a faction. This does not mean a second party ... it doesn’t amount to a split.” And Radek gave this example, “Suppose a house has a leaky roof; it’s impossible to live in, so we would build a cabin next to it to live in while we repaired it. When the house was repaired, we would move back in. This is quite a different thing from demolishing the house.” [189]
But organizing a faction required a basic minimum of forces and everything depended on how quickly the numbers of Chinese Trotskyists could be increased. So Wen Yueh and Ch’en Ch’i did not simply sit in the library avoiding the glances of the curious but threw themselves, together with their colleagues, into the task of recruitment. From among the older students, they won over Yu Lan-t’ien (alias Kuk, who enrolled at UTC on December 20, 1926, but had remained uninvolved during the period of open struggle against the Stalinists). But the university authorities soon found out about his links with Wen and Ch’en and in the summer of 1928, like Wen and Ch’en, he was expelled from UTC. [190] (His subsequent fate is not known.) Some time after the November incident in Red Square, Kuo Miao-ken, who was temporarily on a placement at UTC from his military-political course at CUTE, managed to win over one of his colleagues from the CUTE course, Ch’en Ting-chiao, who was also temporarily at UTC. A report to the secretary of the special party group (the foreign department) describes how when they returned to CUTE they began to “carry out propaganda for Trotskyism and to talk about the mistakes of Comrade Stalin.” The report describes the support they received from their comrades at UTC in their work. “Last Saturday, a group of oppositionists arrived from Sun Yat-sen University to carry out propaganda against Leninist ideas and theory, confusing the minds of those worker and peasant comrades who have not yet fully grasped Leninist principles. The Opposition propaganda caused these students to become disillusioned with the prospects of the Chinese revolution. These activities are extremely dangerous. A number of comrades on the military-political course have already begun to waver.” [191] The author of the report asked the party secretary to “take decisive measures” to prevent any further oppositional activities by Kuo Miao-ken and Ch’en Ting-chiao. What the reaction of the party secretary was we do not know. Most probably he shelved the affair and, having taken the precaution of obtaining confessions from Kuo and Ch’en, was content to leave the threat of party sanctions hanging over them. Kuo and Ch’en continued their studies on the military-political course and at the end of 1928, they were transferred with other students to UTC. Kuo was even invited to carry on his studies at the International Lenin School. There are no more references to them in archival material relating to the Chinese student oppositionists.
The Trotskyists paid particular attention to work among the newest intakes of students, who had real, practical experience of revolutionary struggle and who had tasted the bitterness of defeat. Naturally the political orientation of the new arrivals was also a matter of great concern to the Stalinists. In November 1927 the party leadership at UTC began to gather around itself groups of students who had distinguished themselves in the anti-Trotskyist campaign. These students would be placed in shared rooms with the new students so that they could carry on all-day discussions with them. [192] But this approach was not always effective. Those who arrived from the end of 1927 onwards had all to some degree or other put their lives on the line in the cause of the revolution and felt able to draw their own conclusions as to the causes of the bitter defeat they had suffered. Their experience of armed struggle had reinforced their Communist maximalism and for the most part they were hot-blooded and fearless. And they were as hostile to any manifestation of injustice in the USSR as they were in China. Many of these militants, even before their arrival in the USSR, had been groping empirically toward the same conclusions on the Chinese question as Trotsky and his co-thinkers. The following report, written by a member of the UTC party bureau and dated November 19, 1927, is extremely revealing: “On the question of the Opposition, they absolutely do not have things sorted out. They claim to be standing aloof because they don’t yet understand the situation sufficiently well.” But, the report continues, “en route they argued a great deal about the nature of the revolution in China. The question was even put to the vote, which decided that the Chinese revolution was not a nationalist revolution.” [193] No less revealing is the following statement from Wang Fan-hsi (who arrived in Moscow in October 1927):
I began to have doubts even earlier [that is, while in China]. For a start, it had always seemed absurd to me that in the north [from 1925 to 1927 Wang was a member of the Peking party organization] we put all our energy into building up the KMT organization. (I didn’t know what the situation was in the south.) Secondly, I could not understand why we placed so much faith in KMT generals and politicians and when they betrayed us we transferred our trust to other liars. Thirdly, I could not help asking the question – Why was it necessary to hand over the guns of the Wuhan workers to T’ang Sheng-chih [194], and why did we suppress the so-called “extremist” activities of the Wuhan peasants? [195]
Such sentiments naturally rendered the newly arrived students susceptible to the propaganda of the Trotskyists.
A contributory factor influencing their political outlook was their confrontation with the realities of Soviet life. This was everywhere and in every way at odds with the illusions they had nurtured in China about a just society and a workers’ and peasants’ state. What shocked them most was the widespread social inequality they encountered. “Stalin has a fat belly, while the workers starve.” This, if we can take the word of an informer [196], was the opinion of the Soviet fatherland held by Hu Ch’ung-ku (started military-political course at CUTE in September 1927). [197] A striking picture of rural life was painted in a letter received from a comrade on holiday in the south (Chinese students were allowed trips to the Crimea for rest and recuperation). “Although ten years have passed [since the October revolution], looking from the train I saw peasants living in holes in the ground, without clothes – that’s the reality of Soviet power.” [198] The bureaucratic nature of the regime at CUTE and Sun Yat-sen University, which reflected the wider situation in the Soviet Communist Party and the Soviet state, caused an equal, if not greater, degree of dissatisfaction. Judging from the recollections of Wang Fan-hsi, this factor was to a large extent responsible for the sympathy the students showed toward Trotsky and the Opposition. [199]
We can sum up the situation by saying that by mid-1928, the number of Chinese Trotskyists was steadily increasing. They recruited approximately thirty new members in that year. [200] The following people, in particular, were won over to a consciously Trotskyist position: An Fu (enrolled at UTC November 1927), Pien Fu-lin (also enrolled at UTC November 1927), Li P’ing (UTC/CUTE), Liu Ying (better known as Liu Yin, joined CUTE September 1927, pseud. Kashin; transferred in 1928 to UTC under the pseudonym Gubarev), Fan Wen-hui (alias Fan Chin-piao, enrolled at UTC mid-December 1927), Chi Wai-fang (CUTE), Chi Ta-ts’ai (September 1927–March 1928, was at CUTE, pseud. Martynov; then at UTC, pseud. Devyatkin), Chao Chi (CUTE, pseud. Lyalin; later CUTC, pseud. Dinamin), Chu Ch’ing-tan (UTC, later at military school), and Wang Fan-hsi (referred to above, real name Wang Wen-yuan). These individuals soon became the main organizers of the Chinese Trotskyist underground as around this time a number of the former leaders of the Opposition – Ke Ch’ung-e, Lo Han, Tuan Tzu-liang, Sung Feng-ch’un, Hsu Cheng-an, Hsiao Ch’ang-pin, and T’u Ch’ing-ch’i – were among a number of groups returning to China. [201]
Around this time or shortly afterwards, the following persons also threw in their lot with the Opposition: Lai Yen-t’ang, Li Ts’ai-lien, Lu Meng-i, P’u Te-chih (alias P’u Ch’ing-ch’uan), Hsieh Ying, Wu Chi-yen (alias Wu Chi-hsien, nephew of Ch’en Tu-hsiu), and Tseng Meng. All these later played prominent roles in the Trotskyist movement in China itself. [202]
The growth in the ranks of the Opposition and the necessity of avoiding its collapse in the new circumstances led to the formation of a strongly centralized, conspiratorial organization. The center of the organization was CUTC, which held the greatest concentration of oppositionists. Wang Fan-hsi describes how the organization was established:
One Sunday at the end of September or the beginning of October [1928], about ten of us Chinese students bought some food and took a tram to the end of the line. Then we walked through the outskirts of Moscow to a wood and sat down to a picnic. People lay on the ground, ate, and sang songs. And as a result of this meeting of “activists,” three persons were chosen to lead [the organization]. These were Fan Chin-piao [Fan Wen-hui], An Fu, and myself. I can no longer remember all who were present at the meeting ... I remember best of all Chi Ta-ts’ai ... and the former textile worker Pien Fu-lin made a deep impression on me. [203]
There are documents in the archives relating to this “picnic.” The most significant, Testimony of a Student, judging from the knowledge it displays of the internal life of the Trotskyist organization, was clearly written by one of its leading members. Sifting various pieces of evidence (transcripts of interrogations, lists of the events those interrogated were alleged to have taken part in) and comparing these with the testimony of other CUTE oppositionists, we can come to only one conclusion – the author of this report was Li P’ing. On February 8, 1930, he stated:
“The first meeting took place around October in a wood near the October camp. There were eight or nine persons present – Forel, Nakhodkin, Lektorov, Vitin, Kletkin, Fu Fei-jang, Wang Wen-yuan, Vershinin, and Dorodnyi. We discussed how to carry on our work at Sunovka [Sun Yat-sen University], and in the military schools. A three-person committee was elected, consisting of Lektorov, Vitin, and Dorodnyi.” [204]
The first thing to notice is that Li P’ing names Wang Fan-hsi twice, once under his pseudonym (Kletkin) and once under his real name (Wang Wen-yuan), an obvious mistake. He also refers to one Fu Fei-jang who is not referred to in any of the records of CUTC. It is possible that he was a student at one of the military schools but it is more likely that Li P’ing had in mind Fu Hsueh-Ii, who was one of the most active members of the Opposition at CUTC. (It would have been in keeping with Chinese traditions for Fu Hsueh-li to have had various pseudonyms.) In passing, we should note the Chinese names of the others referred to – Fan Wen-hui, Chu Ch’ing-tan, Li P’ing, An Fu, Pien Fu-lin, and Chi Wai-fang. Interestingly, Li P’ing makes no mention of Chi Ta-ts’ai, of whom Wang Fan-hsi had such vivid recollections. And finally, he gives a different version of the composition of the leadership trio, naming Li P’ing, An Fu, and Chi Wai-fang. So what was the truth of the matter? We can refer here to the testimony of An Fu named by both Wang Fan-hsi and Li P’ing as a member of the committee. This is his testimony (taken from the report of an interrogation which took place on February 12, 1930):
“After the departure [of a number of old oppositionists] for China, a leadership troika was chosen consisting of myself, Vitin (An Fu), (2) Lektorov (Li P’ing), and (3) Dorodnyi (Chi Wai-fang). This took place in September 1928. It was in essence the first properly organized leadership committee of the underground Trotskyist organization.” [205]
It is worth pointing out that yet another Trotskyist activist, Chao Yen-ch’ing, referred in January 1930 to the same three persons – An Fu, Li P’ing, and Chi Wai-fang – as making up the leadership trio, the so-called General Committee. [206]
The initial meeting of activists, apart from electing a leadership committee, also discussed tactics. According to Li P’ing, An Fu proposed the following approach:
“We have suffered a defeat and it is necessary to make a tactical retreat. We must begin discussions with students who are not members of the organization on questions such as their dissatisfaction with the courses and living conditions, not forgetting to raise the problems that apply to particular regional groups. Then we can move on to political questions, show people Radek’s speech on Sun Yat-sen [207], Lenin’s testament, and so on, and then material on the defeat of the Chinese revolution and on the USSR. We must listen to people’s opinions and get them involved.” [208]
This proposal was accepted without opposition, since in practice it reflected the current activity of the Chinese Trotskyists among their fellow students and among officials of the CCP who were in Moscow in particularly large numbers in the summer of 1928 for the sixth congress of their party. The student oppositionists were able to make contact during that period with Wang Jo-fei, Kuan Hsiang-ying, Lo Chang-lung, and Chang Kuo-t’ao. [209] The Trotskyists, especially Liu Jen-ching, who as a founder-member of the CCP felt at ease dealing with the party leadership, introduced CCP leaders to some of Trotsky’s writings, above all his article The Chinese Revolution and the Theses of Comrade Stalin. Having read the articles, neither Chang Kuo-t’ao, Lo Chang-lung, nor Kuan Hsiang-ying showed any great interest in the Opposition, but to their credit they did not betray the people who had given them the literature. [210] Their short-lived contact with the Opposition came to light as a result of the interrogation of some Chinese Trotskyists during an investigation into the activities of the Trotskyist underground begun in February 1930. The Chinese delegation to the ECCI denounced these revelations as a “provocation” as did the Soviet party’s Central Committee and the CCP Central Committee. Nevertheless, Chang Kuo-t’ao was forced to appear before the ECCI and the Control (i.e., purge) Commission to deny “rumors” that he had received Opposition material from Liu Jen-ching. “Perhaps these rumors arose because of my links with [Liu Jen-ching], a long-time party member who had previously co-operated with us against Ch’en Tu-hsiu,” he floundered, attempting to extricate himself.
“Hsiang Chung-fa [211] told me at the sixth congress that [Liu Jen-ching], although not a true Trotskyist, was strongly influenced by Trotskyist ideology; he himself supported the proposal that he be sent ... to do practical work.” [212]
As regards Wang Ruo-fei, after reading Trotsky, especially the articles in which he described the relation of forces within China following the defeat of the CCP and the establishment of KMT authority, he continued to have serious doubts for some time. He later confessed that “in 1928, when we discussed the Chinese question in the Eastern Secretariat of the ECCI, I held some incorrect opinions – that the bourgeoisie and the kulaks were the main social bases on which the Nanking government rested, that the Nanking government might achieve a measure of stability and, with the help of foreign capital, begin to develop capitalism in China.” [213] Such manifestly “Trotskyist” views earned Wang Jo-fei a strict rebuke on May 22, 1930, from a special commission jointly organized by the Control commissions of the Comintern and the Soviet Communist Party. [214] This punishment was enough to deter him from any further dalliance with Trotsky’s ideas.
But in 1928, Wang Jo-fei not only shared some of the views of the Opposition but also extended real material aid to it. He allowed Wang Fan-hsi to use his hotel room to complete the translation of a major article by Trotsky, A Criticism of the Basic Points of the Program of the Communist International. [215] This document, like many others, including the Trotskyist Platform [216], was given to the Chinese oppositionists by Polyakov, a former teacher at UTC and now a member of the underground organization of Bolshevik-Leninists in Moscow. According to An Fu, Polyakov used to attend the meetings of the “General Committee” as an associate member. [217] He and other Russian Trotskyists were in regular contact with An Fu, Wang Fan-hsi, Li P’ing, Hsu Yun-tso, and Liu Jen-ching. After Polyakov’s arrest at the end of 1928, the links with the Russian center were carried on via the widow of A.A. Joffe, Maria Mikhailovna, who, apparently, also replaced Polyakov on the General Committee. [218] These links were brought to an abrupt end by the destruction of the Bolshevik-Leninist group in Moscow and the arrest of Maria M. Joffe.
The material the Chinese Trotskyists translated or wrote themselves was not all destined for distribution among their fellow students. Some was sent to China with supporters who were returning home. Sums of money were also regularly sent to supporters in China, financed for the most part by voluntary contributions from those who could afford them and from membership dues. The latter, it must be said, were negligible (between thirty and fifty kopecks [219]) and were often topped up by special levies of seventy kopecks. The money was either sent via the university secretary, who was naturally unaware of the purpose of these transfers, or via Russian Trotskyists. On occasion the money would be given to students who had well-to-do relatives at home on condition that they write to their parents directing them to deliver a corresponding sum of money to such and such an address. [220] Some money was spent on subscriptions to official publications which were then dispatched to China. For example, according to Chiang Hua-an [221], Li P’ing sent Pravda to China every day. [222] The remaining sums were used for stationery, stamps, and so on, as the oppositionists carried on an active correspondence not only with supporters in China but also with Trotskyist groups in third countries, for example, the United States and Germany. [223]
(To be continued)
* * *
Footnotes
173. Testimony of Comrade Nekrasov, 2.
174. There are differing reports concerning Tung I-hsiang. In February–March 1930, during the interrogation of Chinese Trotskyists arrested by the United Government Political Department (OGPU, Soviet secret police), several persons referred to him as “sympathizing” with the Opposition after 1927. See Russian Center 514/1/1010/53. I am not inclined, however, to believe such information concerning Tung I-hsiang, first, because it is not supported by other sources and second, because we have information concerning the close link between him and one of the leaders of the anti-Trotskyist struggle at UTC in 1927, Chou Ta-wen. Moreover, there is evidence that the accusation of “Trotskyism” levelled at Tung I-hsiang served the purposes of his personal enemies Wang Ming and Pavel Mif, who had once removed him, along with Chou Ta-wen, Yu Hsiu-sung, and other UTC students, from leading work in the university party organization and subsequently took any opportunity to settle accounts with them. Finally, Wang Ming, by the second half of 1931 the leader of the CCP delegation to the ECCI, engineered the execution in 1938, in the USSR, of Tung I-hsiang, Chou Ta-wen, and Yu Hsiu-sung as “members of the anti-Soviet bloc of rightists and Trotskyists.” In August 1957, they were rehabilitated. On this, see Russian Center 495/225/932, 1048, Interview with Wang Fan-hsi at Leeds, England, July 27, 1992.
175. Russian Center 495/225/1341; 495/225/2411; 505/1/22/13; 530/2/41; 530/2/46; Testimony of Comrade Nekrasov, 6–7; Conversation between Comrades Kotelnikov and Khabarov, 13–14.
176. We can make a judgment on this on the basis that on his return to China (toward October 1928) Hsiao Ch’ang-pin immediately became involved in oppositional activity. See Russian Center 495/225/2129; 530/246; Wang, Shuang-shan hui i-lu, 145.
177. See Testimony of Comrade Nekrasov, 3, 5. We have no information concerning Pei Yun-feng’s position. Tung Ju-ch’eng left the USSR around this time.
178. Russian Center 530/2/41.
179. Ibid., 494/225/54 7; Conversation between Comrades Kotelnikov and Khabarov, 13–14.
180. Russian Center 530/1/34.
181. Ibid., Feng Fu-fa, the sister of Feng Hung-kuo and Feng Fu-neng, left with them. She also studied at UTC under the pseudonym Sobinova. See also Ibid., 495/225/1341, 2034.
182. Ibid., 495/225/56.
183. Wang, Shuang-shan hui-i-lu, 80.
184. Russian Center 495/225/2226.
185. According to other sources, admittedly undocumented, one of them was shot crossing the frontier. See Wang, Shuang-shan hui-i-lu, 139.
186. Russian Center 514/1/1010/54, 55; 530/1/56.
187. Ibid., 514/1/1010/56; 530/1/56, 57.
188. The former Chinese Trotskyist P’u Te-chih (alias P’u Ch’ing-ch’uan) indicated in an article that Hsu Yun-tso was active in the Trotskyist organization in China in 1930-31. See P’u, The Birth and Death of the Chinese Trotskyists, 392. This is patently untrue. As regards Yao Ping-hui, shortly after his return to China, he was arrested by the KMT secret police and capitulated, going over to the side of the Nationalists. In 1937 he became a secret agent for the KMT guard. Interview with Wang Fan-hsi at Leeds, England, July 25, 1992.
189. Testimony of Comrade Nekrasov, 10. It is curious that the next time Ch’i Shu-kung met Radek, they hardly spoke. “When we met,” reports Ch’i, “he stated that the Soviet Communist Party line was correct, and that he himself had been mistaken. ‘There is no point whining on, admitting your mistakes. You just have to rejoin the ranks of the party and carry on with your work’. I didn’t manage a reply – he loved to hear his own voice and never listened to others. He was called away somewhere and left, bidding me farewell.”
190. See Testimony of Comrade Nekrasov, 6.
191. Russian Center 532/2/40/108, 109.
192. Ibid., 530/2/26.
193. Ibid.
194. This refers to the disarming of working class pickets in Wuhan. T’ang Sheng-chih was at that time (summer 1927) commander of the Wuhan National Revolutionary Army.
195. Wang, Shuang-shan hui-i-lu, 57.
196. I have no reason to consider this and other denunciations and statements about Hu Ch’ung-ku entirely without foundation. Hu became an active member of the Chinese Trotskyist organization in the USSR.
197. Russian Center 495/225/543.
198. Ibid.
199. Wang, Shuang-shan hui-i-lu, 63.
200. Calculated from Ibid., 72, 80, 83. Russian Center 495/225/57, 1100, 1116; 505/1/22/10; 530/1/62; Li P’ing, Oppositionists Returned from Moscow (August 7, 1930), Ibid., 530/1/62; Testimony of a Student, 12–13; Testimony of Comrade Nekrasov, 6, 7. Wang Fan-hsi maintains, however, that “without exaggeration” more than nine-tenths of the students transferred from CUTE to UTC in autumn 1928 were already Trotskyists. See Wang, Shuang-shan hui-i-lu, 83. This implies a membership of at least 123 which seems completely unbelievable, the more so since there is no documented evidence to support this in the archives. According to other reports, there were about thirty members of the organization in January 1929. See Testimony of a Student, 14.
201. See Russian Center 495/225/1114, 2129; Testimony of a Student, 14; Wang, Shuang-shan hui-i-lu, 145.
202. Russian Center 495/225/1153, 1157, 2050; 530/1/64; Li, Oppositionists Returned from Moscow, 1; Interview with Wang Fan-hsi at Leeds, England, July 25, 1992.
203. Wang, Shuang-shan hui-i-lu, 83.
204. Testimony of a Student, 13, 14.
205. From the Testimony of Vitin, Russian Center 514/1/1012/26.
206. See Record of Communication between the Student Donbasov and a Member of the CCP Delegation, Comrade Teng Chung-hsia. Ibid., 514/1/1010/99. From July 1927 to June 1928, Chao Yen-ch’ing attended the military-political course at CUTE under the pseudonym Mamashkin (hence his nickname “Mama” by which he was known at CUTE and [C]UTC and as which he is referred to in several memoirs).
207. This probably refers to Radek’s article Sun Yat-sen. See Karl Radek, Portraits and Pamphlets (Moscow and Leningrad: Gosizdat, 1927), 156–64. This work was translated into Chinese and published by UTC during the first half of 1927. It is also very probable that this refers to Radek’s article “On the Second Anniversary of Sun Yat-sen’s Death. See Izvestia, March 11 and 15, 1927.
208. Testimony of a Student, 14.
209. According to various sources, the Chinese oppositionists had specific hopes regarding Kuan Hsiang-ying, going so far as to regard him as their candidate for the post of Central Committee secretary at the forthcoming CCP congress. See Li, Oppositions Returned from Moscow, 1, 2.
210. Testimony of a Student, 14; Conversation between Comrades Kotelnikov and Nekrasov, 7; From the Testimony of Vitin, 29; Russian Center 514/1/1010/51; Wang, Shuang-shan hui-i-lu, 90-92, Liu, On Trotskyists in China, 242.
211. Hsiang Chung-fa was elected general secretary of the Central Committee at the first plenum of the CCP’s Sixth Central Committee.
212. Russian Center 495/225/3078.
213. Declaration of I. Nemtsov to the International Control Commission, June 10, 1931, Ibid., 495/225/874.
214. See Extracts from the Minutes of the International Control Commission Secretariat, June 10, 1931. Ibid.
215. See Wang, Shuang-shan hui-i-lu, 91.
216. An Fu, who mentioned a Trotskyist Platform in his testimony, evidently had in mind the Draft Platform of the Bolshevik-Leninists (Opposition) for the Fifteenth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolshevik) [The Crisis in the Party and the Way to Overcome It], which was submitted to the Politburo by thirteen members of the Central Committee in September 1927.
217. From the Testimony of Vitin, 30.
218. See Wu, The Left Opposition in the Chinese Communist Party (Part 1), 80. It is curious that, according to An Fu, Maria M. Joffe gave a letter to Liu Jen-ching to pass on to Trotsky as the former was about to return to China via Europe and intended to visit Trotsky at Prinkipo. See From the Testimony of Vitin, 28. What the letter contained, however, is unknown. The Trotsky archives at Harvard and Liu Jen-ching’s own memoirs record neither its receipt by Liu nor its delivery to Trotsky. Wang Fan-hsi, who was close to Liu Jen-ching in the late 1920s and early 1930s, recalls that Liu never mentioned this letter.
219. Apparently per month. See Russian Center 495/225/2045; Testimony of a Student, 14.
220. See Russian Center 495/225/1446; 503/1/22/3; Testimony of the Student Lugovoi – Minutes of Interrogation, February 9, 1930, Ibid., 514/1/1012/23; Testimony of Comrade Nekrasov, 9.
221. Chiang Hua-an arrived in the USSR at the end of September 1927 and studied on the military-political course at CUTE until the summer of 1928, then until February 1930 at CUTC. His pseudonym was Andrei Vasilevich Namyetkin.
222. Russian Center 495/225/2045.
223. From the Testimony of Vitin, 29; Testimony of the Student Lugovoi, 23.
 

der Pantsov: The Chinese Trotskyists in Soviet Russia (Part 2)



Alexander Pantsov Archive   |   ETOL Main Page

Chinese Trotskyists in Soviet Russia

Alexander Pantsov
From Students to Dissidents
The Chinese Trotskyists in Soviet Russia
(Part 2)
Changes in the study programs took place gradually and many general points of theory continued to be taught in the spirit of the ideas of Lenin and Trotsky (though, to be sure, without references to the latter’s contributions to their development). The changes that took place related especially to the areas of revolutionary tactics and the construction of socialism in the USSR. There were also special topics in the program dedicated to criticising Trotsky’s theoretical and practical “mistakes” in relation to both the Russian and the international workers’ movement. [85] The “Stalinization” of the university also found expression in the introduction of a special course in Leninism (at CUTE in 1924 and at UTC in 1926) based on Stalin’s books The foundations of Leninism and Problems of Leninism. At UTC this course was taken by second-year students and was clearly taken very seriously by the university authorities. The chief lecturer was Pavel Mif himself and rated by the number of hours spent on it (104 per semester), it was ranked third, after party-building (146 hours) and political economy (106 hours). [86] In addition, there were seminars on Leninism organised in a lecture group. [87]
An ongoing problem in the teaching process was the lack of suitable material in Oriental languages and above all in Chinese. CUTE only really started to get to grips with the question of “Easternising” social and economic studies at the end of 1927. [88] Eastern topics formed only 35 per cent of the general history course in 1935 (in previous years it had been as low as 10 per cent). [89] The situation was no better at UTC, where the authorities only began to address the question of “Sinicization” of the study program (even such an issue had to be approached “in stages”) in March 1928. This is partly explicable by the undeveloped state of Marxist scholarship on Eastern affairs at this time, but the result was that students learned more Western history than Chinese, which gave the majority a tendency toward dogmatism.
There was, in truth, very little modern political, economic, and philosophical literature available in the Chinese language at this time, which fact obviously exacerbated the problem of organizing effective tuition for the Chinese revolutionaries. As a result, the schools turned to preparing their own textbooks and other literature. In 1921, the first rector of CUTE, G.I. Broido, directed that lecture materials should be translated into Chinese. [90] UTC/CUTC followed suit. The resulting translations of lectures and course summaries were diffused by various means, being duplicated, printed on wall newspapers, or simply circulated in manuscript. In 1925, a group of students wrote and published a special handbook/guide to translating lecture materials on political economy. It became the practice to publish extracts from this material in the Moscow based Chinese-language daily newspaper Ch’ien-chin pao (Forward) which had a print run from 3,000 to 6,000. [91]
The ongoing task of translating the works of Marx, Engels, and Lenin and the documents of the Comintern and the Bolshevik party continued alongside the above work. At the outset, students prepared short summaries and expositions of Lenin’s views, passing on later to the systematic translation of his writings. [92] These were printed and published either by the typographical departments of CUTE and UTC/CUTC, or by the “Chinese Worker” publishing house which was, in reality, a department of Gosizdat, the state publisher. Many works were published during the 1920s, including the Manifesto of the Communist Party, Capital (first volume only), The Origins of the Family, Private Property and the State, Socialism, Utopian and Scientific, Dialectics of Nature, Plekhanov’s Foundations of Marxism, Economic Teaching of Karl Marx by Kautsky, and Luxembourg’s The Accumulation of Capital and Introduction to Political Economy. The following works by Lenin were also published: State and Revolution, Imperialism, Highest Stage of Capitalism, Two Tactics of Social Democracy in the Democratic Revolution, Left Wing Communism, an Infantile Disorder, The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky, The Agrarian Program of Russian Social Democracy in the First Russian Revolution 1905–7, Karl Marx, The History of the Question of Dictatorship, Marxism and Insurrection, On the Organisational Principles of the Bolshevik Party, The War in China, The Chinese Revolution, The Awakening of Asia, Backward Europe and Advanced Asia, The Three Sources and Constituent Parts of Marxism, The Immediate Tasks of Soviet Power, and A Great Beginning, as well as several articles on the agrarian question and his speech to the second congress of the Comintern. Handbooks of quotations from Lenin were also issued, for example, Lenin on the Soviets and Lenin on the Revolution in the East. A collection of articles by Lenin and Stalin on the national and colonial question was also published. The collected Resolutions of the Second Comintern Congress (editor A.A. Shiik [93]) and other programmatic documents of the Comintern and the party were published. The collection China and Chinese Youth is of interest because of its editor, Ho Chi Minh. The following works by Stalin were published: The Foundations of Leninism, On the Opposition, On Leninism, Questions and Answers, Report of the Central Committee to the Fourteenth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolshevik), On the Social-Democratic Tendency within Our Party, Discussion with the Students of Sun Yat-sen University, and The Revolution in China and the Tasks of the Comintern. UTC also published two readers on Leninism and a number of works by Bukharin, including some on China.
At this time some works by oppositionists were still being published, such as On the Anniversary of the Death of Sun Yat-sen by Leon Trotsky, The History of the Revolutionary Movement in China by Karl Radek, and Sun Yat-sen, 1866–1925, also by Radek. A Textbook of European History was produced by Prigozhin and Gingorn, and a book, Lectures on the History and Development of Social Forms by A.P. Zhakov, who were all teachers at UTC.
To acquaint Chinese students with the basic documents of the Comintern, the Soviet Communist Party, and the CCP, and to educate them about international affairs and the problems of economic construction in the USSR – in other words, to indoctrinate them with a Stalinist outlook – UTC produced a Chinese-language magazine called Kuo-chi p’ing-lun (International Review). Its contents were broadly similar to those of the Comintern organ Inprecor. Later, CUTC published the weekly Mei-chou yao-lan (Weekly Cradle) and Kung-ch’an tsa-chih which featured works by Chinese Communist leaders and articles about life at CUTC.
CUTE and UTC/CUTC did not simply have a teaching role, they also carried out a considerable amount of research work, undertaken by both staff and students. In 1922–23, a social science research bureau, actually a department of the All-Union Research Association for Oriental Studies, was established at CUTE. In spring of 1924, a bureau of Oriental studies and colonial politics was established under the sponsorship of CUTE, and set itself the task of assembling a library of Orientalist material, intended to be used mainly as a teaching aid. By 1926, despite the book famine, they had collected 5,000 volumes. The bureau obtained all the latest Orientalist publications, including Western ones, and had subscriptions to 123 periodicals (82 magazines and 41 newspapers). [94] Chinese students were allowed to use the library under supervision of bureau staff members. In 1926, the bureau helped publish an economic atlas of China, detailing its exploitation by the imperialist powers.
One method of involving students in research was the so-called newspaper circle, which originated at CUTE. In 1927, there were five of these groups operating (not all of them made up of Chinese students). The students, taking as their starting point concrete material originating from China, would put together press bulletins, commentaries, diagrams, and maps. [95] In January 1925, the “Scientific Research Group of CUTE” was founded and attempted to draw into its work not only lecturers and historians but also students. Student representatives were co-opted onto its governing body. The statement of aims of this group talked about the necessity of assembling and developing material for assessment, possible translation and publication. [96]
In November 1927, on the basis of this research group, the Scientific Research Association for the Study of National and Colonial Problems was founded. It operated for two years within CUTE [97] and played a major role in the teaching process of the university. Its tasks included the development of Marxist-Leninist work on Eastern social and economic questions, and also the training of teachers and research workers for Eastern Communist universities. It was divided into two departments, one with responsibility for the Soviet Far East and the other for overseas territories. In 1929, the latter produced a countrywide course on Sinkiang (Xinjiang) which was given not only at CUTE but also in other institutes. [98]
As regards research work at UTC, shortly after the foundation of the university, a China research bureau was established. Its stated aims were to compile a dictionary of modern terminology and to digest two new major works on Chinese history (one of which was to be written by the well-known Chinese reformer Liang Ch’i-ch’ao) as well as producing press reviews, and so on. [99] In February 1926, the Agitprop Department of the Soviet Communist Party’s Central Committee decided to set up a scientific research institute on China, based at the university. [100] Subsequent delays meant that finally, on January 1, 1928, the China research bureau was relaunched as the Scientific Research Institute for Chinese Studies. [101] A significant proportion of the Chinese students took part in the work of the bureau and at any time could receive individual tuition from staff members who included M. Volin (first director of the institute), S.A Dalin (in 1927, director of the China research bureau), Pavel A Mif (who succeeded M. Volin as director), M.G. Andreev, M.M. Kazanin, G.S. Kara-Mursa, and G.B. Ehrenburg. Ch’u Ch’iu-pai was one of the “active members” of the institute and Wang Jo-fei, Teng Chung-hsia, and Chang Kuo-t’ao from time to time took part in its work. [102]
Soviet specialists from the Scientific Research Institute for Chinese Studies and UTC/CUTC worked together on the complex problem of Chinese writing reform. [103] A group of university staff, headed by I.M. Oshanin and assisted by students, undertook the standardisation of modern social, economic, and political terminology in the Chinese language. [104] One of the institute’s most prominent workers, V.S. Kolokolov, oversaw the publication of a Chinese-Russian dictionary, which, though published in 1927, is still considered one of the best of its kind in the field.
The primary aim of the education process was, of course, to develop and improve the party-political work of the Chinese students, to solidify their conviction of the correctness of the political choice they had made, and their devotion to the Communist party (that is, in the first place, to its leaders). Until the summer of 1926, this side of things was controlled by the Moscow Committee of the CCP and the Chinese Komsomol, whose leaders, like many adherents of Communism in China, held radical views about party organisation and the training of party militants. The period in which the leaders of these committees held sway became known as the “Rafaelovshina” after the pseudonym of Jen Chuo-hsuan, Moscow secretary of the CCP in 1925–26. [105] It was also referred to as the Moscow Regionovshina. [106] As the prominent Chinese economist Sun Yeh-fang recalled in 1941: “Jen Chuo-hsuan thought that theoretical work was for party leaders only.” [107] In a pamphlet written by the Rafaelites, A Concrete Policy for the Work of Training the Chinese Communist Branch and the Chinese Socialist Youth Corps in Moscow [108], an effective ban on Chinese students spending time on theoretical work was defended. Chinese students taking their first steps toward a study of socialism were not allowed to study the Russian language. Concerning the inner-party regime, the pamphlet had this to say:
“We should destroy family, local, and national concepts ... Destroy unity based on sentiment – sentimental unity is petty bourgeois unity – we will build our unity on Party interests ... We must employ in our work for the Party the same kind of interest we have in love and literature – love and literature are the foundations of romanticism.” [109]
This declaration is strikingly similar to that of Bakunin and Nechaev in The Revolutionary Catechism:
“A revolutionary is a doomed man – he had no interests of his own, no business, no feelings, attachments, property, not even a name ... all tender, feminine feelings of homeland, friendship, love, and gratitude must be displaced in him by a single cold passion for revolutionary work ... the nature of a true revolutionary excludes all romanticism, sentimentality, enthusiasm, and passion.” [110]
After the rout of the Rafaelovshina in spring of 1926 [111], the leadership of party work among the Chinese students passed into the hands of Soviet Communists.
Party work from this time on mainly took the form of open meetings and discussion groups on current political issues in which practically all the students took part. The discussions, which were guided by the party leadership, took in international affairs, problems of building socialism in the USSR, and Comintern and Soviet Communist Party resolutions, as well as issues facing their own universities. The practice of criticism and self-criticism was encouraged within the universities and each student was obliged to maintain an individual diary, a Register of Group Work, which contained records of their academic progress and, in addition, critical comments on themselves and other students. [112] It is not difficult to imagine what this developed into in practice. The diaries have been preserved in the archives and are full of denunciations of fellow students. As Stalin’s supporters strengthened their grip on UTC/CUTC and CUTE, the practice of informing on one’s fellows was elevated to the status of party policy and became particularly prevalent.
In sum, we can say that the ideological training given to Chinese students in the USSR had a contradictory character. On the one hand, it enabled them to make the transition from intuitive patriotism and revolutionary feeling to conscious anti-imperialism. And for many it awakened an interest in theory which was never extinguished. On the other hand, during their long stay in the USSR, they were heavily influenced by Soviet Communists, who did everything in their power to mould them in their own image. And it was precisely at that time, when Chinese students were being educated in large numbers in the Soviet Union, that Russian radical Marxism began to undergo a profound evolution. The Stalinists who now controlled the international schools set about indoctrinating their wards with great zeal. In doing so, however, they came up against very real opposition, especially from those Chinese students who, despite the dramatic circumstances, never lost their capacity for independent thought (although, it must be said, their differences remained entirely within the framework of Communist doctrine).
 
The Beginnings of the Struggle Against Stalinism
Strange as it may seem, documentary evidence supports the view that the formation of the Chinese Left Opposition was triggered by the activities of Soviet Stalinists who, as remarked earlier, insisted on drawing Chinese students at international schools into their struggle against the Trotskyist-Zinovievist minority in the Soviet Communist Party. Until then, there were no supporters of the Opposition among the Chinese at UTC or CUTE for the simple reason that they knew nothing about the debate within the Soviet party. This is how Meng Ch’ing-shu (alias Meng Ching-shu, UTC, 1927–29) recalls the start of the anti-Trotskyist campaign at UTC:
Previously at Sun Yat-sen University there had been no open struggle against the Trotskyists as it had until then been an affair internal to the Soviet Communist Party. But in 1926, Sun Yat-sen University booked a hall at CUTE for a meeting to celebrate the fifteenth anniversary of October 10 (the outbreak of the Hsin-hai revolution). When Radek began to speak from the platform, Berman, a teacher from CUTE, and others began to shout slogans, “Down with Radek” “Down with Trotsky”, “We’re on the side of Leninism”, “Long live the Central Committee,” etc.
The following day Radek called a meeting of the rectorate at UTC. The participants were Radek himself, the pro-rector Mif, director of studies Agor, party secretary Ignatov, and student union president Golubev (Ch’en Shao-yu, Wang Ming). Radek tried to get the meeting to send a letter to CUTE protesting about the “obstruction” of the UTC memorial meeting and the “insult” to its rector. But Mif, Agor and Ignatov voted against. When Radek asked for Golubev’s opinion Ignatov intervened, saying, “As a party member, you should be with us.” (Ch’en) Shao-yu replied that he had not yet looked into the matter and therefore would not vote. Ignatov was pleased with this response and after the meeting described to Shao-yu the struggle against the Trotskyists in great detail. He explained that previously it had been the policy not to bring this matter out into the open at UTC but that the Central Committee had decided to spread the struggle to the university in the near future. A few days later, an enlarged meeting of the party committee was convened to discuss the struggle against Trotskyism at UTC.
At that time all the students knew about Trotsky and the Trotskyists was what was contained in the history course on the Soviet Communist Party (Meng has in mind Trotsky’s line in the pre-February period, his evaluation of October, etc.) We knew nothing of their activities in 1924–26. Therefore, after the party committee meeting, a general meeting of all Communists and young Communists at the university was called. Party secretary Ignatov addressed the gathering, delivering a lecture on Trotskyism. In this way the intense struggle against Trotskyism at the university began. [113]
The Stalinists employed the same methods as in their campaign among the broader party masses. The international schools were plunged into a constant round of meetings and worked up into an atmosphere of hysteria. Teachers who held oppositional views were subjected to public humiliation. Most worked at UTC where Radek was rector. Apart from him, there were about ten oppositionists on the staff, including (on the evidence of the archives) Gingorn, Dalin, Dorofeev, A.P. and M.P. Zhakov, Mazunin, Polyakov, Prigozhin, and Bella Epstein. [114] The majority were social scientists and worked in the departments of History of the Development of Social Forms, History of the Chinese Revolutionary Movement, and General History of the West. The most prominent was M.P. Zhakov, leader of the Opposition in the Khamovnicheskii district of Moscow where UTC was situated. [115] At CUTE, Trotsky’s supporters included the military studies teacher Dreitser and the researcher Zurabov. [116]
Judging from the recollections of Meng Ch’ing-shu, the Stalinists clearly expected the Chinese students to play the role of extras in the struggle against the Opposition. The students were expected to criticise Trotsky and his followers merely on the say-so of his irreconcilable enemies. Reading Opposition material was forbidden and the students were constantly reminded of the necessity to observe strict discipline and subordinate themselves to the leadership. In these circumstances, naturally enough, a large proportion of the students decided to toe the Comintern line. But others fell prey to doubts and wavering and felt an increasing desire to examine for themselves the Opposition’s documents and get to the root of the questions raised by Trotsky, Zinoviev, and Radek. Naturally they turned to their teachers in the first instance, and to the party committee and the China research bureau. But the supporters of Stalin and Bukharin who dominated these organisations were unlikely to be helpful. They refused to let the students have Opposition documents. (In fact, they themselves quite often did not possess and, in some cases, had never seen such documents.) If a student gave any hint of disagreement with the Comintern line, the teacher was quite likely to accuse him of being under the influence of the ‘Trotskyists’. [117] The most persistently curious students began to make approaches to the oppositionists among the teaching staff. Until April 1927, however, it has to be said that their interest in Trotskyist ideas remained purely academic.
The situation was changed radically by Chiang Kai-shek’s coup of April 12, 1927. This came as an earthquake to the young Chinese Communists. Naturally, events in their homeland were close to their hearts and the shock was intensified by the fact that right up to the moment of the “betrayal” by the leadership of the National Revolutionary Army (NRA), none of them were prepared for it (neither indeed, were the majority of the Soviet party’s Central Committee). The trauma experienced by many is expressed in this letter to the Central Committee from the oppositionists V. Kasparova and G. Shklovskii: “Relying on the confident and reassuring tone of Pravda, many of us considered the predictions of the Opposition on the impending and inevitable betrayal of the Chinese revolution by Chiang Kai-shek to be unfounded and alarmist. For this reason Chiang’s coup and the treason of the national bourgeoisie has shaken the party to its very foundations.” [118] The doubts which had been welling up in the critically-thinking section of the Chinese student body, developed into outright rejection of the Stalino-Bukharinist line on China. “I first began to waver ideologically at CUTC [119] in April or May 1927 – at the time of the report on China by Cde. (Comrade) Martinov of the ECCI and on the occasion of Chiang Kai-shek’s betrayal,” Ch’i Shu-kung (also known as Chi Shu-kung and Chi Pu-kung), one of the first Chinese oppositionists, later revealed under interrogation.
I thought that Comrade Martinov was wrong to oppose the arming of the workers and peasants at the time of the Hong Kong strike in 1925–26. [120] This view was shared by two other students in the fourth group, Elizarov and Yurev. Since the Trotskyist Prigozhin had spoken out against Martinov at a meeting, we, that is, I, Nekrasov, Elizarov and Yurev, approached Prigozhin for clarification. We also approached other Trotskyists, Zhakov and Gingorn. All were teachers at CUTC. Prigozhin began to supply us with Trotskyist documents and literature, clandestine leaflets, and so on, which we read, and in this way our Trotskyist ideology was formed. [121]
The two UTC students referred to, Elizarov and Yurev, were, respectively, Chiang Ching-kuo (the son of Chiang Kai-shek) [122] and a certain Hsu Yun-tso, All three students were members of the Komsomol at the time and many documents attest to the depth of their feelings about the tragedy which had befallen the Communist movement in China. As summer and autumn approached, a number of other students came round to the Opposition, including Wang Wen-hui, Wang Chih-hao, Wen Yueh, Li Kuang-ya, Lin Ai-min, Lu Yuan (alias Shou Shih, I Pai, Lu I-yüan), Liu Jen-shou, Liang Kan-ch’iao, Hsii Cheng-an, Hsiao Ch’ang-pin (alias Chih Ch’i), Feng Ch’iang, Huang Chu, Chu Huai-te, Ch’en Ch’i, and Yang Hua.po. Strangely enough, the Opposition also attracted a KMT member, Teng I-sheng. Oppositional sentiments were also expressed, though not so actively as in the case of the above named students, by Kao Heng (alias Kuan Yu), Ke Ch’ung-e, Sung Feng-ch’un, Feng Yu-hsiang’s son Feng Hung-kuo, Tseng Hung-i, and also, apparently, by Pei Yün-feng and Tung Ju-ch’eng (alias Tung Tzu-ch’eng or Tung Chien-p’ing) [123], Ou Chiu-hsien, Tu Ch’ing-ch’i (alias Tu Wei-chih), Ch’en Yuan-tao, and Tung I-hsiang could be classed as waverers. Meng Ch’ing-shu also recalls that one of the “openly Trotskyist” students at UTC went under the name of Roy (according to UTC documents, a student called Kuo Shou-hua went under this name). As regards students from other colleges, the most prominent was the veteran CCP member Liu Jen-ching (who studied at the International Lenin School under the pseudonym Lenskii). Another, Wang P’ing-i (studied at CUTE and UTC under the pseudonyms Ozolin and Elizavetin), worked with the anti-Stalinist oppositionists within the Soviet Communist Party and later became one of the leaders of the Trotskyist movement in China itself. [124] According to some sources, Kuo Miao-ken, a student on the military-political course at CUTE, expressed sympathy with the views of the Opposition. Other who showed some sympathy to the Opposition were Lo Han (CUTE, UTC) [125], and the CUTE student Tuan Tzu-liang. [126]
Published histories of Chinese Trotskyism and memoirs of those who took part in these events invariably list among the original supporters of Trotsky in Moscow those who subsequently became leaders of the Trotskyist movement in China itself – people such as Ou Fang, Chang Te (alias Chang Wei), Shih Tang, Ch’en I-mou, and Li Hsüeh-lei. [127] These names, however, appear in none of the contemporary documents that I have been able to locate in the archives of the Moscow international schools, including personal notes made by the students themselves. It is most probable that the above names were pseudonyms, adopted by activists from UTC only on their return to active political work in China. The biographies of a number of UTC militants such as Wang Chih-hao, Li Kuang-ya, Lin Ai-min, Feng Ch’iang, Chu Huai-te, and Yang Hua-po fit more or less with what we know of the aforementioned Trotskyist leaders.
As is evident, the first Chinese supporters of the Opposition were few in number; in August 1927 at UTC, for example, including sympathisers and waverers, they numbered just over thirty or 10 percent of the student body. [128] Of these, around fifteen were more or less known as such at UTC. At least that was the figure (“I personally knew of fifteen”) mentioned at a meeting by M. Szhukar, a teacher at UTC. [129] The most active oppositionists appear to have been Feng Ch’iang, Chu Huai-te, Liang Kan-ch’iao, and Lu Yuan. The last mentioned, judging from his personal file and educational record, was one of the most sophisticated Marxists among the students. Before his arrival in Moscow (with the first group of students on November 23, 1925), he had studied Marxist and Bolshevik literature for three years at Shanghai University, an institution set up in October 1922 by the CCP. [130] It was him that Sheng Yueh had in mind when he recalled a certain Trotskyist at UTC by the name of Lu Yen [131] who was “the most well-versed in theory amongst the Trotskyists of Sun Yat-sen University.” [132] Another five of the oppositionists had studied at Chinese universities before arriving in the USSR – Feng Ch’iang and Sung Feng-ch’un at Peking University; Wang Chih-hao at Peking Pedagogical University; Ke Ch’ung-e at a university in Tientsin; and Ch’en Ch’i, who completed part of a university course. [133]
A number of oppositionists held leading posts in the UTC Komsomol which bears witness to their having enjoyed a certain authority among their fellow students. Chu Huai-te, for example, was secretary of the second year Komsomol committee until November 1927. [134] Huang Chu and Ch’en Ch’i also held Komsomol posts. [135]
So what was the nature of the oppositional work carried out by these young Chinese followers of Trotsky? To begin with, they busied themselves with translating and diffusing documents: the Appeal of the United Opposition, open letters from Trotsky and Zinoviev addressed to the Politburo and the ECCI, and their articles on the Chinese revolution. But in this first period, they were not so concerned to make propaganda among their fellow students as to influence the leadership of the CCP. The literature they translated was dispatched to its Central Committee. [136] They restricted themselves to ideological struggle and made no attempt to set up their own organisation (either inside or outside the party). “It was simply a group of like-minded individuals,” recalled Ch’i Shu-kung. [137]
Naturally they combined their propaganda work with some agitation among the students, using wall newspapers and posters (Chiang Ching-kuo was a particularly active fly-poster) [138], intervening at party and Komsomol meetings and speaking in class to defend, insofar as they were permitted, the platform of the Opposition. They began to intensively canvass individual support, using the Chinese question as the main issue, since this was the terrain on which they were most confident and the question which troubled ordinary students the most. But they also raised other questions, such as the growing bureaucratization of the party-state apparatus in the USSR, and they spoke of the necessity to struggle for reform of the party and against “Stalin’s White Guard regime.” They called for a change in the Stalino-Bukharinist line in the countryside toward the peasantry and in the cities toward the working class. They also raised other international issues. [139]
Judging from the documents that have survived, they did not develop political or theoretical positions of their own, but simply popularised the conceptions of the Trotskyite-Zinovievite Opposition. We can judge the intensity of their work from the denunciations which from time to time found their way to the UTC party committee – the work of ever vigilant student-Stalinists. “Our oppositionists not only carry on their work among us but also among the KMT,” reads one of these:
Last week Comrades Ogarev (Lu Yuan) and Lastochkin (Liang Kan.ch’iao) tried to win over Ch’iu (?), Te(?), and Ying(?) on the train to Moscow. Comrade Ogarev said: “Comrade Radek is right on the Chinese question and the Comintern has made tactical mistakes.” The students were sympathetic to his point of view and Lastochkin told them if they had any concrete questions, he could pass them on to Radek. At a meeting of the CCP fraction of the university KMT committee, Comrade Platonov (Li Yueh-t’ing) stated that Ogarev recently tried to win him over and said “if you want to read Opposition documents, I can let you have some.” [140]
In another statement made to a party investigatory committee, it is related how “in a discussion with A. Zhakov in a seminar, all supported his opponent Pogorelov (Ch’in Pang-hsien), except for Leonidov (Lin Ai-min). Comrade Leonidov declared that ‘the CCP had done nothing to prevent Chiang Kai-shek’s treachery, and the mistakes of the CCP had allowed Chiang to disarm the Shanghai workers’.” [141]
The author of another such document alleged that:
Polevoi (Teng I-sheng) carried out oppositional agitation and propaganda among the masses at the Hotel Passade. He said that the Chinese comrades do not understand the question of the Chinese revolution; that Russia is a dictatorship under Stalin and the dictatorship of the proletariat no longer exists (this took place in November 1927). He said the present line of the Chinese revolution demanded a different policy and when the other comrades confronted him, he himself admitted that he was an oppositionist. [142]
In all their activities, the young Chinese internationalists could rely on the support of Russian adherents of the Trotsky-Zinoviev bloc, primarily their own instructors at UTC who, right up to the start of the arrests and exiling of Opposition supporters, regularly invited them to meetings and arranged for them to meet the leaders of the movement. Ch’i Shu-kung recalls how Prigozhin took him, Chiang Ching-kuo, and Hsu Yun-tso to the apartment of Vuiovich (apparently Vuio Vuiovich), while Zhakov managed to arrange for him to meet with Trotsky himself at the State Concessions Committee building. He recalls that they discussed the prospects for the Chinese revolution [143], but unfortunately no detailed record of the meeting survives.
Working together with supporters of the Opposition among their teachers, the most determined supporters of the Chinese Left Opposition made preparations for the celebrations to mark the tenth anniversary of the October revolution. On the morning of November 7, they took part in a parallel, unofficial Trotskyist demonstration in Red Square.
Ten or eleven students took part – Wang Chih-hao, Teng I-Cheng, Li Kuang-ya, Lin Ai.-min, Lu Yuan, Liang Kan-ch’iao, Hsu Cheng-an, Feng Ch’iang, Chu-Huai.te, Yang Hua-po, and according to some reports Hsiao Ch’ang-pin. [144] It is difficult to recreate in detail the confused events of that day. The documents that have survived in the archives (Minutes of the Sun Yat-sen University party committee, November 9, 1927, no. 9; Extracts from the minutes of the Khamovnicheskii presidium RKK (District Control Commission), November 22, 1927, no. 46; and Minutes of the University Directorate, November 10, 1927, no. 4) are rather contradictory in character. Nevertheless, it is possible to get a general impression of the fundamental facts. The affair seems to have taken place as follows. A day or two before the demonstration the students named above, assisted by the UTC teacher Bella Epstein, constructed a red banner with the slogan “Long live the leaders of the world revolution, Zinoviev, Radek, Preobrazhenskii. [145] There were probably other placards prepared in advance and taken by the oppositionists to Red Square. As they came alongside the mausoleum, the students, to the astonishment of the other marchers, unfurled their banner and began to shout slogans in support of the leaders of the Opposition. Their demonstration lasted only a few minutes as supporters of the Stalinist majority in the party marching with the university contingent moved swiftly to “restore order.” The oppositionists were forced to retreat and they returned home. However, none were arrested at this time. [146]
This public demonstration by Chinese oppositionists, despite its brief duration, made a deep impression on many of these present in Red Square that morning. Attention was drawn to the fact that among the Chinese, whose revolutionary movement was followed with avid interest not only in the Soviet Union but the world over, there were also opponents of Stalin, prepared to openly declare their solidarity with the joint Left Opposition within the Soviet party. The famous American historian Louis Fisher, present that day in Red Square as correspondent for The Nation, wrote many years later about the group of Chinese oppositionists demonstrating in front of Lenin’s mausoleum. [147] Another American, Vincent Sheean, who arrived in Red Square after the break-up of the Trotskyist demonstration, wrote of the rumours which swept Moscow following the events. He could not bring himself to believe one of the more, to him, fantastic of these rumours, that “a woman member of the Chinese Communist delegation carrying red flags inscribed with orthodox slogans, suddenly stepped forward in front of Stalin and the other members of the Central Committee and unfurled a banner emblazoned with the slogan ‘Long Live Trotsky’.” [148]
The following day the party committee at UTC called two meetings in rapid succession. At the first, it decided it was “necessary” to remove Chu Huai-te from his post as second-year Komsomol secretary “in view of his political unsoundness”; the committee simultaneously decided “it was necessary to relieve of their duties” other oppositionists who had been members of course committees (who, exactly, it was not stated). [149] At the second meeting, the “anti-party activity of a group of comrades during the demonstration” was examined. Judging from the minutes, the first meeting passed off fairly calmly. Chu Huai-te was not present and the committee members, being like-minded people, found no reason to disagree among themselves. The second meeting, however, was stormy. Feng Ch’iang and Liang Kan-ch’iao were invited to attend as representatives [150] (the minutes refer to them as “ring-leaders”) of the oppositionists who took part in the counter-demonstration. Accusations were hurled at them, describing their actions as “anti-Soviet” and charging them with using “fascist” methods against “those comrades who were attempting to restore order within the contingent”. They were also variously accused of maintaining links with right-wing KMT members, of factionalism, and of attempting to “wreck” the party. [151] Naturally these accusations provoked an indignant response. We can judge the temperature of the meeting from the following extracts from the minutes:
Comrade Miller [152]: I don’t know all the oppositionists – only the leaders; Varskii (Feng Ch’iang), Lastochkin (Liang Kan-ch’iao), Ogarev (Lu Yuan). On the demonstration I was walking among the oppositionists when Comrade Volk [153] approached us and linked arms with Lastochkin and myself. As we were passing Lenin’s mausoleum, the oppositionists unfurled their flags and Lastochkin tried to join them but Comrade Volk would not let him go. The oppositionists began to shout “Down with the fascist Central Committee,” “Long live the Opposition,” and “Long live Trotskyism.” I began to shout “Long live the Leninist Central Committee.” Ogarev was carrying a flag and began to attack Comrade Volk with the flagpole. Then Okunev (Chu Huai-te), Latyshev (Hsu Cheng-an) and Polevoi (Teng I-sheng) got together and tried to throw Comrade Volk out of the demonstration. (At this point Lastochkin is shouting incessantly.)
Comrade Sedyakin [154]: If Comrade Lastochkin cannot conduct himself as befits a party member, then the party committee will be obliged to ask him to withdraw from the meeting.
Comrade Brandler [155]: In his statement Comrade Varskii says that Comrade Pogulyayev [156] searched him at gunpoint. This is a lie; he does not possess a revolver. (Lastochkin shouts.)
Comrade Sedyakin: I am putting to the vote a motion I have received to exclude Comrade Lastochkin from the meeting. (The motion was carried unanimously and Lastochkin, with a cry of indignation, left the meeting).
Comrade Golubev [157]: We should note that this fight was not a fight between comrades. Why did this clash take place precisely on the tenth anniversary of October in the presence of all the international delegations?
Comrade Proletariev [158]: We allowed five minutes at the party committee meeting for an explanation, but the Opposition comrades want to talk for longer and accuse the party of silencing them. On the day of the demonstration Ogarev came up to Doronin [159] and declared, “You are celebrating the tenth anniversary of October. It’s a great celebration but it’s not our celebration.” The CCP sent you here to study Leninism and the history of the Russian revolution, nothing was said about studying Trotskyism. We’ve no use for Trotskyism in China.
Comrade Varskii: This is all lies! I cannot explain in five minutes ...
Comrade Mif: We need to talk about the circumstances the university finds itself in. Oppositional sentiment is growing within the university, not decreasing. The reason for this lies in the defeat of the Chinese revolution. Our students come increasingly from petty-bourgeois backgrounds and oppositional sentiments come naturally to them. All are recent recruits to the party – for example, Comrade Mikhailov [160], who joined in 1926 [161] – Komsomolists as well – perhaps these latter joined the Komsomol under orders from reactionary organisations. They welcomed the defeat of the Chinese revolution – gambled on it. We are not going to educate them here just so they can take Trotskyist ideas back to China instead of Leninism.
Comrade Mikhailov: I am being lumped together with the oppositionists and I object to this since it’s wrong to compare real oppositionists with waverers.
Comrade Varskii: The “facts” referred to in the resolution are simply not believable; for example, on links with the right wing of the KMT, there are no such links. The October revolution was not just a Russian but an international revolution and we must salute all the leaders of this revolution. No one shouted the slogan “Down with the fascist Central Committee.” The party of Lenin is united and the Central Committee of the party is united. The CCP has made mistakes as has the Soviet Communist Party. We need to correct these mistakes. Members of the party should not shut their eyes. [162]
After a “discussion” of this nature and without even hearing out the point of view of the oppositionists (the five minutes allowed to Feng Ch’iang was clearly insufficient), the committee decided unanimously to expel from the party Bella Epstein, Liang Kan-ch’iao, Feng Ch’iang, Wang Chih-hao and Chu Huai-te and to propose to the Komsomol that they expel Lu Yuan, Li Kuang-ya, Yang Hua-po, Lin Ai-min and Chu Huai-te. [163]
No decision was taken regarding Hsiao Ch’ang-pin; the fact that he denied holding oppositional views at the meeting gained him the support of committee members Berman and Li Pen-i. For some inexplicable reason, no one paid any attention to the question of Hsu Cheng-an. As regards Teng I-sheng, since he was not a member of the party, the committee had no direct power to impose sanctions on him. It solved this problem by taking a decision to purge the university of so-called “right Kuomintang elements” [164], starting with those who had links with the Opposition. The bureau also took the opportunity to warn all remaining oppositionists that any attempt on their part to renew factional activities would be suppressed in the most resolute manner. It was decided that it was necessary to hold discussions at party general meetings and study circles on the struggle against Trotskyism and, in addition, to “look into the question” of organising under the auspices of the bureau of Leninism special consultations on a long-term basis for all those interested in these problems.
The resolution of the party committee received the assent of the party membership that same day, or at the latest at the next general meeting of the party at UTC. Altogether, 137 people voted on the resolution to expel the oppositionists with only 6 voting against (and these 6 were among those being expelled). [165] At some point on November 9 or 10, at a meeting of the Komsomol committee at UTC and at a subsequent general meeting of the Komsomol, the five oppositionists named by the party committee were expelled from the youth organisation.
On November 10, the university directorate met and decided to send back to China Feng Ch’iang, Liang Kan-ch’iao, Chu Huai-te, Wang Chih.hao, Li Kuang-ya, Yang Hua-po, Lu Yuan, and Lin Ai-min, as well as Teng I-sheng. [166] On November 16, Pravda published an article on the “smashing” of the Trotskyist Opposition at UTC. [167] It had been written by one of the lecturers at the university, possibly by Mif himself. (The article was signed Aleksandr, Mif’s real name being Mikhail Alexsandravich Fortus). On November 22 the decision to expel Fang Ch’iang, Wang Chih-.hao, and Liang Kan-ch’iao from the party came up for review in front of the presidium of the Khamovnicheskii district control commission of the Soviet Communist Party. (The question of Chu Huai-te was set aside because of his non-appearance before the presidium; whether it was reviewed at a later date we do not know.) Strange as it may seem, the presidium did not agree with the decision of the UTC party organisation and, having examined the evidence, decided to change the sentences on Fang Ch’iang, Wang Chih-hao, and Liang Kan-ch’iao from expulsion to a severe reprimand and a warning. [168] This, however, in no way affected the decision of the university directorate to send the students home. And on the very same day as the presidium hearing (November 22), Feng Ch’iang, Wang Chih-hao, Liang Kan-ch’iao, Yang Hua-po, Lin Ai-min, Chu Huai-te, Lu Yuan, and Li Kuang-ya received their travel documents for China. For some unknown reason, it took until December 25 to assemble Teng I-sheng’s documents. [169]
A few days before their departure for China, three or four of the students, including Liang Kan-ch’iao, met with Trotsky in the offices of the State Concessions Committee. As Liang Kan-ch’aio recounted to Wang Fan-hsi, the main question discussed was the future of the Opposition in China. Seeking to gain Trotsky’s approval, Liang said, “Don’t worry. As soon as we get back to China we will immediately set up a mass party of at least half a million members.” But Trotsky smiled and replied, “The revolution has just suffered a defeat. Today we must take things one step at a time. And if each of you,” and here he pointed at each of the assembled Chinese, “gathers around himself five or six workers and educates them, this in itself will be a big achievement.” (According to Wang Fan-hsi, he remembers Liang Kan-ch’aio’s account of this meeting extremely clearly.) [170]
On the evening of November 23, the first group of expelled students left UTC. They were bid farewell by Bella Epstein who, as described in an informer’s statement delivered to the university party committee the following day, ran toward them when they were already sitting in the car and shouted, “You have suffered because of your struggle. That is the true path to victory. Our ideas will rise again and we will meet again soon under different circumstances.” [171]
But they were not to meet again. The students were sent to Vladivostok, from where, having overcome the many difficulties and obstacles placed in their way by the Soviet bureaucratic machine [172], they finally left for China in February or March of 1928.  As to Epstein’s fate, we can only guess. Most likely she, like the majority of oppositionist teachers and researchers at UTC and CUTE, died in the Stalinist mincing machine.
With the departure to China of the most active of Trotsky’s supporters, the first phase of the history of the Chinese Left Opposition in the USSR – that of open struggle against Stalinism – came to a close. A new period would now begin – of intense underground work.
(To be continued)
* * *
Footnotes
85. Ibid., 530/1/4.
86. Ibid., 530/1/30/124; 532/1/10/3.
87. Ibid., 530/1/16.
88. Timofeeva, “CUTE, 1926–38,” 30.
89. Ibid., 40.
90. See G. Broido, The Communist University of the Toilers of the East, Zhizn’ Natsional’nostei, January 26, 1921.
91. Some translators, on graduating from UTC and returning home, published translations of the lectures under their own names. One of these was Han Liang-hsien for whose work the famous KMT activist Hu Han-min wrote an introduction. See Sheng, Sun Yat-sen University, 56.
92. See Timofeeva, CUTE, 1921–25, 54.
93. Andrei Aleksandrovich Shiik (1891–1978), alias Andre Shik, a learned Africanist, teacher at CUTE, and senior research fellow at the International Agrarian Institute, later became prominent as a statesman in the Hungarian People’s Republic.
94. See Timofeeva, CUTE, 1926–38, 35.
95. See Pod Znamenem Ilyicha, April 26, 1924; Revolyutsionnyi Vostok (Revolutionary East), 1927, no. 1:134.
96. See Timofeeva, CUTE, 1921–25, 54.
97. At the end of 1929 the Scientific Research Association for the Study of National and Colonial Problems was detached from CUTE and reorganised as a wider social organisation. From that time, CUTE was managed by this Association.
98. See Timofeeva, CUTE, 1926–38, 35–38.
99. See Efimov, Episodes in the History of the Communist University of the Toilers of China, 175.
100. See Russian Center 530/1/9.
101. See V.N. Nikiforov, Sovetskie Istoriki o Problemakh Kitaya (Soviet historians on problems of China) (Moscow: Nauka Press, 1970), 127.
102. See Russian Center 530/1/28.
103. One of those who began to study the question of reforming the Chinese script, at UTC and at the China Institute, was Wu Yu-chang. After finishing university in 1930, he worked as an instructor at a Soviet party school for Chinese workers in Vladivostok and became a member of a regional committee on the Romanization of the Chinese script. He was head of the Chinese section of the movement for the liquidation of illiteracy. Around this time he produced a textbook and a dictionary using a Romanized script based on the Peking dialect. In 1931, he took part (with Lin Po-ch’u and Liu Ch’ang-sheng) in the first conference on the Romanization of the Chinese script. From 1955 until his death in 1966, Wu Yu-chang was chairman of the committee for the reform of the Chinese script under the PRC State Council.
104. Sheng, Sun Yat-sen University, 4; Russian Center 530/1/29.
105. Jen Chuo-hsuan worked and studied in France in the early 1920s. He joined the Chinese Communist movement in 1922 and the French Communist Party in 1923. In 1925–26, he was a student first at CUTE and then at Sun Yat-sen University, and secretary of the Moscow Branch of the CCP. At the end of 1927, a year after his return to China, he was arrested in Hunan by the KMT and sentenced to be shot. The execution was botched and he was only wounded. A local peasant woman saved his life by taking him to hospital. Scarcely had his wounds been dressed when he was recaptured. This time he capitulated and betrayed a number of his former comrades to the KMT. In the 1930s and 1940s, he published a number of works under the pseudonym Yeh Ch’ing sharply criticising the CCP leadership from the standpoint of classical Marxism. As a result, he was accused by the Stalinists and Maoists of belonging to the Trotskyist movement with which, in fact, he had no links.
106. Such terminology was used, in particular, at the Sixth Congress of the CCP. See Stenograficheskii Otchet Shestogo S’ezda Kommunisticheskoi Partii Kitaya (Stenographical record of the Sixth Congress of the CCP, vol. 4 (Moscow: Institut po Kitayu Press, 1930), 27.
107. Letter from Comrade Sung Liang [Sun Yeh-fang] to Comrade [Liu] Shao-ch’i, in Liu Shao-Ch’i, Lun Tang (On the Party) (Talien: Ta-chung shu-tien, 1947), 345.
108. For a full text of the document translated into English, see C. Martin Wilbur and Julie Lien-ying How, Missionaries of Revolution: Soviet Advisers and Nationalist China, 1920–1927 (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1989), 527–29.
109. Ibid., 527.
110. Cited in Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, The Alliance Between the Social Democrats and the International Brotherhood of Workers (Thesis and Documents Published by Decision of the Hague Conference of the International), in Marx and Engels, Collected Works (Russian edition) 18:415, 416.
111. See Russian Center 530/V42; Sun Yeh-fang, On the Moscow Branch of the CCP, Chung-kung Tang-shih tzu-liao (Materials on the History of the CCP) (Peking), 1982, no. 1:180–83.
112. Russian Center 530/V5–8.
113. Meng, Vospominaniya o Wang Mine, 66–67
114. See Russian Center 530/1/28; 530/2’29, 40; 514/1/1012’2–11; Chiang Ching-kuo, My Days in Soviet Russia (Taipei: 1963), 8.
115. UTC was situated at no. 16 Volkhonka Street.
116. See Testimony of Comrade Nekrasov, Russian Center 514/1/1012’3, 4–5.
117. See Testimony of a Student, Ibid.,, 12.
118. Letter from V. Kasparova and G. Shklovskii to the Central Committee and Central Executive Committee of the Soviet Communist Party, Ibid., 17/71/88/ 34.
119. More precisely, Sun Yat-sen University of the Toilers of China.
120. This refers to the Hong Kong-Canton strike.
121. Testimony of Comrade N. Nekrasov, 2.
122. The fate of Chiang Ching-kuo (pseudonym Nikolai Vladimirovich Elizarov), the son of Chiang Kai-shek, is rather interesting. He enrolled at Sun Yat-sen University as part of the first intake of Chinese students on November 23, 1925. In December the same year he joined the Chinese Komsomol and the following year the Russian Komsomol. Before officially finishing university, he was transferred in February 1927 to a military school in Moscow and then, in December (or, according to some reports, at the end of August) 1927, he was sent to the Military-Political Academy (VPAT) in Leningrad. There he became, in February 1930, a candidate member of the Soviet Communist Party. After finishing at VPAT at the end of June 1930, he was sent to work in industry for two years, first as a metal worker in the Dynamo factory in Moscow, and then, from May to November 1931, as chairman of the October Revolution collective farm in the village of Korovino in the Moscow oblast. This period of industrial work was evidently punishment for the anti-communism of his father and his own short-term enthusiasm for the ideas of the Opposition. From November 1931 until October 1934 he worked as an assistant departmental manager at the Urals Machine Factory in Sverdlovsk, and then, until spring 1937, was deputy editor of the factory newspaper, For Heavy Mechanical Engineering. In December 1936, he was promoted from candidate to full member of the Soviet Communist Party by the principal typographical organization of the factory; this decision was, however, not ratified by the oblast committee. Then, until May 1937, he was deputy manager of the organization department of the Sverdlovsk city Soviet, after which he was sent back to China. Stalin intended to use him as a means of influencing Chiang Kai-shek during a period in which a new united front was being formed between the CCP and the KMT. (According to some reports, Chiang Ching-kuo himself explained his departure to friends at the Urals Machine Factory by saying he had been given a “special assignment” to influence his father, who had been following an “unstable policy” on the eve of the outbreak of war with Japan.) On his return home, however, Chiang Ching-kuo became one of Chiang Kai-shek’s closest and most trusted associates. In February 1941, the Leninskii regional committee of the Sverdlovsk party organization expelled him for “loss of contact with the party organization over a period of three and a half years.” For further information on his residence in the USSR, see Russian Center 514/1/312/12–21, 31–35, 38–43; 514/1/1010/4–7; 530/1/1_4, 20, 34, 42. The Tolmachev Military-Political Academy Archives; Pasok KPSS (The Party Archives of the Sverdlovsk Oblast Committee) 10/4/1695/2–6; 153/5/120/1–5, 12–14; 161/6/322/1–6.
123. On August 5, 1927, Pei Yun-feng, Kao Heng, Tung Ju-ch’eng, Hsu Yun-tso, and Ch’i Shu-kung were sent to CUTE and on the military political courses as translators. See Russian Center 530/1/42171; Testimony of Comrade Nekrasov, 3, 4.
124. See Wu K’un-jung, The Left Opposition Faction in the Chinese Communist Party, Part 1), Issues and Studies 10, no. 6 (March 1974); 80.
125. See Russian Center 495/225/327, 2411; 505/1/22/10; 514/1/1031/13–14; 530/1/ 16, 34, 56, 62; 530/2/26, 41, 42; Testimony of Comrade Nekrasov, 3, 4; Wang, Shuang-shan hui-i-lu, 63, 80, 145; Cheng Ch’ao-lin hui-i-lu, 290; Meng, Vospominaniya o Wang Mine, 68; Pravda, November 16, 1927.
126. Interview with Wang Fan-hsi at Leeds, England, July 25, 1992.
127. See, for example, Wang, Shuang-shan hui-i-lu, 64, 80; Cheng Ch’ao-lin hui-lu, 290; Liu Jen-ching, On Trotskyists in China, Chung-kung Tang-shih tzu.liao, 1982, no. 1:248; Ming Yuan, The Rise and Fall of the Group of Liquidationists, She-hui hsin-wen (Social News) 3, no. 23 (1933): 323.
128. Calculated from Russian Center 530/1/42.
129. Ibid., 530/2–32. That in summer 1927 there were no less than fifteen oppositionists at the university was also mentioned at one of the meetings of the UTC party committee. Ibid., 530/2/26.
130. Ibid., 495/327.
131. No such person as Lu Yeng figures in the register of students at UTC.
132. Sheng, Sun Yat-sen University, 166.
133. See Russian Center 495/225/1532, 1816, 2129, 2185, 2226.
134. Ibid., 530/2/26.
135. Ibid., 530/2/41.
136. See Testimony of Comrade Nekrasov, 2.
137. Ibid., 3.
138. Conversation between Comrades Kotelnikov and Khabarov, Russian Center 514’1/1031/13.
139. See Testimony of Comrade Nekrasov, 4–5.
140. Russian Center 530/1/37.
141. Ibid., 530/2/29.
142. Ibid., 530/2/41.
143. See Statement of Nekrasov to the Purge Commission, Ibid., 495/225/362; Conversation between Comrades Kotelnikov and Khabarov, November 21, 1936, Ibid., 495/225/1036/12–13.
144. See Minutes no. 9 of the Soviet Communist Party branch bureau at UTC, November 9, 1927. Ibid., 530/2/26.
145. One of the documents referred to states that the Opposition banner had written on it, “Long live the leaders of the world revolution: Zinoviev, Radek, Preobrazhenskii, etc.” (Russian Center 530/2/26). Naturally, the word “etc.” would never appear on a banner. Most probably, Trotsky’s name appeared alongside those of the other “leaders”.
146. Russian Center 530/2/24, 26.
147. Louis Fisher, Men and Politics: An Autobiography (New York: Puell, Sloan and Pearce, 1941), 88.
148. Vincent Sheean, A Personal History (Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, Doran & Co., 1935), 284.
149. See Minutes no. 8 of the Soviet Communist Party branch bureau at UTC, November 9, 1927. Russian Center 530/2/26.
150. Apart from these, Hsiao Ch’ang-pin was also present at the meeting.
151. See note 144 above.
152. Miller was the pseudonym of Hu Chien-san, a UTC student and member of the party cell bureau.
153. Ya.I. Volk was a teacher at UTC.
154. S.M. Sedyakin was at this time secretary of the party cell bureau at UTC.
155. Brandler was the pseudonym of Ho Shang-chih, a UTC student and member of the party cell bureau.
156. Pogulyayev was secretary of UTC from 1925 to 1928.
157. Golubev, i.e., Ch’en Shao-yü (Wang Ming), was at this time a member of the party cell bureau at UTC.
158. Yevgennii Proletariev was a pseudonym of Pu Shih-ch’i, a translator and teacher at UTC and a candidate member of the party cell bureau.
159. Doronin was the pseudonym of the UTC student P’an Wen-yu.
160. Mikhailov was the pseudonym of Hsiao Ch’ang-pin.
161. In fact, Hsiao Ch’ang-pin joined the CCP in December 1925. See Russian Center 495/225/1963.
162. See note 144 above.
163. Chu Huai-te was a member of both the Party and the Komsomol simultaneously.
164. In reality, of course, there were no real right KMT members left at UTC. This was merely a political label which the administration applied from time to time to those KMT members who remained at the university after the July coup carried out by Wang Ching-wei in China.
165. See Russian Center 530/V16; Pravda, November 16, 1927.
166. See Minutes no. 4 of a Meeting of the UTC Management, November 10, 1927. Russian Center, 530/1.
167. Pravda, November 16, 1927.
168. See Extracts from Minutes no. 46 of a Meeting of the Presidium of the Khamovnicheskii District Committee, November 22, 1927. Russian Center 530/2/24.
169. Ibid., 530/1/42/52, 53, 55, 59, 70.
170. Interview with Wang Fan-hsi at Leeds, England, August 4, 1992. On the meeting between Trotsky and Liang Kan-ch’aio, see also Pu Ch’ing-ch’üan, The Birth and Death of the Chinese Trotskyists, in Ch’en Tu-hsia p’ing-lun hetian-pien (Collection of critical articles on Ch’en Tu-hsiu), vol. 2 (Chengchow: Ho-nan jen-min ch’u-pan-shen, 1982), 388.
171. Russian Center 495/225/327.
172. On this, see the letter sent from Vladivostok by Lu Yuan to Ch’en Ch’i and Wen Yueh. Ibid., 530/1/57.
 

